- MAKING PRESCRIPTION DRUGS MORE AFFORDABLE: LEGISLATION TO NEGOTIATE A BETTER DEAL FOR AMERICANS

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MAKING PRESCRIPTION DRUGS MORE AFFORD-
ABLE: LEGISLATION TO NEGOTIATE A BETTER
DEAL FOR AMERICANS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 25, 2019

__________

Serial No. 116-66

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
43-316 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              GREG WALDEN, Oregon
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York             FRED UPTON, Michigan
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           PETE OLSON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California           DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico            H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PAUL TONKO, New York                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York, Vice     BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chair                            BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa                 LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts                    MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California            RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California                TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DARREN SOTO, Florida
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
------

Professional Staff

JEFFREY C. CARROLL, Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Deputy Staff Director
MIKE BLOOMQUIST, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Health

ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Chairwoman
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina,     Ranking Member
Vice Chair                       FRED UPTON, Michigan
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico            GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILLY LONG, Missouri
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
Massachusetts                    SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
TONY CARDENAS, California            MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California                EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     3
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     8
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    12

Witnesses

Robert Fowler, Ph.D., Professor Emeritus, Baldwin Wallace
University.....................................................    16
Prepared statement...........................................    18
Answers to submitted questions...............................   214
Benedic Ippolito, Ph.D., Research Fellow, American Enterprise
Institute......................................................    24
Prepared statement...........................................    26
Answers to submitted questions...............................   216
Gerard F. Anderson, Ph.D., Professor, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, and Director, Johns Hopkins Center for
Hospital Finance and Management................................    36
Prepared statement...........................................    38
Answers to submitted questions...............................   223

Submitted Material

H.R. 3, the Lower Drug Costs Now Act of 2019, submitted by Ms.
Eshoo \1\
H.R. 275, the Medicare Prescription Drug Price Negotiation Act of
2019,bmitted by Ms. Eshoo \1\
H.R. 448, the Medicare Drug Price Negotiation Act,bmitted by Ms.
Eshoo \1\
H.R. 1046, the Medicare Negotiation and Competitive Licensing Act
of 2019,bmitted by Ms. Eshoo \1\
Letter of September 19, 2019, from Nancy A. LeaMond, Executive
Vice President and Chief Advocacy and Engagement Officer, AARP,
to Mr. Pallone, et al., submitted by Ms. Eshoo.................   118
Statement of the AFL-CIO by Richard Trumka, President, September
19, 2019, submitted by Ms. Eshoo...............................   121
Letter of September 23, 2019, from Scott Frey, Director of
Federal Government Affairs, American Federation of State County
and Municipal Employees, to Ms. Eshoo and Mr. Burgess,
submitted by Ms. Eshoo.........................................   122
Statement of the American Hospital Association by Tom Nickels,
Executive Vice President, September 19, 2019, submitted by Ms.
Eshoo..........................................................   124
Statement of America's Health Insurance Plans by Matt Eyles,
President and Chief Executive Officer, September 19, 2019,
submitted by Ms. Eshoo.........................................   125
Statement of Families USA by Frederick Isasi, Executive Director,
submitted by Ms. Eshoo.........................................   126
Statement of Patients for Affordable Drugs Now, September 19,
2019, submitted by Ms. Eshoo...................................   128

----------

\1\ The legislation has been retained in committee files and also is
available at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=110024.
Statement of Pacific Business Group on Health, September 19,
2019, submitted by Ms. Eshoo...................................   130
Statement of the Alliance for Retired Americans by Richard
Fiesta, Executive Director, September 19, 2019, submitted by
Ms. Eshoo......................................................   131
Statement of the California Medical Association by David H.
Aizuss, President, September 19, 2019, submitted by Ms. Eshoo..   132
Statement of the American Medical Association by James L. Madara,
Executive Vice President and Chief Executive Officer, September
24, 2019, submitted by Ms. Eshoo...............................   133
Statement of the UAW by Josh Nassar, Legislative Affairs
Director, September 24, 2019, submitted by Ms. Eshoo...........   134
Statement of 340B Health, September 25, 2019, submitted by Ms.
Eshoo..........................................................   136
Statement of the National Association of Chain Drug Stores,
September 25, 2019, submitted by Ms. Eshoo.....................   138
Letter of September 25, 2019, from Sheila M. Arquette, Executive
Director, National Association of Specialty Pharmacy, to Ms.
Eshoo and Mr. Burgess, submitted by Ms. Eshoo..................   144
Statement of American Society of Health-System Pharmacists,
September 25, 2019, submitted by Ms. Eshoo.....................   150
Statement of the National Grange, September 20, 2019, submitted
by Ms. Eshoo...................................................   154
Statement of Americans for Tax Reform, submitted by Ms. Eshoo....   155
Statement of the Partnership to Improve Patient Care by Tony
Coelho, Chairman, submitted by Ms. Eshoo.......................   157
Statement of RetireSafe by Mark Gibbons, President and Chief
Executive Officer, submitted by Ms. Eshoo......................   159
Statement of the Academy of Physicians in Clinical Research,
September 19, 2019, submitted by Ms. Eshoo.....................   160
Statement of the Council for Affordable Health Coverage by Joel
White, President, September 19, 2019, submitted by Ms. Eshoo...   161
Article of July 6, 2019, ``MPs to debate new drug after young
Heidi denied treatment,'' by Heather Large, Express & Star,
submitted by Mr. Upton.........................................   163
Fact Sheets, ``Marketing and Promotion of Medicines: 4 Things You
Need to Know,'' PhRMA, submitted by Mr. Upton..................   167
Article, ``What Industry Spends The Most On Research and
Development?,'' Craft, submitted by Mr. Upton..................   175
Statement of the National Community Pharmacy Association,
September 25, 2019, submitted by Mr. Welch.....................   180
Statement of the American Pharmacists Association, September 25,
2019, submitted by Mr. Welch...................................   182
Statement of Hon. Elijah E. Cummings, Chairman, House Committee
on Oversight and Reform, September 25, 2019, submitted by Mr.
Welch..........................................................   184
Article of July 18, 2018, ``Chinese blood pressure pills sold in
the U.S. recalled over cancer-linked ingredient,'' by Zhuang
Pinghui, South China Morning Post, submitted by Mr. Flores.....   186
Article of August 14, 2018, ``FDA Recalls: A Reminder that China
Controls Much of the World's Drug Supply,'' by Maggie Fox, NBC
News, submitted by Mr. Flores..................................   191
Article of November 19, 2018, ``Drug Recalls Put Spotlight on
Drug Supply Chains,'' by Matt Smith, WebMD, submitted by Mr.
Flores.........................................................   195
Article of January 14, 2019, ``Blood pressure drug recall: FDA
investigates foreign plants that made drugs with cancer-causing
impurities,'' by Ken Alltucker, USA Today, submitted by Mr.
Flores.........................................................   199
Article of January 30, 2019, ``How a Tainted Heart Drug Made in
China Slipped Past the FDA,'' by Anna Edney, Bloomberg,
submitted by Mr. Flores........................................   203
Article of September 23, 2019, ``FDA expands blood pressure drug
recall, again,'' by Sara G. Miller, NBC News, submitted by Mr.
Flores.........................................................   210
Article of September 23, 2019, ``More blood-pressure pills
recalled over cancer-causing chemical,'' by Kate Gibson, CBS
News, submitted by Mr. Flores..................................   212

MAKING PRESCRIPTION DRUGS MORE AFFORDABLE: LEGISLATION TO NEGOTIATE A
BETTER DEAL FOR AMERICANS

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 25, 2019

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:29 a.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Anna G. Eshoo
(chairwoman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Eshoo, Engel, Butterfield,
Matsui, Castor, Sarbanes, Lujan, Schrader, Kennedy, Cardenas,
Welch, Ruiz, Dingell, Kuster, Kelly, Barragan, Blunt Rochester,
Rush, Pallone (ex officio), Burgess (subcommittee ranking
member), Upton, Shimkus, Guthrie, Griffith, Bilirakis, Long,
Bucshon, Brooks, Mullin, Hudson, Carter, Gianforte, and Walden
(ex officio).
Also present: Representatives Soto, Schakowsky, Walberg,
Flores, McKinley, Johnson, Latta, and Rodgers.
Staff present: Jacquelyn Bolen, Counsel; Jeffrey C.
Carroll, Staff Director; Waverly Gordon, Deputy Chief Counsel;
Tiffany Guarascio, Deputy Staff Director; Josh Krantz, Policy
Analyst; Una Lee, Chief Health Counsel; Aisling McDonough,
Policy Coordinator; Joe Orlando, Staff Assistant; Alivia
Roberts, Press Assistant; Samantha Satchell, Professional Staff
Member; C. J. Young, Press Secretary; S. K. Bowen, Minority
Press Assistant; Jordan Davis, Minority Senior Advisor;
Margaret Tucker Fogarty, Minority Staff Assistant; Theresa
Gambo, Minority Financial and Office Administrator; Caleb
Graff, Minority Professional Staff Member, Health; Peter
Kielty, Minority General Counsel; Ryan Long, Minority Deputy
Staff Director; James Paluskiewicz, Minority Chief Counsel,
Health; Kristin Seum, Minority Counsel, Health; Kristen
Shatynski, Minority Professional Staff Member, Health; and Evan
Viau, Minority Professional Staff, Communication and
Technology.
Ms. Eshoo. Good morning, everyone. The Subcommittee on
Health will now come to order.
The first thing I would like to begin with is all of us
wishing our wonderful colleague, Congresswoman Matsui, a happy
birthday.
Happy birthday, Doris. Happy birthday.
[Applause.]
Ms. Eshoo. Happy birthday. Happy birthday. That really is
sound applause on both sides, Doris. You're in good shape.
You're in good shape. But we all know that. Blessings on you,
our friend.
I want to welcome everyone that's here in the audience. I
see a lot of red shirts. I think that's all AARP. Thank you for
being here and for your advocacy.
The Chair now recognizes herself----
Mr. Walden. Madam Chair?
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Walden. If I could just point briefly.
Ms. Eshoo. Certainly.
Mr. Walden. We have a number of Members on our side who
want to waive onto the sub.
Ms. Eshoo. Certainly.
Mr. Walden. How should we accommodate that?
Ms. Eshoo. Well, I don't think you need permission for
that. They just need to--I think what we need to know is the
order in which they arrived, and after all the Members--the
rules of the full committee provide for following the----
Mr. Walden. Right. Members on the sub to go first.
Ms. Eshoo. All members of the subcommittee go first, and
then the order in which they have arrived today I will
recognize them.
Mr. Walden. And then in terms of seating, I know we have--
this is a very small room that was chosen.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, let's see if we can get some more chairs.
Let's see if we can get some more chairs. If they don't want to
stay for the whole----
Mr. Walden. Should they ----
Ms. Eshoo. If they don't want to stay for the whole hearing
----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. They can come back. The staff--
committee staff----
Mr. Walden. Well, I think they want to participate.
Ms. Eshoo. Do you want to be here for the whole----
Mr. Walden. Well, some will. You know, we have the other
hearing going on downstairs on vaping at the same time----
Ms. Eshoo. Right. Right.
Mr. Walden [continuing]. Which is unfortunate. But----
Ms. Eshoo. No, we will be happy to recognize them, and
there are some reserved seats there it says for the press, but
they haven't taken them. So----
Mr. Walden. Well, that's--OK. I know you----
Ms. Eshoo. OK. We will get--what was that again?
OK. So the staff will make room for them----
Mr. Walden. All right. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. And get name cards for them.
Mr. Walden. Yes, that would be excellent. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. Absolutely. Thank you.
I want to thank the Members that are here today to waive
on. I think it's an important rule of the committee, and I know
that I have exercised it and it's an important rule of the
committee. We want to accommodate you.
So with that, the Chair now recognizes herself for 5
minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Today, millions of Americans are fighting two battles: one,
their illness, a condition that they may have, and the cost of
their prescription drugs to address it.
One in four diabetes patients ration their insulin. Twenty-
three percent of American seniors report difficulty affording
their drugs, and 30 percent of Americans have skipped a dose
due to cost.
As a nation, we are paying three to four times more for
these needed drugs than other countries. Every member of this
committee, every single one of us, has heard from our
constituents about the high cost of prescription drugs, and
that is why we are beginning the journey today to address this
issue in our country.
We have a law in our country that prohibits Medicare from
negotiating directly with drug companies--the only developed
nation in the world with such a law.
So that is why we are considering four bills to finally
allow Medicare to negotiate drug prices. 1A\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The proposed legislation has been retained in committee files
and also is available at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=110024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Two of the bills--H.R. 3 and H.R. 448--limit the negotiated
price to be in line with what other wealthy countries pay for
their drugs.
With these bills, Americans will no longer have to pay so
much more for their prescription drugs than other countries. It
is something that when people complain about the price, they
always pose the question, Why is it that we pay so much more
and the same drug is cheaper in other countries? It always
attends that question.
I think our constituents deserve a much better deal.
Importantly, H.R. 3 prioritizes insulin as first on the list to
be negotiated. Humalog, a common insulin, costs the average
American $2,240 a year. If prices in the United States matched
those in other countries, the same drug would cost Americans
$347 a year, seven times less than it does now.
Under H.R. 3, every American--this is a very important
element of the legislation--every American, whether they are
enrolled in Medicare or have private insurance, will have
access to the lower prices.
H.R. 3 also ensures seniors can afford their out-of-pocket
drug costs, bringing those costs down to $2,000 a year from as
much as $5,100 a year or more. This would be a godsend. This
would be a godsend to people.
H.R. 3 also stops drug price hikes like the ones we saw
from EpiPen and Martin Shkreli's price hike of Daraprim. The
bill says that if a manufacturer raises the price of any Part B
or D drug, including generics, above the rate of inflation, the
manufacturer must lower the price or pay the entire price above
inflation back to the Treasury.
When H.R. 3 was introduced last week, I read some of the
comments from my Republican colleagues, and I want to address
them head on.
First, on bipartisanship--I want H.R. 3 to be a bipartisan
bill because I want this bill--I want legislation to become
law.
Secondly, H.R. 3 includes many provisions that President
Trump and other Republicans have publicly supported. It
delivers on candidate Trump's support for negotiating drug
prices.
H.R. 3 also has a similar policy to President Trump's
proposal to tie what Medicare Part B pays for prescription
drugs to international prices.
H.R. 3 shares provisions with Senator Grassley's drug
pricing bill, including capping out-of-pocket costs for seniors
and lifting price hikes to inflation.
Second, Republicans say that this bill will stifle
innovation and R&D. We all care about research and development
and innovation because we want those miracle drugs to get to
people.
But if they can't afford them, they simply don't have
access.
Today, NIH spends more money on R&D than any single
pharmaceutical company, and most big drug manufacturers spend
more today on marketing, sales, and overhead than on R&D, and
this is a change. At one time, that wasn't the case.
Third, my colleagues call H.R. 3 socialism. That's the new
buzz word. Did Republicans call candidate Trump a socialist
when he said, quote, ``When it comes to negotiating the cost of
drugs, we are going to negotiate like crazy''?
Who here has not supported the VA's ability to directly
negotiate drug prices? Congress unanimously voted--this is
extraordinary--Congress unanimously voted to give the Secretary
of the VA authority to negotiate in 1992, resulting in the VA's
prescription drugs costing about 40 percent less than
Medicare's.
The cost of prescription drugs is an enormous burden for
the American people, and I think it's time for us to level the
playing field for them.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Eshoo follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Anna G. Eshoo

Today, millions of Americans are fighting two battles--
their illness and the cost of their prescription drugs. One in
four diabetes patients ration their insulin. Twenty-three
percent of American seniors report difficulty affording their
drugs, and 30 percent of Americans have skipped a dose due to
cost. As a nation, we're paying 3 to 4 times more for these
needed drugs than other countries.
Every member of this committee has heard from their
constituents about out-of-control prescription costs. It's time
to act.
Today, a U.S. law prohibits Medicare from negotiating
directly with drug companies, the only developed nation in the
world with such a law.
That's why we're considering four bills to finally allow
Medicare to negotiate drug prices.
Two of the bills, H.R. 3, the Lower Prescription Drug Costs
Now Act, and H.R. 448, the Medicare Drug Price Negotiation Act,
limit the negotiated price to be in line with what other
wealthy countries pay.
With these bills, Americans will no longer have to pay so
much more for their prescription drugs than other countries.
Our constituents deserve a much better deal.
Importantly, H.R. 3 prioritizes insulin as first on the
list to be negotiated. Humalog, a common insulin, costs the
average American $2,242 per year. If prices in the U.S. matched
those in other countries, Humalog would cost Americans $347 per
year--7 times less than it does now.
Under H.R. 3, every American, whether they are enrolled in
Medicare or have private insurance, will have access to these
lower prices.
H.R. 3 also ensures seniors can afford their out-of-pocket
drug costs. When many seniors live on an annual income of only
$26,000, bringing out-of-pocket costs down to $2,000 per year
from as much as $5,100 could be a godsend.
H.R. 3 also stops drug price hikes like the ones we saw
from EpiPen and Martin Shkreli's price hike of Daraprim. The
bill says that if a manufacturer raised the price of any Part B
or Part D drug (including generics) above the rate of
inflation, the manufacturer must lower the price or pay the
entire price above inflation back to the Treasury.
When H.R. 3 was introduced last week, I read some of the
comments from my Republican colleagues. I want to address them
head-on:
First on bipartisanship. I want H.R. 3 to be a bipartisan
bill because I want it to become law.
H.R. 3 includes many provisions that President Trump and
other Republican have publicly supported. It delivers on
candidate Trump's support for negotiating drug prices. H.R. 3
also has a similar policy to President Trump's proposal to tie
what Medicare Part B pays for prescription drugs to
international prices.
H.R. 3 shares provisions with Senator Grassley's drug
pricing bill, including capping out-of-pocket costs for seniors
and limiting price hikes to inflation.
Second, Republicans say that this bill will stifle
innovation and R&D. Today, NIH spends more money on R&D than
any single pharmaceutical company, and most big drug
manufacturers spend more today on marketing, sales, and
overhead than on R&D.
Third, my colleagues call H.R. 3 socialism. Did Republicans
call candidate Trump a socialist when he said, ``When it comes
to negotiate the cost of drugs, we are going to negotiate like
crazy''? Who here hasn't supported the VA's ability to directly
negotiate drug prices? Congress unanimously voted to give the
Secretary of the VA authority to negotiate in 1992 resulting in
VA's prescription drugs costing about 40% less than Medicare's.
The cost of prescription drugs is an enormous burden for
the American people and it's time to level the playing field
for them.
I yield my time to Representative Matsui.

Ms. Eshoo. I now have the pleasure of yielding the
remainder of my time to Congresswoman Matsui.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much. So I get a little more
time because it's my birthday, right?
Ms. Eshoo. Absolutely.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Madam Chair.
There are many reasons to undertake this important work,
none more important than the everyday stories from patients
across the country dealing with high drugs costs, including
seniors like Cynthia Stockton from Sacramento.
A few years ago, she developed seizures and discovered a
brain tumor. She's on Medicare, and without prescription drugs
her body would shut down and she would die.
The prescription she takes to treat her muscle spasms and
seizures and boost her mental health cost a significant amount
of money for someone on a fixed income.
Seniors like Cynthia deserve better. They deserve
affordable medication, and it underscores why we must get this
right.
I look forward to working to make that a reality. Thank
you, and I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back.
I was going to yield time to Congresswoman Kuster, but I
don't have any more time. So--I don't. I know that. I just
looked up at the clock.
The Chair now recognizes Dr. Burgess, the ranking member of
the Subcommittee on Health, for 5 minutes for his opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. So my thanks to the chairwoman. We are
convened here today to discuss the very important topic of drug
pricing. Every one of us has heard passionate personal stories
from our constituents about the ever-increasing costs of
prescription drugs.
So I am committed to addressing this issue and lowering
out-of-pocket costs for patients. In fact, in December of 2017,
as chairman of this subcommittee I asked our witness panel at a
drug supply hearing not just to point out flaws, which they
did, but to come to us--come to the table with solutions.
Unfortunately, there wasn't a lot of coming forth with
solutions. But still, we have pushed forward with discussions,
most of the time bipartisan discussions, and legislation.
Throughout last Congress and this Congress we have held
thoughtful hearings with robust witness panels to offer
analyses on different drug pricing problems and possible
legislation.
But this hearing seems to really come at us fairly quickly
on a bill that was just released last week, and it does seem to
be a partisan exercise on this topic today, and that's
unfortunate.
This committee has a history of working together to improve
generic and biosimilar competition. For example, I worked with
Chairwoman Eshoo on the Purple Book Continuity Act, which has
passed the House, and I think we can both agree that this is a
better bill because we shared our ideas and we worked together.
Additionally, the House passed the CREATES bill. We worked
on it last Congress, completed it in this Congress, and this
will prohibit drug manufacturers from gaming the system by
refusing to sell samples to generic manufacturers.
CREATES will directly address the thalidomide issues that
Dr. Fowler mentions in his testimony, and we need to build on
that foundation to address other aspects of this market
dynamic.
Going forward, we should be able to continue a bipartisan
dialogue instead of being shut out of our conversations
altogether.
I do support bipartisan solutions to lowering drug prices
for American patients. I appreciate that in the past we have
had bipartisan conversations about modernizing Medicare Part D
in this Congress, including capping beneficiaries' out-of-
pocket costs.
I would like to continue those conversations and welcome
committee activity that enables productive discussions.
H.R. 3 is a proposal that was drafted behind closed doors
by Speaker Pelosi and her staff, and it is being forced through
this committee by the chairman. This committee has a long
history of working together to address complex issues in the
healthcare system, including drug pricing.
Until last week, that was the case in this Congress as
well. This committee has fought over the years to achieve
bipartisan success in establishing pathways for new and
innovative drugs and cures to come to market and get into the
hands of patients more quickly.
Through FDA user fee reauthorizations and 21st Century
Cures we have built a framework that spurs innovation to
improve the health and well-being of the lives of patients and
their loved ones.
Earlier this year, we saw on a ``60 Minutes'' program where
Dr. Francis Collins of the National Institutes of Health was on
national television and used the word ``cure'' in referring to
sickle cell disease.
I can't tell you how stunning that was for me. The release
of such great human suffering is priceless. Yet, we do need a
21st century payment mechanism for our 21st Century Cures.
We need to ensure that such payment mechanisms do not
impede innovation. While we should ensure that the government
money is spent wisely, that should not come at the cost of
limiting patients' access to care.
So, Doctor, I am uncomfortable with the idea of government
action restricting patients' access to lifesaving medications.
You know, back in the early days of my medical practice
back in the 1980s--as doctors we like to sit around and gripe
about stuff, and we did.
So one of the things we griped about was the fact that
there were treatments available in Europe that were not
available in the United States.
Now, thanks to the establishment of user fees and other
significant work done by this committee, the Committee on
Energy and Commerce, to clear that regulatory bottleneck and
speed the drug approval process over the past four decades, now
the situation is reversed.
American doctors have more pharmaceutical tools available
to treat their patients and alleviate human suffering than do
their European counterparts.
So we are going to hear a number of examples of that today.
I certainly want to thank the committee for the work back in
the '90s on the user fee agreements that led us to this point,
and it is in that spirit of bipartisanship I hope we can go
forward.
After we have this hearing today and get it out of our
system, we need to sit down and see if we can't do something
that will be meaningful.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Michael C. Burgess

Thank you, Madame Chair. We are convened here today to
discuss the important topic of drug pricing. Every one of us
has heard passionate, personal stories from our constituents
about the ever-increasing cost of prescription drugs. I am
committed to addressing this issue and lowering out-of-pocket
costs for patients. In December 2017 as chairman of this
subcommittee, I asked our witness panel at a drug supply chain
hearing to point out flaws in our system and come to the table
with solutions. Unfortunately, there was a lack of solutions
shared, but we still pushed forward with bipartisan discussions
and legislation.
Throughout last Congress and this Congress, we have held
thoughtful, bipartisan hearings with robust witness panels to
offer analyses of different drug pricing problems and
legislation.
Regrettably, we are holding a quickly assembled partisan
hearing on this topic today.
This committee has a history of working in a bipartisan
manner to improve generic and biosimilar competition. For
example, I worked with Chairwoman Eshoo on the Purple Book
Continuity Act, which has passed the House, and I think we can
both agree that this is a better bill because we shared ideas
and worked together. Additionally, we have passed CREATES,
which will prohibit drug manufacturers from gaming the system
and refusing to sell samples to generics manufacturers. CREATES
will directly address one of the Revlimid issues that Mr.
Fowler mentions in his testimony, and we must build on that
foundation to address other aspects of this market dynamic.
I hope going forward, we will be able to continue a
bipartisan dialogue instead of being shut out of conversations
altogether.
I support bipartisan solutions to lower drug prices for
American patients. I also appreciate that we have had
bipartisan conversations about modernizing Medicare Part D this
Congress, including capping beneficiaries' out-of-pocket costs.
I would like to continue those conversations and welcome
committee activity that enables productive discussions.
H.R. 3 is a proposal that was drafted behind closed doors
by Speaker Pelosi and is being forced through this committee by
the chairman. This committee has a long history of working
together to address complex issues across the healthcare
system, including drug pricing. Until last week, that was still
the case this Congress.
This committee has fought long and hard to achieve
bipartisan success in establishing pathways for new and
innovative drugs and cures to come to the market and get into
the hands of patients faster.
Through FDA user fee reauthorizations and 21st Century
Cures, we have built a framework that spurs innovation to
improve the health, well-being, and lives of patients and their
loved ones.
Speaker Pelosi said ``The issue of the cost of prescription
drugs is one subject that can make grown men cry,'' but how
about a cure for a life-threatening illness for your loved one?
Earlier this year, Dr. Francis Collins of the National
Institutes of Health went on national television and said that
we have a cure for sickle cell disease. The relief of such
great human suffering is priceless, yet we do need to have 21st
century payment mechanisms for our 21st Century Cures, and we
need to ensure that such payment mechanisms do not impede
innovation.
While we should ensure that government money is spent
wisely, that should not come at the cost of limiting patients'
access to care. As a physician, I am uncomfortable with the
idea of government action restricting American patients' access
to lifesaving medications.
In the early days of my medical practice in the 1980s, I
used to gripe with other doctors that there were treatments
available in Europe that were not yet available in the U.S.
Thanks to the establishment of user fees and other significant
work done by the Energy and Commerce to clear the regulatory
bottleneck and speed the drug approval process over the past
four decades, American doctors now have more pharmaceutical
tools available to treat their patients than those in other
countries.
I think I can speak for other Members of this committee and
the American people in saying that we should work together to
fix drug prices. Thank you, Madame Chair. I yield back.

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I will not take
the additional minute and a half.
Ms. Eshoo. I thank the gentleman.
Dr. Burgess, my door is always open. We will honor regular
order here, and I think that it's now time to recognize----
Mr. Burgess. Just a----
Ms. Eshoo. Certainly.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. Parliamentary--then can we
anticipate a subcommittee markup before going to full committee
markup?
Ms. Eshoo. I believe so, yes.
Mr. Burgess. All right. I'll take that as an assurance.
Ms. Eshoo. I just want to add that H.R. 3 doesn't limit
access of any drugs. There's no formulary. It's just a fair
price.
With that, I now would like to recognize the gentleman from
New Jersey, the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Pallone,
for his 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Today, we are beginning the process of finally giving the
Federal Government the ability to negotiate lower prescription
drugs prices for the American people.
For years, Americans have been subsidizing prescription
drugs for the rest of the world. Americans pay three, four, or
10 times the amount what people in other countries pay for the
exact same drug, and that's not fair.
And today we are beginning the process of leveling the
playing field by discussing four bills, including bills
introduced by Representatives Doggett, Welch, and Cummings, who
have sought to tackle prescription drug negotiation over the
years.
We will also discuss H.R. 3, the Lower Drug Costs Now Act,
which I introduced last week with several other committee
chairs. The legislation gives the Secretary of Health and Human
Services the authority and the tools to negotiate the price of
prescription drugs for all Americans.
It ends the gouging of American consumers by establishing a
maximum fair price on what we are willing to pay for
prescription drugs based on what other countries are paying for
the same drugs.
It incentivizes manufacturers to stop unfair price hikes on
Medicare beneficiaries by requiring them to pay a rebate back
to Medicare if they increase prices faster than inflation, and
it caps out-of-pocket costs of the Medicare prescription drug
benefit, giving American seniors the peace of mind of knowing
that their prescription drug costs will not bankrupt them or
empty their retirement accounts.
Now, I know Dr. Burgess said we are pushing this but, you
know, Dr. Burgess, we are having a hearing today, and if the
Republicans want to work with us on this proposal, they can.
I mean, my concern--I have to be honest--is that when we
passed Medicare Part D, and I was here, they insisted on
putting this prohibition on the Secretary negotiating
prescription drugs.
That has to come out. There has to be a process of
negotiating. Otherwise, I don't know how we are going to
effectively bring prices down.
So if you want to work with us, it's fine. But I think that
this--getting rid of this clause that says you can't negotiate
and having that as a basis of the legislation I think is
crucial.
And I remind them that the President recently indicated via
Twitter that he welcomes what we put forth as Democrats.
So let's get this done because it's time that we negotiate
a better deal for the American people.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Today, we are beginning the process of finally giving the
Federal Government the ability to negotiate lower prescription
drug prices for the American people. For years, Americans have
been subsidizing prescription drugs for the rest of the world.
Americans pay three, four or ten times the amount what people
in other countries pay for the exact same drug. That's not
fair, and today we are beginning the process of leveling the
playing field by discussing four bills, including bills
introduced by Representatives Doggett, Welch and Cummings, who
have sought to tackle prescription drug negotiation over the
years.
We will also discuss H.R. 3, the Lower Drug Costs Now Act,
which I introduced last week with several other committee
chairs. This legislation gives the Secretary of Health and
Human Services the authority and the tools to negotiate the
price of prescription drugs for all Americans. It ends the
gouging of American consumers by establishing a maximum fair
price on what we are willing to pay for prescription drugs,
based on what other countries are paying for the same drugs. It
incentivizes manufacturers to stop unfair price hikes on
Medicare beneficiaries by requiring them to pay a rebate back
to Medicare if they increase prices faster than inflation. And
it caps out-of-pocket costs in the Medicare prescription drug
benefit, giving America's seniors the peace of mind of knowing
that their prescription drug costs will not bankrupt them or
empty their retirement accounts.
It is time for Congress to take bold and decisive action to
reduce prescription drug prices for all Americans. As President
Trump himself said in his State of the Union address this past
February, ``I am asking Congress to pass legislation that
finally takes on the problem of global freeloading and delivers
fairness and price transparency for American patients.'' That's
the President earlier this year.
I invite my Republican colleagues to work with us on this
proposal and remind them that the President recently indicated
via Twitter that he welcomes our ideas.
Let's get this done because it is time that we negotiate a
better deal for the American people.
Thank you, I yield back.

Mr. Pallone. And now I'd like to yield 45 seconds each to
three of our Members. First, Mr. Welch, then Mr. Lujan, and
then Ms. Schakowsky.
So I'll yield 45 minutes to Mr. Welch, who's one of the----
Mr. Welch. I'll take the minutes.
Mr. Pallone. What? No, I mean, 45 seconds, because he's one
of the sponsors of one of the bills.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much.
This committee has to make a very simple decision: Will our
Government be an advocate on behalf of consumers and taxpayers?
Every other government in the world does it. Here, there is
price setting. Opponents of this bill fear price setting. We
have got price setting. It's by the pharmaceutical industry.
This bill does four good things. Number one, it sets a cap,
1.2 times. We are not going to be suckers, like the President--
President Trump said.
Number two, it spreads the benefits across the entire
marketplace. So private, employer-sponsored healthcare plans
will benefit.
Third, it'll save hundreds of billions of dollars, and it's
about time.
Number four, the savings go back into the Medicare plan so
that folks who are paying high copays and deductibles are going
to get some overdue relief.
Let's pass this bill. Let's work together to make it
happen. I yield back.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, and I yield 45 seconds to the
gentleman from New Mexico.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to echo the
words of my colleague, Mr. Welch. It's about time that we come
together to get this done. Democrats and Republicans have been
talking about lowering prescription drug prices for some time.
During the last 2 years, you heard from everyone running
for office that they were going to do something meaningful to
require negotiation of prescription drugs to lower the costs,
to make a difference for our constituents.
After Speaker Pelosi rolled out this particular piece of
legislation, one of the bills that's before us today, even
President Trump found time to tweet, ``Good work, Nancy. Let's
get this done.''
Let's move this forward. There's a chance for us to work
together. Let's require negotiated drug prices and lower costs
for the American people.
Plain and simple, let's get it to the President, get it
signed into law, and make a difference for the people that
entrusted us to get this done.
I yield back.
Mr. Pallone. I've got 30 seconds left for Ms. Schakowsky.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
I am so proud of this committee for leading the charge to
finally allow for negotiation of prescription drug prices,
which we have been trying to do since 2005 when Big Pharma
tucked into that Part D bill a prohibition.
Negotiation is the most effective way, and as we move
forward, though, I have three suggestions. I'll do it as fast
as I can.
One, that we must ensure that this legislation addresses
the issue of the typically skyrocketing prices of new drugs
that are launched on the market.
Second, we must ensure that the limited number of drugs
that are eligible for negotiations--that we don't use that to
be able to raise prices on other drugs.
And third, I believe that we have to include other things
like transparency in this legislation. I have a bill to do that
so the drug companies have to explain their increases.
And let me just also thank you for not including
arbitration in this legislation.
Mr. Pallone. And I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
And now it's a pleasure to recognize the ranking member of
the full committee, Mr. Walden, for his 5 minutes for opening
statement.
Mr. Walden. Good morning, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. Good morning.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. There is no debate about the fact that
Republicans and Democrats want to work together to lower drug
costs for consumers.
We also believe in innovation, and we believe in stopping
bad actors.
Madam Chair, I have to strongly express my great
frustration about the decision to sabotage both the traditions
of this committee and the bipartisan work that you know was
well underway to tackle high-cost drugs.
Our teams were working well together to find solutions that
become law. They were negotiating, modernizing Medicare Part D,
and then we went into radio silence.
Under Chairman Upton's leadership and mine, we wrote
durable laws together to increase innovation, to find cures to
diseases, to stop scams by some companies that kept competition
out of the marketplace.
We all knew there was more work to do. We have worked in a
bipartisan way, up until now, on those efforts. We did it on
CREATES. We did it on pay-for-delay. We did it on blocking, and
we were doing it on these other issues.
I thought we were headed in good faith down that same path
until the Speaker's office dropped this partisan plan on our
process. We were not privy to any of this, and I am not sure
you all were.
Congress needs to work together with President Trump. I've
never seen a President lean forward more on an issue like this
than him, and we can agree and disagree with different points.
But he wants to sign a bill that will work. Unfortunately,
that's not what we are doing this morning. It's hard words for
me to say because you are my friend. But this is partisan
politics at its worst, and it's an avoidable failure--the
failure to build on our bipartisan progress to lower
prescription drugs for consumers.
With a bipartisan, inclusive process, Republicans have
worked with Democrats to push for legislation that promotes
competition, that lowers out-of-pocket costs for consumers, and
establishes transparency and accountability in drug pricing.
We worked together to pass the 21st Century Cures
legislation that's been referenced, and the FDA
reauthorizations in 2017 that opened the door to more generics
being approved in 1 year than in the history of the FDA, and we
did that in a bipartisan way.
In this committee we passed CREATES to stop bad behavior,
and then the Speaker's office shoved in a poison pill to make
Republicans vote no on the floor and did the same thing on the
other legislation.
Our work last Congress resulted in the FDA, as I said,
approving a record number of generics, including the first
generic competitor to EpiPen.
My friend from Oregon, Mr. Schrader, helped lead that
effort, so if you got a medical device where there's no
competitor, we will put you at the front of the approval list.
If you look over the past year and a half, the legislation
that has become law and passed the House, our bipartisan
policies have added up to $24 billion in savings to the Federal
Government and lowered prices for consumers. And there's more
we can do together if you'll come back to the table.
Many may not know this but, before Speaker Pelosi began to
write her partisan plan behind closed doors, Republicans and
Democrats on this committee had been working together drafting
policies in good faith, and we believed and the majority
indicated we'd receive unanimous support in the committee.
These policies essentially mirror about 90 percent of the
legislation our colleagues in the Senate have been working on
and about 92 percent of what the HELP Committee in the Senate
was working on.
We were very close. Some of these policies included immense
benefit to our Nation's seniors in the form of modernizing
Medicare Part D program, provide an out-of-pocket spending cap
for seniors so you'd never--you'd always know what the limit
was.
But those bipartisan negotiations came to an abrupt halt.
Why were you forced to walk away from the table? We wanted and
still want to work with you in addressing this issue for the
American people.
But now we have before us a partisan plan that puts
politics over progress. Are you even able to negotiate from
here, or is it ``This is it, take it or leave it''? Are you
willing to make substantive changes so we can reach bipartisan
agreement, or is this the end? Check the box, score a point,
move on?
We don't know because you haven't told us, and frankly I am
not sure you know yourselves. I think it's unfortunate you were
forced to pursue the Speaker's strategy and not let our
productive and bipartisan discussions continue. They stopped.
They halted, and we all know it.
When it comes to setting prices, I was on the committee
when we passed Medicare Part D. It was a huge fight, it's true.
And there was a decision made to establish the program the way
it is, and Democrats did want to set prices. In fact, they
wanted to put in statute--they wanted to put in statute the
Part D premium and index it to inflation.
Thirty-five dollars in '06. Had they done that, it'd be $46
today. This week, Medicare announced the premium in 2020 will
be $30 a month, not $35, and certainly not $46. About a third
lower for seniors than if you'd followed the Democrats' plan to
lock it in statute.
There's a way to make the free market work for consumers.
There's a way to save for seniors. We remain committed to doing
that once this process plays itself out.
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Greg Walden

There is no debate about the fact that Republicans and
Democrats want to work together to lower drug costs for
consumers. We also believe in innovation, and we believe in
stopping bad actors.
Madame Chair, I have to strongly express my great
frustration about the decision to sabotage both the great
traditions of this committee and the bipartisan work that--you
know--was well underway to tackle the high cost of drugs. Our
teams were working well together to find solutions that could
become law. They were negotiating modernizing Medicare Part D,
and then we went into radio silence.
Under Chairman Upton's leadership and mine, we wrote
durable laws together to increase innovation, to find cures to
diseases and stop the scams by some companies that kept
competition out of the marketplace. We all know there is more
work to do. We've worked in a bipartisan way, up until now, on
those efforts. We did it on CREATES. We did it on pay-for-
delay. We did it on blocking, and we were doing it on these
other issues.
I thought we were heading in good faith down that same
path, until the Speaker's office dropped this partisan plan on
our process. We were not privy to any of this and I'm not sure
you all were.
Congress needs to work together with President Trump--I've
never seen a President lean forward more on an issue like this
than him. We can agree and disagree on different points, but he
wants to sign a bill that will work.
Unfortunately, that's not what we're doing this morning.
These are hard words for me to say because you are my friends,
but this is partisan politics at its worst and it's an
avoidable failure. A failure to build on our bipartisan
progress to lower prescription drug prices for consumers.
With a bipartisan and inclusive process, Republicans have
previously worked with Democrats to push for legislation that
promotes competition, lowers out-of-pocket costs for consumers,
and establishes transparency and accountability in drug
pricing. We worked together to pass the 21st Century Cures Act
in 2016 and the FDA Reauthorization Act in 2017 that opened the
door to more generics being approved in 1 year than in the
history of the FDA and we did that in a bipartisan way.
In this committee, we passed CREATES to stop bad behavior
and then the Speaker's office shoved in a poison pill to make
Republicans vote no on the floor, and the same thing with other
legislation. Our work last Congress, as I said, resulted in the
FDA approving a record number of affordable generic drugs last
year, including the first generic competitor to the EpiPen.
My friend from Oregon, Mr. Schrader, helped lead that
effort to say that if you have a medical device and there's no
competitor, we'll put you at the front of the approval list.
If you look over the past year and a half at the
legislation that has become law and what has passed the House,
our bipartisan policies have added up to $24 billion in savings
to the Federal Government and lower prices for consumers. And
there is more we can do, together, if you will come back to the
table.
Many may not know this, but before Speaker Pelosi began to
write her partisan plan behind closed doors, the Republicans
and Democrats on this committee have been working together,
drafting policies in good faith that we believed, and the
majority indicated, could receive unanimous support in the
committee.
These polices essentially mirror about 90% of the
legislation that our colleagues in Senate Finance have been
working on, and about 92% of what the HELP Committee in the
Senate have been working on. We were very close. Some of those
policies included immense benefit to our Nation's seniors in
the form of modernizing the Medicare Part D program and
providing an out-of-pocket-spending cap for seniors so you
would always know what the limit was. But those bipartisan
negotiations came to an abrupt halt.
Why were you forced to walk away from the table? We wanted
and still want to work with you on addressing this issue for
the American people. But now we have before us a partisan plan
that puts politics over progress.
Are you even able to negotiate from here? Or is this it?
Take it or leave it? Are you willing to make substantive
changes so we can reach bipartisan agreement? Or is this the
end? Check a box. Score a political point. Move on.
We don't know because you haven't told us. Frankly, I'm not
sure you know yourselves. I think it is unfortunate that you
were forced to pursue the Speaker's strategy and not let our
productive, bipartisan discussions continue. They stopped;
they've halted. We all know it.
Now, when it comes to setting prices, I was on the
committee when we passed Medicare Part D. It was a huge fight,
it's true. And there was a decision made to establish the
program the way it is, and Democrats did want to set prices. In
fact, they wanted to put in statute the Part D premium and
index it to inflation--$35 in 2006. Had they done that, it'd be
$46 today. This week, Medicare announced the premium in 2020
will be $30 per month, not $35, and certainly not $46. That's
about a third lower for seniors than if you had followed the
Democrats' plan to lock it in statute.
There's a way to make the free market work for consumers.
There's a way to save for seniors. We remain committed to doing
that, once this process plays itself out.
I yield back.

Ms. Eshoo. I thank my friend for his 5 minutes and 27
seconds for his opening statement.
I think that we all need to take a deep breath and really
roll our sleeves up and look for the opportunities to work
together.
Mr. Walden. If the gentlelady will yield.
Ms. Eshoo. No, let me finish what I want to say. I
understand people wanting to characterize things the way they
view them. You have every right to do that. This is regular
order. This is a hearing. We have witnesses. We can question
them.
All ideas can be placed on the table. As I said in my
opening statement, there are portions of H.R. 3 that include
ideas from the White House, ideas from Senator Grassley, and we
are going through regular order.
So my door is open. I think all the Members know that. You
know that, certainly, and there is a big difference between
capping out-of-pocket costs and the actual price of
prescription drugs.
Mr. Walden. I am very well aware of that, and I agree with
you.
Ms. Eshoo. And we need to work together on that. So----
Mr. Walden. Would the gentlelady yield?
Ms. Eshoo. Yes, I guess--I don't have--I guess I can,
right?
Mr. Walden. Yes. I am glad--I know you, we have worked
together on things. We have fought over things.
Ms. Eshoo. Right.
Mr. Walden. We have worked on things, and we have done it
in good faith always, and I take you at your word. We will come
through your door.
Ms. Eshoo. Good. I welcome that.
Mr. Walden. Because we were on a path--our teams were--and
this got dropped. We had no notice. I mean, the hearing got
noticed. We were told it was going to be on Thursday. It got
moved to Wednesday. It got noticed late in the day before a
draft of the legislation was even available. I hope you
appreciate our frustration.
Ms. Eshoo. You know what I don't want to do? I do----
Mr. Walden. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. But I don't want us to get lost in
the weeds of the yin and the yang. When we were in the
minority, we would complain about what time and who filed and
what we didn't know and who didn't tell us.
Now the shoe is on the other foot. I am not saying that I
prefer being in the minority. Trust me.
Mr. Walden. But----
Ms. Eshoo. But it is--you know----
Mr. Walden. But I would--I would just----
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. We do get into that, but I think
the main point----
Mr. Walden. I would just--I know. Our teams were talking
and meeting and working on language----
Ms. Eshoo. And we will. And we will.
Mr. Walden. And then it stopped.
Ms. Eshoo. And I don't think--let me just say something
about the Speaker's role in this.
The Speaker is second in line in the Constitution to the
presidency, whomever that individual is. This is such a top
priority for us that it came from there. It came from there.
Mr. Walden. My point.
Ms. Eshoo. Now, that this is not--this is not to say that
for the last two Congresses or three--five, six, seven years--
that Democrats haven't had a caucus on this, working on all of
the ideas and bringing them forward.
So parts of this bill are not brand new to us. It is a
compilation, but I think that it's a serious undertaking for
the people of our country. We want our economy to work. We want
innovation to flourish. But we want people to be able to afford
the drugs that they need. Some people can't live without them.
So a price should not be a death sentence.
All right. Now we are going to get back to----
Mr. Bucshon. Madame Chairwoman?
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Bucshon. Can I ask a question?
Ms. Eshoo. Sure. Who is seeking to be recognized? Sure.
Mr. Bucshon. Since it appears that the chairwoman had extra
time for her opening statement should the ranking member also
get extra time----
Ms. Eshoo. If he----
Mr. Bucshon [continuing]. To clarify their comments?
Ms. Eshoo. He did. He did. I recognized him.
Mr. Bucshon. Right. But then you just now went on about a
five-minute talk without----
Ms. Eshoo. Well, let me ask you----
Mr. Bucshon. At the discretion of the Chair, which you can
do. But in fairness then the ranking member----
Ms. Eshoo. Well, why don't you stop talking and I'll ask
the----
Mr. Bucshon. The ranking member should have time also.
Ms. Eshoo. Would you like to say something else, Greg?
Mr. Walden. I think I know how this plays out, and I think
it's time we heard from our witnesses and moved on.
Ms. Eshoo. OK.
So now we will move to our witnesses, and we want to thank
each one of you for being here today. I'll introduce all three
now.
Dr. Robert Fowler, thank you for being with us. He's
professor emeritus at Baldwin Wallace University. Dr. Gerard
Anderson, professor at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health--thank you for being here. And Dr. Benedic Ippolito,
research fellow in economic policy studies at the American
Enterprise Institute.
Thank you to each of you for joining us today. We look
forward to your testimony, and at this time the Chair will
recognize each witness for your 5 minutes.
I think you know the system with the lights. Green,
obviously--we drive through green, right? Yellow, caution. Red,
stop.
So with that, I'll recognize Dr. Fowler for your 5 minutes
of testimony, sir, and thank you again.

STATEMENTS OF ROBERT FOWLER, Ph.D., PROFESSOR EMERITUS, BALDWIN
WALLACE UNIVERSITY; BENEDIC IPPOLITO, Ph.D., RESEARCH FELLOW,
AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE; AND GERARD F. ANDERSON, Ph.D.,
PROFESSOR, JOHNS HOPKINS BLOOMBERG SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH, AND
DIRECTOR, JOHNS HOPKINS CENTER FOR HOSPITAL FINANCE AND
MANAGEMENT

MDNM/STATEMENT OF ROBERT FOWLER, Ph.D.

Dr. Fowler. Chairwoman Eshoo, Ranking Member Burgess, and
members of the committee, I am honored to be here today.
My name is Robert Fowler. I am here as an Ohioan, a
religious studies professor, a husband, and a father. Most
importantly for today, I am here as a cancer patient.
In 2006 I was diagnosed with an incurable blood cancer
called multiple myeloma. For the last decade, I have taken a
chemo drug called Revlimid. The list price of that drug is
almost $200,000 per year.
My experience being a cancer patient has taught me two
important lessons. First, since myeloma treatments inevitably
stop working for patients, causing them to relapse, we
literally need new drugs to stay alive.
The importance of innovation is crucial to me.
The second is that drugs don't work if people can't afford
them. As a new Medicare beneficiary, I will pay, roughly,
$12,500 a year out of pocket for my drug, Revlimid.
There is one big reason my drug costs me and the system so
much. Under current law, Medicare is prohibited from
negotiating directly with my drug manufacturer. As a result,
Americans pay two to three times more than other nations for
the same drugs.
Now, drug companies will tell you that they need high drug
prices in order to fuel innovation. The brutal message implied
in their ever-increasing drug prices is this: If you don't want
to die, you must pay whatever we demand. That's simply not
true.
Here is why. According to the Washington Post, nine out of
10 big drug companies spend more on marketing than research.
Drug corporations' profit margins are almost three times the
average of S&P 500 corporations, and we could go on.
There is plenty of money to lower drug prices and fuel the
innovation I need to stay alive. Generic competitors were
supposed to lower the price of my Revlimid by now. But Celgene,
the manufacturer of the drug, has stopped at nothing to extend
its monopoly, blocking generic competition and suffocating its
product in a pile of patents.
And Revlimid could cost taxpayers an estimated $45 billion
through 2028. I bring up this history to make the case that we,
as taxpayers, must have a mechanism to push back.
Patients like me need immediate congressional action. As
you work to fix our broken system, I urge you to take three
concrete actions.
First, repeal the ban on Medicare negotiating directly with
drug companies. According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, 86
percent of all Americans--majorities of Democrats, Republicans,
and independents--support allowing Medicare to negotiate for
lower prescription drug prices.
Second, ensure that Americans, regardless of insurance
type, have access to lower priced drugs. Drug companies like
Celgene should have to offer a better deal to people like me on
a government health insurance plan as well as Americans who use
private insurance.
Finally, cap seniors' out-of-pocket costs for prescription
drugs. Paying over $12,000 per year out of pocket isn't
sustainable for seniors.
It is not easy to live with an incurable disease. But I
have no choice. The physical and mental toll of living with
cancer is something I have to endure.
You do not have the power to take away my cancer, nor do
you have the power to make my personal struggles with this
disease any easier.
But you do have the power to make my prescriptions more
affordable. I want to live many more years in spite of my blood
cancer. To have a shot at that, I need two things: lifesaving
drugs and an affordable price.
Drug companies would have you believe that we must pick
between innovation and affordability. I disagree. We can
absolutely have both, and I am hopeful that after actions of
this committee we will.
Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fowler follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Dr. Fowler.
What you said you wish for, we want to make your wishes
come true. Thank you very much.
I now would like to call on Dr. Ippolito and thank you for
being here as a witness. You have 5 minutes to make your
presentation to us.

STATEMENT OF BENEDIC IPPOLITO, Ph.D.

Dr. Ippolito. Well, Chairman Eshoo, Ranking Member Burgess,
members of the subcommittee--Chairman Pallone and Ranking
Member Walden as well--my name is Benedic Ippolito. I am an
economist and research fellow at the American Enterprise
Institute.
Prescription drugs can offer tremendous benefit to
patients. But they can also represent a major financial burden.
So I am glad that the committee is considering this issue so
seriously.
Today, I am going to focus on two elements of recent
proposals, namely, redesigning the Medicare prescription drug
benefit, known as Medicare Part D, and allowing for direct drug
negotiation.
First, the design of the Medicare Part D benefit has
attracted criticism for justifiable reasons. Its current
structure both raises program costs, mainly to taxpayers, and
exposes beneficiaries to the kinds of financial risks that
insurance is supposed to mitigate--the kinds of financial risks
that we literally just heard about.
Proposed redesigns to Part D would reduce open-ended
Federal spending, improve incentives to control overall costs,
and place a cap on the maximum out-of-pocket spending of
enrollees.
I know there are some differences across the proposals
we've seen in H.R. 3, what's come out of the Senate Finance
Committee. But suffice it to say that there are enough
similarities across them that I believe these are exactly the
kind of policy changes that should be encouraged.
I am, however, less enthusiastic about proposals to allow
the secretary of HHS to negotiate drug prices.
First, the penalties associated with walking away from
negotiations are so severe, be it losing nearly all revenue or,
literally, your intellectual property rights, that they are
negotiations in name only.
Practically, the Secretary of HHS is given power to dictate
prices as they see fit. Regardless of what one thinks, this
kind of centralized rate regulation is both challenging and
highly consequential.
Indeed, the economics literature has repeatedly shown what
likely seems obvious. Financial returns for successful drugs
has a direct influence on the research and development
decisions of firms.
Indeed, we've talked a lot about the introduction to
Medicare Part D. There are, literally, studies that show the
very introduction of the senior prescription drug benefit
altered the kinds of drugs that manufacturers decided to invest
in. Namely, they steered more investments to that particular
market.
I am particularly concerned because these kinds of pricing
decisions are going to be made under intense political
pressure.
So, for example, in cases where administrations emphasize,
shall we say, 4- or 8-year time horizons, there will be
substantial pressure to sharply reduce current prices and enjoy
the absolute benefit of lower drug spending while discounting
the cost of reduced innovation that it's only realized beyond
that kind of time horizon.
This is not optimal for society. Moreover, consider the
incentives associated with H.R. 3's negotiation process or
rate-setting process.
Drugs that have no competitors would be subject to
aggressive rate regulation. However, the same is not true of
drugs that have at least one competitor.
Being second to market could prove substantially more
profitable than creating a path-breaking therapy, particularly
if we are thinking about rare diseases where it takes a
relatively long time before we tend to see competitors come
into the market. The markets just aren't that big.
In addition, I worry about the unpredictability of such a
system. Changes in the policy preferences of future
administrations will likely manifest in highly variable rate
regulation over time.
One might, for example, predict considerably different use
of this broad pricing power under an administration led by
Senator Bernie Sanders than, say, by the Bush administration.
This kind of uncertainty is very costly when we think about
the kind of time horizons that somebody who's entering into
either early-stage investment or even at the Big Pharma stage
of investment is thinking about.
You have to think about a decade-plus in advance. You're
not going to know who's going to be President, who's going to
be the head of HHS, what kind of policy priorities they're
going to have, and so much more. That kind of uncertainty
really is costly. That is a real cost that you have to think
about.
Altogether, I worry that the system will lead to outcomes
that stray far from what is best for Americans. However, none
of this is to say that drug prices must remain where they are.
Indeed, they shouldn't.
I applaud reforms to the Part B benefit design, and I
encourage Congress to continue working to make our current
regulatory environment work better.
Examples of policy options include reforming the protected
classes in Part D, removing incentives to prescribe higher
costs in Medicare Part B, addressing REMS abuse that we talked
about, the CREATES Act, reducing patent thickets or other
generic delaying tactics, improving access to lower cost
biosimilars, and so much more.
Overall, this is a very important issue, and I thank you
for the opportunity be here today, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ippolito follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you very much, Dr. Ippolito.
Our next witness is Dr. Gerard Anderson, and when I
introduced him, you'll recall, he's a professor at Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. Welcome to you. You
have 5 minutes to enlighten us. And that's quite a necktie
there.
Dr. Anderson. Well, this is my Johns Hopkins necktie.
Ms. Eshoo. Oh, I see. See, I didn't see the bottom of it.
Dr. Anderson. It's got a shape on it, too.
Ms. Eshoo. I couldn't figure it out but it's----
Dr. Anderson. So, you know, men don't have very much, so we
only have ties.
Ms. Eshoo. This is true. This is true. Yes, this is true.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF GERARD F. ANDERSON, Ph.D.

Dr. Anderson. Well, thank you for the opportunity to
testify this morning, and thank you to Ranking Member Burgess
for the opportunity 2 years ago to testify on the drug supply
chains hearing.
Rather than try to summarize my testimony today, I just
want to focus on a couple of topics.
Beginning economics tells you that, when there is
competition, the market attains a reasonable price, and for
many drugs there is reasonable competition and the market
appears to work.
However, for drugs, when there's no real competition, the
prices are very high because the drug companies have all the
power. In economics, we call this market failure.
We did a study of 79 drugs in the United States without any
generic competitions. These drugs represent about half of all
Medicare spending, and they cost three to four times what other
countries are paying.
There was also significant variation across these drugs.
Some of these drugs only cost 30 percent more than what other
countries were paying. Some of them cost 7,000 percent more
than what other countries were paying.
We need to focus on where the market failure is greatest.
We also found that drug prices go up in the United States
after the drug launch and they go down in other countries after
the drug launch. So some control over prices is absolutely
necessary.
Without a therapeutic alternative, drug plans in the
Medicare program cannot bargain effectively. H.R. 3 focuses on
these drugs without competition and where the spending is
greatest.
I also understand why it's so difficult for us to rely on
prices set in other countries. We don't do this for other goods
and services.
However, it just doesn't make sense for us to pay three to
four times what other countries are paying for the same drugs.
I know that many of you are concerned that if we use
international reference prices that the prices are going to
increase in other countries. I am not concerned about that for
a number of reasons.
First, it assumes that the drug companies have the power to
raise prices in other countries whenever they want. I doubt
they have this power.
Second of all, it assumes that drug companies are not
already attempting to maximize their revenues in other
countries. I just wouldn't want to be the French
representatives for a drug company and say to my boss, ``Oh, we
could have gotten higher prices on France but we are getting so
much money in the United States that I won't bother.''
That just won't happen.
Third, many industrialized countries already use external
reference prices, so that whole system is already baked into
the system.
And finally, and probably the most important, these
countries already have mechanisms in place to obtain lower drug
prices. These mechanisms are not going to change if the United
States pays lower prices.
I outline these things in the U.K., Japan, Germany in my
testimony.
I know that many of you are concerned about H.R. 3--about
innovation. I've spent 37 years as a professor at Johns
Hopkins, and I am totally in support of innovation.
My expectation is that drug companies will continue to
support research because, without research, drug companies
don't have anything to sell. They must invest in research in
order to have a product.
Currently, the largest drug companies allocate more
resources to marketing than they do to research. They spend
less than 20 percent of their total revenues on research. This
may need to change, and they may have to reallocate some money.
Unfortunately, we may have to see fewer television
commercials about drugs on television.
It's unlikely that U.S. researchers will suffer if lower
prices are paid for drugs. While drug companies may reward
certain companies that pay higher prices for a drug on the
margin, drug innovation occurs where the best scientists are
located. The U.S. has some of the best universities in the
world, and this is where the drug companies start.
Increasingly, drug research is done first in academic
medical centers, and then the drug companies purchase this
research.
A recent example of this pattern is the first hepatitis C
drug. The initial research was done in Emory, funded by the
NIH, and then Gilead purchased it.
Most of the research that we see in the drug companies
started at the NIH and at universities. The product--the
funding for Januvia, one of the big drugs, was $277 million by
the NIH, and they funded 93 different projects. Remicade,
another one, $218 million, and NIH funded 454 different
projects.
If there are savings from H.R. 3, Congress will have an
opportunity to improve the Medicare benefit. It's most
important to limit the out-of-pocket liability of Medicare
beneficiaries. Most private corporations have out-of-pocket
limits. Medicare should.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Anderson follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you very much, Dr. Anderson.
And now that our witnesses have all offered their
testimony, the Chair recognizes herself for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Let me start with you, Dr. Fowler. You were the first one
up, and besides being a doctor you're a patient and you spoke
quite eloquently about your status as a patient.
So remind us, what drug do you take?
Dr. Fowler. I take Revlimid made by the Celgene
Corporation.
Ms. Eshoo. And does that drug have any competition?
Dr. Fowler. No.
Ms. Eshoo. No competition. I think it's important to note
that H.R. 3 has 250 of the most expensive drugs in the United
States that do not have any competition to be negotiated.
Now, that's a very, very important point.
So, Dr. Fowler, you can't go out and shop for what you need
to stay alive any other place?
Dr. Fowler. That drug is keeping me alive. I've taken it
for 10 years, and it has worked wonderfully for me. I am
reluctant to put that aside and go try something else when what
I am taking is working so well. But the day will probably come,
statistics would say, where I will fall off the cliff. My
disease--I will relapse and I will need some other expensive
treatment, so--but for the time being, Revlimid is doing
wonderfully well for me. It's just a pity that I have to pay
the price that I do for it.
Ms. Eshoo. And how much did you say it was a year?
Dr. Fowler. Golly, I took it for 10 years, paid for by my
university's medical coverage, and now I am newly into the
world of Medicare.
Very quickly, for the 10 years that I took it under the
university's health plan, it started out that my insurance
company was paying $70,000 a year to cover the prescription.
At the end of July, this summer, when I retired, my
insurance company was paying $190,000 a year----
Ms. Eshoo. Wow.
Dr. Fowler [continuing]. To pay the cost of the drug.
And, oh, by the way, that means over the 10-year period I
calculate--this is a rough calculation, but I think it's fair--
I calculate that my insurance company paid, roughly, $1.4
million to pay for my Revlimid.
But that really----
Ms. Eshoo. And I think that what needs to be built into
this is the appreciation of what those costs mean when they're
built in to other premiums for whomever is in that insurance
pool. That is all part of it.
Dr. Fowler. Exactly.
Ms. Eshoo. Dr. Ippolito, what's your definition of a
monopoly?
I mean, I've looked it up. It's the definition is, the
dictionary says, a commodity controlled by one party.
Dr. Ippolito. That sounds right to me.
Ms. Eshoo. Pardon me?
Dr. Ippolito. Sounds right to me.
Ms. Eshoo. It sounds right to you?
Dr. Ippolito. Yes.
Ms. Eshoo. Do you see any likeness of monopoly in terms of
what we are talking about when you have the most expensive
drugs in the country, and they have no competition?
Dr. Ippolito. They have no competition because that's
been--that's the policy. I mean, to be clear, one of the
important things we want to ask----
Ms. Eshoo. Well, we don't want that to be the policy,
though. That's the point, isn't it? You don't want it to be the
policy, do you?
Dr. Ippolito. Well, but what we are proposing is to keep
them ----
Ms. Eshoo. No, but you want competition, do you not?
Dr. Ippolito. I would eventually like competition.
Ms. Eshoo. Eventually?
Dr. Ippolito. There's a variety of ways--yes, that's right.
Ms. Eshoo. When?
Dr. Ippolito. Well, so just to back up, briefly----
Ms. Eshoo. By when?
Dr. Ippolito [continuing]. Dr. Anderson made the point
that, you know, we are talking about a market failure here. To
be clear, some of these are legislative monopolies. We give you
a monopoly in order to incentivize you to make a product, and
then the hope is, eventually, we'll have generic entry to
reduce the long-run costs.
And so part of the question that's really important for
this discussion and H.R. 3 is, Why are these monopolies? Is
this just a drug that's in the stage where we literally set up
a monopoly for them, or is it that this a drug where, for
example, they're using delaying tactics, patent thickets, and
so on.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, we have done legislation to clear out the
underbrush on that. But I think that you're evading a larger
point, and that is that, when you have one drug on the market,
it's one of the most expensive, one of the top 250 drugs that
do not have any competition, that we want to do something about
that because when you have a monopoly people don't have
choices, and Dr. Fowler is one of them.
And it's very costly not only to him, to his insurance
plan--his private insurance plan that he had through the
university--and now through Medicare, which is a public
insurance program.
So we are talking about--this is a program to bring down
the cost of drugs for patients, and in doing so it is to save
money across the board because the legislation moves across the
board.
So I think we are both in sync on the issue of monopoly.
My time is expired, and I will recognize Dr. Burgess for
his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Madam Chair. And again, just to
reiterate, the CREATES bill that we worked on last Congress and
did pass this Congress still has not become law, but it does
address the issue of getting samples, and the reason in the
Revlimid instance, the reason the samples are difficult is
because that medicine used to be known by another name, right?
Revlimid was known by another name, and that name carried a
connotation that people thought----
Dr. Fowler. Oh, you mean the predecessor?
Mr. Burgess. Yes.
Dr. Fowler. Yes. It was preceded decades ago by
thalidomide.
Mr. Burgess. Right. So there was a----
Dr. Fowler. It's a derivative of thalidomide.
Mr. Burgess. There was a barrier and that had to be
overcome, and we are grateful that someone did figure that out
and overcome it, and you have it available.
And now I think samples have been made available so at some
point we will see some relief on this. But CREATES was designed
to help that and move that process along.
Dr. Ippolito, let me ask you a question. So America is
known for innovation. We are all grateful for that. You know,
we sat--well, actually, it wasn't a hearing. It was a briefing
during the time leading up to the passage of the Affordable
Care Act.
And Doug Elmendorf came and sat in the big room downstairs.
All the lights were off. There were no television cameras.
There was no one transcribing the notes, and Dr. Elmendorf was
asked how--and he's the director of the Congressional Budget
Office--how much money are we going to get to spend now on
other things that we are going to be saving so much money with
this negotiation that we are doing.
And I think his answer surprised some people. Since it
wasn't on the record and no one could read about it, his answer
was, it doesn't move the needle. And can you speak to that a
bit? Is the situation different now, where the needle is now
just freely to move up or down with----
Dr. Ippolito. Yes. I think it's important to--based on, at
least, the CBO numbers that I think you're referring to, it is
the case that CBO generally has scored it that, if you just let
Medicare kind of negotiate and say go get them, then you
basically get no budgetary savings, and the reason is they
don't really have any leverage to get anything unless you can
actually exclude a drug, say, from a formulary, for example.
But it's important to keep in mind that that's--that's a
very different idea than what we are talking about in the kind
of bills that we are considering today. I mean, the kind of
bills we are considering today are, if you don't agree to the
HHS Secretary's price, then either we confiscate your
intellectual property or we fine you at 95 percent of your
gross revenue, which is going to exceed 100 percent of your net
revenue, basically, for all firms.
I mean, you know, we are talking about two ends of a
spectrum. One is sort of a toothless negotiation. One is just
price setting. Like, you know, I don't want to get into
semantics but it's just the HHS Secretary's price setting. And
so, you know, the score you're talking about I would think of
as being a totally end of the spectrum, other end of the
spectrum than what we are discussing today.
Mr. Burgess. And because this is more coercive, do you have
an opinion as to how this could affect innovation?
Dr. Ippolito. Well, I mean, I think the question about what
happens with returns and investment behavior isn't really one
that's up for debate, certainly directionally.
We know--we've seen--when Medicare Part D was introduced,
we saw drug makers change the kind of drugs that they invested
in because there was this new big market of seniors who were
going to be consuming more drugs.
And so I don't think there's a lot of people that argue
with that, right. We've seen--if you think about malaria,
malaria kills half a million people a year, and compare that to
gout, which is an uncomfortable kind of arthritic condition
that you have in your joints, right?
If we were thinking about just investing for pure social
gains and for the good of the science, we've be investing like
crazy in malaria. But yet, between 2004 and 2016, we saw about
nine publicly registered trials for malaria and 239 for gout.
And so this idea that there's no relationship between
returns and what you invest in is kind of hard to believe. Rich
people have gout. Rich people with insurance get gout. People
who have malaria are poor, and they don't have coverage.
So I think the direction is clear. The question and one of
the big pieces of uncertainty is, Just how much is any given
administration really going to put their foot down with this
broad pricing power?
Mr. Burgess. Well, let me just ask you a question on the--
because one of the course of aspects of H.R. 3 is the excise
tax, and it's very complicated as you read through the
language. I am still not sure that I understand it, how it's
calculated.
But is that--that excise tax does not get returned to the
consumer, does it?
Dr. Ippolito. Well, I mean, again, it's sort of--it's
almost weird to think about this excise tax in the sense of a
normal kind of a--a normal magnitude tax because you're
literally talking about a tax that in this would very quickly
escalate to about 95 percent of gross revenues. That's going to
exceed 100 percent of the net revenues flowing to a firm for
any given line of business.
And so whatever passed through looks like or doesn't look
like is almost irrelevant because you're really talking about a
firm that just isn't going to be viable in that kind of
environment.
Mr. Burgess. Because of the confiscatory nature of the
excise tax?
Dr. Ippolito. Yes. It's just so large. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you. And if the Chair needs the time, I
will yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Dr. Ippolito, just a factoid. NIH has invested zero in
gout. NIH has invested $260 million for malaria.
Now, who is next to be recognized? The chairman of the full
committee, Mr. Pallone, is recognized for his 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I wanted to ask Dr. Anderson--oh, he's over here--Dr.
Anderson, single-source, brand-name drugs that lack generic
competition represent one of the largest categories of drug
spending growth in the Medicare Part D program.
For example, in 2017, single-source, brand-name drugs
accounted for almost three-quarters of total Part D spending,
and these drugs are not only highly expensive, they also lack
competition that helps drive down costs.
Now, the Ways and Means Committee released a report earlier
this week--dare I mention the name of the other committee--but
they did release a report earlier this week that found that
Humira, an anti-inflammatory therapy without a generic on the
market and the best-selling prescription drug in the world, has
doubled in price in the U.S. since 2012 and is currently priced
at $2,436 per dose, or about 500 percent of the international
average price.
So, Dr. Anderson, you have also done extensive work
comparing these sole-source, brand-name drug prices in the U.S.
with the prices in other major economies.
On average, how much more do consumers in the U.S. pay for
these sole-source drugs than consumers in other large
countries?
Dr. Anderson. So they pay about three to four times as
much, on average. There are some drugs that only are 30 percent
more. There are some drugs that are 7,000 percent more.
So it really depends on the drug and the market.
Mr. Pallone. Now, can you give us an example of a brand-
name, sole-source drug that lacks any price constraints in the
U.S. and what the same drugs cost in a country like Japan?
Dr. Anderson. So sure. So the number-one-selling drug in
2017 was Harvoni, which is a drug that takes care of hepatitis
C. It was $1,100 per dose in the United States. It was $438 in
Japan.
Mr. Pallone. You know, I was in Japan a couples times in
the last two years to see my son, who was teaching there, and I
tried to, you know, do a little survey once at one of the drug
stores, and I couldn't believe how much cheaper things were.
So what is the reason why it's cheaper in Japan?
Dr. Anderson. Well, Japan is very clever. What Japan does
is there's a price, and then it goes around and asks the
pharmacies, ``How much did you pay for the drug?,'' which is
always less than the price that's set by the government.
And so then they find that they bought it for 20 percent
less or 10 percent less. And so then they say, ``Oh, we are
going to set the price next year at that much lower price.''
So every year in Japan the price goes down after the
launch, and every year in the United States the price keeps
going up. As your example with Humira says, the price doubles.
In the United States, you can double the price. In Japan, you
have to lower the price in order to sell your drug.
Mr. Pallone. So, from your perspective, does using an
average price across a certain subset of international
countries, as proposed in my bill, does that provide an
appropriate reference by which to compare U.S. prices?
Dr. Anderson. Absolutely. I mean, I don't see any reason
why we in the United States, which are funding most of the
research and development, should be paying three to four times
what other countries are paying for exactly that same drug.
Mr. Pallone. Well, H.R. 3 contemplates the use of, and I
quote, ``average international market price, or AIM price, to
serve as a negotiation boundary for the Secretary.''
Is the use of the AIM price similar to the international
pricing index proposed by President Trump for Part B drugs, and
is that an appropriate mechanism by which the Secretary should
negotiate?
Dr. Anderson. So President Trump did propose that. He uses
it, and he uses about 120 percent of the price. So it's
effectively the same idea applied to Part D as he applied to
Part B, and almost every other industrialized country uses some
form of external reference prices to set their prices. It might
not be the only factor, but it's one of the most important
factors they use to set their prices.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Let me ask you this. It may be the
last thing I get a chance to ask you. But can you respond to
Mr. Ippolito's claims in his testimony that it would be too
complicated to determine transaction prices in foreign
countries as compared with the U.S. prices for this purpose?
Dr. Anderson. Well, we were able to do it and publish them
in the Journal of Health Affairs, so it's a peer-reviewed
publication. We worked with the Ways and Means Committee to
help them understand it. They were able to do it. Every single
country that uses external reference prices is able to do it.
I really do hope the United States is as smart as these
other countries and as smart as I am.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Pallone. Of course--of course, you mentioned Ways and
Means, too. I hesitate to mention the committee but, you know,
that's my problem, not yours.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, I think this is the sound of a very
confident person----
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. To say that. Yes. Thank you.
Now we'll recognize the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Walden, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate that.
Dr. Ippolito, as you know--as we all know--Medicare statute
currently prohibits the Secretary from using cost-effectiveness
thresholds to deny patients access to medical care.
Is it correct that several of the countries referenced in
H.R. 3 used cost effectiveness standards in their government-
run systems?
Dr. Ippolito. Sure. Yes. Probably most famously the U.K.
Mr. Walden. And is it also fair to say that fewer new
medicines are available in those countries compared to the
United States?
Dr. Ippolito. In general, the United States gets drugs
faster than other countries, and then there's a second way in
which, you know, so the NHS or what is called NICE in England
can decide whether or not to recommend covering a drug or not
indefinitely. So the answer is yes.
Mr. Walden. And what does this mean for patients in a
country with hard-to-treat conditions for which new therapies
are being developed every day?
Dr. Ippolito. It means what it sounds like. You get the
drugs slower, and sometimes you don't get the drug if it's up
to a clinical effectiveness--effectively, an agency to
determine whether that they think the drug is worth covering
for the National Health Service in England. I am just using
U.K. as an example here.
Mr. Walden. Sure.
Dr. Ippolito. And if they recommend against covering the
drug--which last I checked is, I don't know, 10, 15 percent of
the time--then unless they lower the price that the drug is
just not covered.
Mr. Walden. Just not covered. So, therefore, not available.
Dr. Ippolito. Yes. In general, yes. Unless they lower the
price.
Mr. Walden. Yes. And in the U.K., do they ever deny parents
the opportunity to take an ailing child out of the system to
get treatment?
Dr. Ippolito. I've read things about this.
Mr. Walden. Have you read about Charlie Gard?
Dr. Ippolito. I don't know enough about it to speak
confidently on the matter.
Mr. Walden. Yes. All right. Well, it happened.
Walk me through on H.R. 3, the negotiation and how that
works with the up to 95 percent confiscation of revenue if the
company doesn't agree to what the government says the price is
going to be.
Dr. Ippolito. Sure. So there's a nominal negotiation, at
least as I read it, where the HHS Secretary can propose a price
to cover the drug. He----
Mr. Walden. Any price?
Dr. Ippolito. As long as it is lower than a maximum amount
allowed international.
Mr. Walden. Which is 120 percent of the IPI?
Dr. Ippolito. Yes. That's exactly right.
Mr. Walden. So the Secretary--if a drug was $100 under the
International Pricing Index, could the Secretary of HHS say,
``I am going to pay you $20''?
Dr. Ippolito. I have not read anything that would preclude
them from doing that.
Mr. Walden. And if you're the drug company and you say,
``Well, that doesn't even cost my operations--I don't know that
I can do that''--what happens then?
Dr. Ippolito. If you initially refuse the price, then you
get fined 65 percent of your gross revenues and that----
Mr. Walden. Gross revenues of the drug?
Dr. Ippolito. Gross revenues I believe of the drug, at
least in my reading and that's--yes.
Mr. Walden. And that's the first year, right?
Dr. Ippolito. And then escalates to 95 percent.
Mr. Walden. Ninety-five percent----
Dr. Ippolito. Yes.
Mr. Walden [continuing]. Of the revenues. And you cannot
sell that drug to anybody else at a price higher than what the
government negotiates, correct?
Dr. Ippolito. It is my understanding that you at least have
to offer the HHS Secretary's price to everyone in the market.
Mr. Walden. All right. Do you do economics?
Dr. Ippolito. I do.
Mr. Walden. Can you imagine a buyer being offered that
price saying, ``No, I think I will take a higher price''?
Dr. Ippolito. Generally, we do not believe that people----
Mr. Walden. Generally?
Dr. Ippolito [continuing]. Leave that much money on the
table.
Mr. Walden. Yes, I don't either. All right. All right.
Look, we all want to get these prices down, but none of us
wants to stifle innovation or access. For me, innovation and
access is key, but so it price.
To Dr. Fowler's comment, the drug you can't afford is a
drug that you might as well not even have. That's why we were
working on the out-of-pocket cap in Part D, and we were very
close in our negotiations, and I think we can get there. I
think we may still have the opportunity to get there.
And we were trying to stop the bad behavior--the gaming of
the systems, the REMS issue that, I think, all of you have
mentioned at one time or another. We passed that out of here
unanimously. There's so much we could do here.
I was on the committee when we passed Medicare Part D and
we had virtually an all-night markup, and it was a fight back
and forth just over different philosophies.
And as I mentioned earlier, Democrats had an amendment that
Mr. Strickland offered that they unanimously passed to lock in
the premium rate--$35 in statute plus--in statute and
inflationary increase, which would have put it at $46 a month.
Now--and now we know it's actually going to be below $35, which
is what was said in '06.
The other thing we had was CBO--the Congressional Budget
Office--projected what they thought drug costs would be to the
program, and I am told as of now it's about 33 percent lower
than what CBO estimated. And so there are ways to get at this
that would skin this cat--that would allow us to prevent the
kind of out-of-pocket, extraordinary expenditures you're
facing, Dr. Fowler, especially on Medicare.
There are ways to increase innovation and put market forces
in the right direction, and I stand ready to work with my
colleagues to get that done, given the opportunity.
And I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
And now I would like to recognize the gentlewoman from
California, our birthday person, Congresswoman Matsui.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Matsui. OK. Thank you. Enough about that.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Matsui. I want to thank all you witnesses for being
here today. This is very, very important regarding the
pharmaceutical prices.
I want to ask a question about low-income Medicare
beneficiaries because I believe they deserve special attention
as we consider legislation to make prescription drugs more
affordable.
LIS enrollees--low-income subsidy enrollees--who take
specialty tier drugs and receive Part D's low-income subsidy do
not face the same financial hurdles associated with cost
sharing.
Nonetheless, many of these low-income seniors and persons
with disabilities struggle to pay their health bills.
Further, LIS beneficiaries continue to account for the
majority of beneficiaries who reach the catastrophic phase of
the benefit, and taxpayers bear much of the cost of treatment
on premium and cost-sharing subsidies.
Dr. Anderson, I know you can be very succinct, too. But
with the savings generated from drug-pricing legislation, what
steps should Congress take to reinvest savings in ways that
improve the LIS program and allow the subsidy to reach more
people?
Dr. Anderson. Well, thank you, and happy birthday.
Ms. Matsui. Oh, thank you.
Dr. Anderson. So about a third of all Medicare
beneficiaries right now qualify for LIS, and what that means is
that they have, in many cases, not a very high burden to pay
when they use their prescription drugs.
But people who don't qualify for LIS are like Dr. Fowler,
and they do. And so if there is money and drugs are so
important to people so they can have them, and if you have a
$2,000 out-of-pocket bill, that's probably 1 month of your
Social Security income.
Ms. Matsui. Mm-hmm. Right.
Dr. Anderson. And so you're making a lot of very difficult
choices. So if there is the possibility to do something,
increasing the number of people that are eligible for LIS is
very important. At the same time, the prices have to come down
so that the Federal Government can afford to do that.
Ms. Matsui. All right. Absolutely.
I know we talked a little bit about list prices before. But
as a committee we've been examining the market dynamics of the
drug supply chain and how each part of the chain contributes to
the end price the consumer pays.
While price concessions in a supply chain ultimately
distort the net price paid for a drug, a stark fact of the
matter remains. Out-of-pocket costs are often based on a drug's
list price, leaving beneficiaries directly exposed to price
increases.
Dr. Fowler, can you expand on why your out-of-pocket costs
for Revlimid has increased dramatically now that you enrolled
in Medicare? How does a Part D benefit differ from your
employer plan when it comes to paying for high-cost specialty
drugs?
Dr. Fowler. How long do I have?
[Laughter.]
Ms. Matsui. Just, you know----
Dr. Fowler. Ten years of experience on the private plan and
almost 2 months under Medicare. So the differences that I am
beginning to comprehend between the two systems are quite
bewildering.
My insurance company was paying a huge amount back when I
was employed at the university.
Ms. Matsui. Yes.
Dr. Fowler. And I think I misstated earlier. They were
paying $90,000 total when I started and $190,000 when I ended.
What was my expense? My copay was almost negligible.
In the end, my copay each time the prescription was filled
was $45. So I was paying out pennies, and the insurance
company--but, really, my colleagues at the university who were
picking up the premiums----
Ms. Matsui. Right.
Dr. Fowler [continuing]. That's really who was paying the
freight.
Ms. Matsui. Well, is it the----
Dr. Fowler. So I was paying almost nothing, and the
insurance company, or, in fact, my colleagues, were paying a
monstrous amount.
But now I am in the world of Medicare. All of a sudden, my
out-of-pocket expenses, $12,500 it looks like. I've had the
prescription filled twice since I started the plan--the Part D
plan. So----
Ms. Matsui. OK. So your out-of-pocket costs are greater is
what you're saying, right now? That's the difference?
Dr. Fowler. Oh, considerably. I estimate it'll be $12,500 a
year.
Ms. Matsui. OK. OK.
Dr. Anderson, drug companies have complete unilateral
discretion to set their list price. Compared to the status quo,
how will reassigning liability in Part D shift pricing
incentives for manufacturers and impact overall cost to
beneficiaries? I have about 25 seconds.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Anderson. Thank you. So Part B is one where, you know,
you need to control the prices because the Medicare beneficiary
pays some of that cost, and so right now there is--the drug
companies can set whatever price they want for it.
They're mostly biologics. They're mostly very expensive
drugs. And so the Medicare beneficiaries are having to pay
those costs. So setting some way to control the prices for
those drugs is very important.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back.
It's a pleasure to recognize the former chairman of the
full committee, Mr. Upton from Michigan, for 5 minutes of his
questions.
Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, my friend, and I just--I guess
we could have made an opening statement written, but I am going
to just say a few things.
This is a really important issue. You know, drug prices
impact every family. Everyone is concerned about it. We've seen
all the stories. It has been for a while.
And with a divided government, you have to work together to
get things done, and this committee has had a long reputation,
no matter who has been chair, to getting things done.
And if you look back, when I was chairman one of the things
that every one of us here worked on was 21st Century Cures, and
I would say then that every Member on both sides of the aisle,
in fact, had a piece of that bill. They could take credit for
it.
We all knew people in our districts, different associations
that were involved in it, and it really made a difference and
will continue to make a difference for a long, long time. And I
think some of us know that Diana DeGette, who was my partner on
this, we were working on a 2.0 bill. We are in the listening
stage now to really look back and see where we can make it even
work better for the different groups that are out there and,
ultimately, do great things for our country.
But the point I want to make is it was bipartisan. In fact,
I actually stopped a markup--I think it was a full committee
markup--just so that we could spend another day to make sure
that everybody was on board, and of which they were when it
passed 51 to nothing.
So this is a big issue. We want to get something to the
President's desk. We need to take regular order to make sure
that we do that with more than just one hearing but make sure
that we really do the process.
So one of the things that helped drive me to lead the
charge was this awful disease which, frankly, I had never heard
of before or at least didn't know any victims of this disease
called SMA--two beautiful little girls.
We now have a drug that is going to, I think, work, and
that drug--I saw a story--I am going to put this in the
record--this is a story in the U.K. where this new drug for SMA
in fact is being denied, which is really unfortunate.
And I would like to think that as time moves on it will be.
They'll allow it and one of the concerns that we have perhaps
with H.R. 30, if this was put in, is that you would have
drugs--you would restrict research and deny lifesaving drugs to
whoever and really end up with something that none of us would
want.
So I guess my first question would be, Are there
considerations in this bill to ensure that HHS would evaluate
patient need in determining the cost value of the treatment?
And maybe, Dr. Ippolito, if you might answer that.
And then I have just another quick question before my time
expires.
Dr. Ippolito. In terms of what the HHS Secretary would
evaluate it, based on my reading it was the cost of developing
the drug, cost of making the drug, and then I believe it was
therapeutic value relative to the other option. I don't think I
read anything to your specific concern.
Mr. Upton. OK. One of the issues that both Dr. Fowler and
Dr. Anderson raised was the amount of money being spent on
advertising and marketing versus research.
I've got some different numbers than that. Again, I will
put this in the record, but let me just share some of those
numbers.
PhRMA tells us that R&D--their companies spend $90.5
billion on research and development, and the amount of money
spent on marketing and promotion is $28.1 billion. So, in
essence, a 3 to 1 margin of which that $28.1 billion only $6
billion--only--but that goes to advertising, compared to the
$90 billion, I will confess that.
And there was a study that was done--again, I will put
this--ask to put this in the record--with a good number of
companies. I mean, they started with--at the top with Bristol-
Myers and Merck and Celgene and they go down the whole--you
know, we have Boeing and Raytheon, AT&T, and it is--based on
this table, the pharmaceutical industry spends considerably
more not only in--well, at least in percentage of the revenue
Celgene is 45 percent R&D versus Procter & Gamble just is 3
percent. And I just--for your comments to say that they spend
less than 20 percent of their revenues on research with more
spent on advertising, where do you get those numbers?
Knowing that my time has expired, I will let you answer.
Dr. Anderson. So I can send you the information. I don't
have it in front of me. But we took a look at their
statements--their financial statements for the drug companies,
and so we get just different numbers than they do.
I will show you the numbers that we got and how we got
them.
Mr. Upton. Great. Yield back.
Mr. Burgess. Did the gentleman have a unanimous consent
request?
Mr. Upton. I do, and I will----
Ms. Eshoo. Placed in the record. So ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Upton. Thanks. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. Happy to.
For the record, in terms of the information that the
Secretary makes a determination on, it is a list. It's relative
to the direct negotiations, research and development costs,
prior NIH funding support for discovery and development of the
drugs, market, manufacturing, and distribution costs, patent
exclusivity data, domestic and international sales information,
FDA approval information on alternative drugs on market,
clinical effectiveness analysis and data on alternatives, and
other advancements in treatments. So that fills out the record
on the question that the ranking member of the full committee
posed.
Now I would like to recognize the gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Butterfield, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Thank
you to the three witnesses for your testimony today.
Dr. Fowler, thank you for your story. My staff has been
talking with me about your story, and just thank you so very
much.
Over the past years that I've been here in Congress--I
believe it's about 15 years that I've been here and 12 years on
this committee--I've heard so many people say that they cannot
afford their prescription medication, both in Medicare and in
private insurance, and that's just not acceptable.
I have a lot of industry in my district, and I believe that
innovation should absolutely be encouraged and rewarded. But,
clearly, the American people need some relief.
It's time for Congress to act in order to ensure the
American people have access to and can afford the treatments
that they need.
And so, Dr. Fowler, I understand that in your testimony you
say that under Medicare Part D you will spend over $12,000 a
year on your medication. Is that correct, or is it $1,200?
Twelve thousand dollars?
Dr. Fowler. That's correct. Twelve thousand five hundred.
Mr. Butterfield. OK. Can you discuss how capping out-of-
pocket expenses for prescription drugs will help individuals
like you?
Dr. Fowler. It would help all of us to sleep easier at
night knowing that our financial situation is going to be
manageable. This brand new world of retirement and living off
of Social Security, Medicare, retirement savings is--I find it
very precarious. I wish there were less anxiety and more
confidence for the future.
Mr. Butterfield. Well, thank you for that. It's what I
wanted to hear, and thank you for putting that into the record.
The legislation that we are discussing today will help
lower the price of prescription drugs for millions of Americans
and help ensure that we are getting the best deal on
prescription drugs for our seniors, and so I sincerely thank
you very much.
Dr. Anderson, if I may please go to you. Thank you also for
being here. It is unacceptable that Americans are paying on
average three to four times more for their drugs than patients
and our neighbors to the north, Canada, Germany, the U.K., and
Japan, among others.
I wanted to ask you about a particular drug that is vital
to the health of my constituents in North Carolina and across
the country, and that is insulin.
Ten percent of North Carolinians have diabetes. In some
counties in my district, almost 20 percent of adults have
diabetes. The price of insulin has increased by 197 percent
from 2002 to 2013.
According to a study by Kaiser, total Medicare Part D
spending on insulin has increased 840 percent from between '07
and '17. These figures are shocking.
Dr. Anderson, can you discuss why drugs such as insulin
cost so much in our country? It's my understanding that six of
the seven noninsulin medications used to treat type 2 diabetes
are priced 600 to 1,100 percent higher in the U.S. than other
nations. Help me get my hands around this.
Dr. Anderson. Certainly. So the first thing to recognize is
that there are only three manufacturers in the country for
insulin drugs. So there's not a lot of competition.
Second of all, the competition is in a very strange way.
It's much like my iPhone. Essentially, I have an iPhone 10. We
are about to be able to get an IPhone 11. It's going to add
another $1,000 if I wanted to buy it.
What happens with insulin is they keep changing the product
a little bit, either the way it gets distributed or it's a
faster release or something like that, and then they can charge
even more than they did yesterday.
And so what they are doing is slightly changing the product
or the distribution in order to raise the price, and since
there's only three of them selling it, that's the system that
they're using.
Mr. Butterfield. Is it correct then to say that insulin
medications contribute significantly to Medicare spending on
prescription drugs?
Dr. Anderson. Well, I mean, so many people have diabetes
that, of course, it has a huge impact on the spending in the
Medicare program, and the Medicare program is the one that's
paying most of those bills.
Mr. Butterfield. Which contributes to the deficit, which
contributes to the debt.
Dr. Anderson, can you discuss why requiring the Secretary
to negotiate on a small number of drugs including insulin would
help lower prescription drugs costs?
Dr. Anderson. Well, it would be simple because there's a
number of drugs, somewhere less than a hundred, where the
prices are three to four times what other countries are paying,
and the PBMs that are trying to negotiate these prices don't
have any negotiating power. They have negotiating power when
there's two drugs available and they can play one off against
the other. When there's only one drug, there's no ability to
play one off against the other.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Pleasure to recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Shimkus, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. And we are really sorry about this announcement
that you made.
Mr. Shimkus. All right. It's a long way off. You guys are
stuck with me for months.
Ms. Eshoo. I don't know what got into you, but anyway----
Mr. Shimkus. Freedom. Freedom.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Madam----
Ms. Eshoo. We are going to come to Illinois and have lunch
with you.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Madam Chair.
A couple things. Great hearing. This is a debate that I've
been involved with now 23 years, and I am sure we'll continue
to have this debate for 23 more as everything evolves.
Dr. Ippolito, let me first go in response to another series
of questions that you already received. What are your thoughts
on the feasibility of HHS being able to correctly come up with
a reference price for countries named in H.R. 3?
Dr. Ippolito. So yes, I am considerably more pessimistic
than Dr. Anderson just because there's a few things to keep in
mind. First off, yes, some other countries use reference
prices, but nobody matters nearly as much as the United States
with the global market for pharmaceuticals.
According to IQVIA, we spend something on the order of the
same amount as the rest of the top 10 spending countries in the
world. That's not something to celebrate, but that's something
that you have to acknowledge, which means that when it comes to
behavior of sovereign nations, as it were, that what we do
really matters in a different way. And so what's going to
happen is that drug makers are going to take all sorts of
strategic actions. They're going to try and get into deals with
countries to engage with these off invoice-type pricing
discounting behavior. We are going to see efforts to offer
special package size, dose size, administration route
combinations in certain reference countries, and not offer them
in the United States.
Mr. Shimkus. So you're telling me it's going to be
difficult to do, from your perspective?
Dr. Ippolito. There's a reason that, the Speaker wrote, we
are going to use the net price of a country ``if practicable.''
It's because it's not easy.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Thank you.
Dr. Fowler, welcome. I think we all deal with cases like
yours. Prior to Medicare Part D, what would our out-of-pocket
costs be today?
Dr. Fowler. When I was back on the private----
Mr. Shimkus. No. No. No. Just, say, if you're in the same--
if you were in the same position you are today and we didn't
have--you know, there was a time we didn't have Medicare D. I
don't know if you knew that. What would be your burden?
Dr. Fowler. I don't know.
Mr. Shimkus. Well, what's the--what's the cost--the basic
cost of the drug?
Dr. Fowler. What's the market----
Mr. Shimkus. What's the market value of the drug without
any negotiation?
Dr. Fowler. The retail price is about $200,000 a year.
Mr. Shimkus. So that would be your out-of-pocket cost?
Dr. Fowler. I suppose.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. So, I mean, it's good to have experience
and be around here a little bit because, prior to Medicare D,
there was no help for prescription drugs for seniors under
Medicare. Nothing.
AARP is here. They were there. They were part of the
negotiations and, in the end, they supported the Medicare D
proposal.
But pharmaceuticalogically or whatever, the world has
changed too. In those days, we had basic chemical formulations.
Now we have biologics. Now we have this--these massive costs.
So in that language, when you get outside of the protected
area it's 5 percent of the cost of the drug, and I think if
anyone's talking to their constituents--I remember going to
Olney, Illinois, which is the home of the white squirrels, and
before a dinner--it's in the beautiful 15th Congressional
District. We have white squirrels there. And I met with a
constituent who was outside paying similar costs to you, Dr.
Fowler, on a lifesaving drug. And I think part of our debate
and concern is that we want to have those drugs available. So
we've got to fix this. And so I think there's places where we
can go on, you know, capping out-of-pocket costs in the
extension to this new world of biologics. So I think there's
a--I just think there's a lot of things to do. We are--I think
I can talk for Republicans, basically--are really concerned
about Government creating a formulary in prices. I remember
small drug companies coming in. Raised $10 million to find a
cure. Going back to their investors and say, ``We are almost
there, we need $10 million more.'' Under this new H.R. 3
proposal, Dr. Ippolito, would you see any venture capitalists
or anybody really doing that anymore?
Dr. Ippolito. So this is actually one of the biggest
misconceptions about how R&D works in the pharmaceutical space.
I think there's this idea that this is the purview of Big
Pharma. You make a drug. You go back to the chemist and you
say, ``OK, mix something up again.'' That's really not how this
works. What you really have is early-stage investment is,
largely, funded by venture capital firms and is done by small
biotechs, and those venture capital firms don't have any
allegiance to the drug market. They're just as happy to invest
in a new scooter, you know, rental app or whatever.
So, you know, we do have to keep in mind----
Ms. Eshoo. Well, I think my VCs are going to have a problem
with what you just said, but go ahead.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Ippolito. No, there's too many scooter rental companies
already. But the point is that the capital is very mobile, and
that is the thing to keep in mind.
Mr. Shimkus. My time has expired. So with that, I will
yield back. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back. It's important to
note that there are no formularies in H.R. 3, and the issue of
whether patients will have access to the medications that they
need in Medicare--Medicare is going to continue to cover all of
the drugs that it does today. The bill does not stop Medicare
from covering prescription drugs or limit patient choices, and
I think that that is--that's front and center for seniors. So
that's why I am adding it to the record.
I now would like to recognize the gentlewoman from Florida,
Congresswoman Castor, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Chairwoman Eshoo, for holding this
very important hearing on how we make prescription drugs more
affordable.
There is a celebrity here in the audience. Probably the
most famous, the top consumer advocate from the State of
Florida, Jack McCray, who works for the AARP, is in the
audience. Jack, thank you very much for being here. He's worked
on these issues for years and years, and I am grateful that
this committee is--finally, we have in our sights some terrific
legislation to finally take on Big Pharma and to do everything
we can to lower prescription drug prices.
Dr. Fowler, your written remarks where you say what the
drug companies really think is, ``Pay us or you will die.''
Well, hopefully, we pass these bills out and those days will be
over.
And I also want to compliment my colleague and friend,
Peter Welch, who has worked for many, many years on negotiating
drug prices through Medicare. I have been allied with
Representative Welch for many years, and, Peter, I appreciate
your leadership on this.
Let's get into the details a little bit on this. Under
current law, the Secretary of HHS is prohibited from
interfering with the negotiations between drug manufacturers
and pharmacies and prescription drug plan sponsors. That's kind
of un-American, isn't it? We just say you can't negotiate.
This clause is often referred to as the noninterference
clause of the Medicare Part D statute. It was enacted in 2003
at the time that Medicare Part D was approved.
Since the implementation of the Medicare Part D program,
Medicare spending for Part D has increased from $46 billion in
2007 to about $80 billion in 2017, for an average annual growth
of 5.6 percent.
Additionally, the Congressional Budget Office has
determined that, for Part D beneficiaries, our neighbors who
take brand-name specialty drugs, the average annual net
spending on such drugs tripled from 2010 to 2015.
All of the four bills before us here would address this in
different ways.
Dr. Anderson, can you explain what this noninterference
clause is? Is that a fair name anyway, and what implications do
this provision in law currently have on the Secretary?
Dr. Anderson. So the noninterference clause means that you
can't interfere between the negotiations between the PDP and
the drug company. So that's the negotiation that can take place
between the PDP and the drug company, but Medicare can't do it.
You mentioned all those increases. Where the increases are
occurring is in high-cost specialty drugs, and that's where the
Medicare program, which is paying right now 80 percent of the
cost, has no ability to negotiate, no seat at the table to do
anything about those prices.
So where we are seeing most of the increases is where
Medicare cannot negotiate.
Ms. Castor. Why was that even included back then?
Dr. Anderson. Well, in the past they thought that the drug
companies and the pharmacy benefit managers would be able to
negotiate prices, and they were.
And as I said in my testimony, for many drugs they are able
to negotiate prices. But what's happened over the last 16 years
since the legislation has passed is we've seen a growth in the
number of these very expensive, high-cost drugs.
Ms. Castor. And that's not helping beneficiaries, is it?
Dr. Anderson. Well, some of the drugs are very beneficial.
They cure diseases. They treat diseases. They are, in fact,
very important. But if you can't afford them, then you can't
take them.
And what's interesting about Dr. Fowler's example is, if
he's insured privately, he's probably got very good insurance.
Unfortunately, if he has Medicare, he doesn't have an out-of-
pocket cap and, as he says, he's going to pay $12,000, whereas
when he was insured by his university, he paid virtually
nothing.
Ms. Castor. So are you saying that we shouldn't tie the
hands of the Federal Government to negotiate prices. If we
really want to put beneficiaries and our neighbors front and
center, you would address this noninterference clause and allow
negotiation?
Dr. Anderson. You would need to do it because this is where
it's for a small subset of drugs where there's no competition,
and Medicare right now is paying 80 percent of the cost. That's
where the growth is occurring.
Ms. Castor. And would you agree that negotiation is a
market-based tool?
Dr. Anderson. You can make it a market-based tool. Correct.
Ms. Castor. OK. I agree, and what impact do you think this
would have on the average Medicare beneficiary's pocketbook?
Dr. Anderson. So----
Ms. Castor. Oh, excuse me. My time has expired. I am very
passionate about this, and I thank you for your testimony.
Ms. Eshoo. We appreciate your passion, and Members are
going to have the opportunity to submit questions to the
witnesses, and we ask that you respond to those questions
forthwith so that--because it's very hard to get everything in
in 5 minutes, as you can tell.
It's now my pleasure to recognize the gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, for this
hearing and, as you know, we need to continue to work through
this as this issue is complicated and needs further analysis
and additional input, and I am going to have some questions
later that I think will raise some issues that show that we are
going to have to do some additional work.
But am I correct that you're willing to commit to regular
order after this hearing with a subcommittee hearing and a full
markup hearing, Madam Chair?
Ms. Eshoo. Can you repeat the question, please?
Mr. Griffith. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Eshoo. I am guilty of looking at my phone.
Mr. Griffith. I understand. And the question was is that,
you know, as we work through some of these questions, they're
complicated and so forth, and I am just confirming that you are
committed to regular order----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes, and it was another one of our colleagues
asked me that.
Mr. Griffith. OK.
Ms. Eshoo. This is regular order. We are having this
hearing. We'll have a markup in the full committee. I believe
we will have a markup on the subcommittee.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I appreciate that very much----
Ms. Eshoo. Sure.
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. Because I do think it's
important.
Ms. Eshoo. It is.
Mr. Griffith. And that brings me to my first question,
which is to you, Dr. Ippolito. I hope I said that close to
right. I was not here earlier because we had two hearings going
on, and I was downstairs asking questions.
The idea of intellectual property is so important to our
country that it is enshrined in the Constitution, Article 1
Section 8 Clause 8--grants to Congress the powers to promote,
quote, ``the progress of science and useful arts,'' end quote,
by providing inventors the limited but exclusive right to their
discoveries--and authors, they're included as well.
This applies to copyrights, patents, and trademarks
similarly protected by Congress under the commerce clause,
Article 1 Section 8 Clause 3. Together, they are all protected
under the umbrella of intellectual property.
Can you speak to the bills before us today and how they
would undermine this important constitutional right, either
through excessive taxation or seizure?
Dr. Ippolito. Right. So I think the key here is to
understand what the kind of penalties are if you do not accept
the HHS Secretary's price, and we are talking about either,
effectively, all of your net revenue or, literally, the seizure
of your intellectual property.
And in terms of--you know, I really do want to emphasize we
are talking about early-stage investment and the uncertainty.
It's long-term investments, and so on.
The fact that if you do not agree to some price that is
very hard to predict--10 years from now it's going to be a
function of who's the President, who's the HHS Secretary, what
kind of political dynamics are, and so on, plus you know that
they can also just take your intellectual property if you don't
like the answer. Well, that's one heck of a disincentive to get
into that business.
And so in terms of--you know, if you want to lower prices,
fine. Just come out and say what the price is going to be for
something. But don't tell me that the answer is, oh, we'll come
up with a price 12 years from now and see if you like it and,
you know, we'll go from there, and if you don't like it we'll
take your intellectual property.
Come up and say what the price is you want to pay.
Otherwise, this kind of thing is so much uncertainty, it's
going to be hugely detrimental to the firms that want to get
into this kind of business.
Mr. Griffith. Well, and you say it's detrimental to the
firms getting in. Wouldn't it be natural for one of those
companies perhaps to look for a different venue in which to
place their company and maybe offshore it to someplace in Asia
or some other location where they wouldn't have these
restrictions?
Dr. Ippolito. I mean, I think the first order that you
would expect is, and I will use a different example than the
scooter sharing. But, you know, venture capital firms don't
need to invest in pharmaceuticals. They can invest in anything
they want to invest in, and that capital is mobile.
And so my first-order expectation would be that, if you
make it too unattractive to get into this business, well, then
fine, we'll invest in something else. We are not beholden to
this market.
Mr. Griffith. One of my other concerns that I hope will get
worked out in subcommittee is that--as we go forward with the
markup is that I am not sure we aren't violating on parts of
this bill where they do a look back prior to the passage of the
bill and start charging people--I am not sure we are not
violating both the civil aspects of ex post facto and possibly
even bills of attainder. What say you?
Dr. Ippolito. I mean, it is true that if you're talking
about the inflation caps I think we would be retroactively
taking back--price increases back to I think as far as 2016. I
am not--I don't know enough about the legal environment to know
but----
Mr. Griffith. But it looks punitive to me. I will have to
do some more study on it before we get to subcommittee. This is
our first hearing on this particular bill. So I look forward to
that.
I will say in the short time I have remaining that the
whole system is complicated. We need more transparency.
Dr. Anderson has said the drug companies are raising the
prices and the PBMs can negotiate if there's more than one.
He's right about that. On the other side of that coin, we heard
drug manufacturers in a hearing last year or the year before
say that, when there is more than one, the PBMs hold them
hostage and ask them to raise their list price so they can then
give a bigger discount. The problem is, when Dr. Fowler goes to
pay his copay, he's paying it on the list price and not on the
discount price that the PBMs have gotten after they ask the
drug company to raise it. It's outrageous. There's a lot more
work we could do together. Working together in a bipartisan
fashion, I think we can. This committee has always had a
history of doing that, and I yield.
Dr. Ippolito. And I want to emphasize one thing just on
that point. The Part D benefit redesign does that. Part of
what's encouraging that is the terrible incentive structure in
Part D. This idea of high list to net spreads is what it's
called. It's because you can use this benefit design to offload
all these costs onto the Federal Government and then just stick
it with the patient out of their pocket. It's a bad benefit
design. So, you know, I know negotiations will be part of this,
but don't lose sight of the fact that there is a really good
idea on the Part D benefit redesign here and incentive finance,
too.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back, and I thank him for
his questions.
I now recognize the gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Sarbanes,
for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
There's a statistic which I always find incredible, that
there are three Big Pharma lobbyists for every Member of
Congress, and so, you know, we are constantly having to fend
them off.
But I want to remind us that there are 750,000 Americans
for every Member of Congress. So if you do some math there, you
have to give those pharma lobbyists credit, and I know a lot of
them are watching so I want to salute them for this. That means
each pharma lobbyist is holding back 250,000 Americans. That's
what's been happening over the last however many decades it is,
because all those Americans want to see these prices lower, and
somehow the lobbyists have managed to keep that from happening.
So that's pretty impressive. But it's changing. It's changing.
And I think what happened is that the demand--the desire,
the thirst for something real that could help families across
the country--is beginning to overwhelm the inside game that's
been played for so many years, and maybe those lobbyists are
going to step to the side a little bit so they don't get
trampled by Americans who want to see a change.
So I think that's why we are at this point, finally,
because so many families out there are affected, and they've
just had enough and they want to see a change. We got a lot of
good proposals here that really do something real to address
drug pricing in America.
So let me ask you, Dr. Anderson. I am very interested in
this cap that is contained within H.R. 3 with respect to the
out-of-pocket costs that seniors would face with respect to
prescription drugs under Medicare Part D, and it's a $2,000
cap.
So talk to me about that in a number of different ways.
First of all, in addition to that I gather the manufacturers
will now also be partly on the hook with respect to weighing in
and alleviating some of the impact of the drug costs. So that,
obviously, creates some interesting incentives in terms of the
price that they set on the front end.
But also with respect to that $2,000 number, that wasn't, I
assume, just kind of pulled out of thin air. There must be some
rationale behind it. Why is that the number that makes sense?
What does it represent in terms of significant benefit for
patients? How will it help affect behavior on the part of the
industry in ways that make a positive difference for families
out there who are facing these high drug prices?
Dr. Anderson. So everybody seems to agree that we need to
have an out-of-pocket cap in the Medicare program, much like
most private insurance companies. Most self-insured companies
have an out-of-pocket cap.
So there's agreement that it should be--there should be an
out-of-pocket cap. It's just where it should be set. So the
Trump administration originally said almost $5,000. The Senate
Finance Committee said $3,100, and H.R. 3 says $2,000.
And so what we took a look at is who's affected at $5,000,
$3,000, and $2,000, and less than 1 percent of Medicare
beneficiaries were affected by the $3,000 or $5,000 cap. About
4.5 percent of Medicare beneficiaries are affected by the
$2,000 cap.
However, it really doesn't cost very much to help so many
more seniors by lowering the cap from $3,000 to $2,000, and
especially if you changed the way it's financed through having
the corporations pay more, the drug companies pay more, and the
PDPs pay more instead of right now Medicare paying 80 percent
of that cost.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much.
And as my time closes here, I just want to emphasize, Madam
Chair, that the design elements of the proposal that is
contained in H.R. 3 for sure, and I know there's been careful
attention to designing the other proposals as well, but I
really want to emphasize that these have been carefully put
together. They are--the various provisions are complementary in
terms of the positive impact that it can have with respect to
drug prices. So it's a very good product--legislative product
that will make a difference.
And with that, I will yield back my time.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Pleasure to recognize the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Long, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And, Dr. Fowler, on the medication that you take, it is a
chemotherapy regimen. Is that correct?
Dr. Fowler. Yes, chemotherapy.
Mr. Long. And how often are you required to undergo
chemotherapy?
Dr. Fowler. Excuse me?
Mr. Long. How often are you required to undergo
chemotherapy for this?
Dr. Fowler. Well, it comes in capsule form.
Mr. Long. Oh, OK. OK.
Dr. Fowler. Little capsules. I take 21 days of capsules and
then 7 days off. I don't understand the medical science behind
it, but that's----
Mr. Long. OK. So you don't have to go somewhere and take
chemo in a traditional chemo----
Dr. Fowler. No. It's a simple----
Mr. Long. OK. OK. We had a very dear friend that succumbed
to that disease. She had to travel to Little Rock to take her
treatment and did that for years and years and years, and like
I said----
Dr. Fowler. Right.
Mr. Long [continuing]. So God bless you and----
Dr. Fowler. Thankfully, I don't have to do that.
Mr. Long [continuing]. Keep up the fight. You bet. Yes.
Dr. Ippolito, in your testimony regarding price setting,
you question the ability of regulators to know all relevant
information distilled via markets where they can be subject to
pressures.
Can you talk about the more--talk about that more and why
the Pelosi plan takes numbers from these referenced countries
on their face and why that is not well thought out?
Dr. Ippolito. Well, so there's two points. The first is
that you have to remember that other countries are solving a
different problem than we are. Other countries are relatively
small. So Canada is a very small part of the pharmaceutical
market. They can make what economists would call a partial
equilibrium decision. That is, they can basically assume that
we are going to set a price and it's not going to matter that
much for how anybody else behaves. The United States, that's
just different, for better or for worse. We spend so much that
we are the straw that stirs the drink. We are what matters in
the pharmaceutical market. So what was right for one other
country may not be right for us, not to mention we may have
different preferences and different willingness to pay and all
that kind of thing.
So there's a lot going on here that's different between the
countries.
The second point, the more broad point is, look, whether
you love rate setting or hate it, it's not easy. Like, we've
seen this. Almost, you know, about half of States plus did some
version of hospital rate setting back in the day. We had five
States that had long-lived rate-setting regimes, and they all
succumbed to various different forms of political pressure,
misuse of the system, just literal complexity, and all sorts of
other reasons.
So it's not like we haven't seen this type of thing tried
before. Even if you like it, it's very hard. These are
complicated markets.
Mr. Long. And you're surely not old enough to remember when
Reggie Jackson said, ``I am the straw that stirs the drink.''
Dr. Ippolito. No. Somebody told me to say that. I have to--
--
[Laughter.]
Mr. Long. Busted.
Can you explain where the Pelosi plan fails in
understanding the tradeoffs between spending and future drug
development, and why the effort under H.R. 3 to treat tradeoffs
other countries face as identical to the U.S. is incorrect?
Dr. Ippolito. So I worry a lot about that. I think that
what we have is a system where the HHS Secretary gets to set a
price. There's no real negotiation happening and there's going
to be tremendous pressure to value the near-term gains that
come from a real benefit, which is paying less for drugs.
That's great. I want to pay less for everything that I have.
But I also care about another kind of access, not just access
today, but I care about access to some, you know, treatment for
ALS or Alzheimer's or whatever it might be.
And so the question is not, you know, How do we hammer the
cost down as much as humanly possible? The question is, How do
we solve this joint problem of maintaining access today and
making sure we have some long-term vision? And I worry that the
way this is set up is, we are really going to give short shrift
to that long-term vision.
Mr. Long. OK. And can you talk about the lack of certainty
that will be created under H.R. 3 as different administrations
may maximize the Federal rate setting allowed under H.R. 3?
Dr. Ippolito. I mean, you know, this is one of these things
where you have to sort of guess how this would evolve. I think
it's--you know, what we know is that there's some maximum
price, and it's this reference price.
But you can go anywhere below that you want. And so the
question is, what is any given administration going to do with
that power? And, you know, frankly, if you just listen to the
rhetoric--for example, I use Senator Sanders, is obviously
running for President right now. Based on my observations and
listening to the rhetoric that I hear come out of his campaign,
I would expect quite different things than if I were to
imagine, you know, Tom Price for HHS Secretary or whatever. And
I don't even--I don't even want to assign a value judgment to
which is better. But the point is, literally, that regardless
of what you think is better, the sheer existence of uncertainty
is costly. So, you know, firms are not what we call risk
loving. They are risk averse. They do not like uncertainty, and
what we have is uncertainty over decades-long projections for
investments.
And so that's really what I worry about, even independent
of whether you think the price is going to be too high on
average or too low on average or whatever.
Mr. Long. OK. And Madam Chairwoman, just to correct the
record, I would like to state that Marionville, Missouri, is
the home of the white squirrel, not 10 miles from Anywhere,
Illinois, that Shimkus tried to claim it was.
I yield back.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Eshoo. Well, thank God you made that distinction. We
are really grateful to you, Mr. Long.
The gentleman yields back.
Pleasure to recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Kennedy, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you for holding
this extremely important hearing. Thank you for your witnesses
for being here and your testimony.
Dr. Fowler, thank you for your moving words, sir. This
committee has heard you loud and clear, has heard an awful lot
of additional witnesses in very similar circumstances.
As Members of Congress, every day we hear stories about
patients and families who are draining savings accounts and
falling into deep debt just to afford medication that can keep
them alive.
We listen as terrified, exhausted patients tell us about
drugs that could treat their treatable disease if they could
afford it. We watch parents, including some back in my home
State, who marched into headquarters--in front of headquarters
of a pharmaceutical company--carrying the ashes of their
children because the treatment that could have saved their
lives was too expensive.
And I understand that this is a big, hard problem. I
understand the complexity around it. Dr. Ippolito, I appreciate
your testimony and your candor on this and the challenges that
exist and the choices that have to be made in a piece of
legislation.
I would say there's choices being made in the status quo at
the moment that is an absolute abject failure to an awful lot
of people that need care and that care exists.
And so I don't dismiss any of the concerns that you raise.
I also think that we also have to recognize there's a cost of
not doing anything. We have had so many hearings here over the
course of even my tenure where we've had executives from a
number of pharmaceutical companies, PBMs, et cetera, up at that
dais right where you are that literally just did this, over and
over and over again.
And so at a certain point, what else are we supposed to do
than make a choice? What else are we supposed to do other than
force an issue? What else are we supposed to do than say, ``You
know what? Fine, here it is. And you want to push back, you
want to debate it, fine.'' But you can't keep waiting for
somebody else to solve this problem. I literally asked a
question of an executive at that table, What else we should do?
And the response was, ``Call a hearing in Congress, invite us
to testify, and solicit advice.'' At that dais, in front of
Congress at a hearing to solicit advice. That was the response
I got.
So at a certain point, what else are we supposed to do when
every other witness keeps doing this, from pharmaceutical
industries and from the industry writ large?
And so my patience, and I think an awful lot of us, are
wearing thin. Again, understanding the complexity, but to point
out a couple of obvious shortfalls in the system. Dr. Fowler,
you indicated that you are on a medication made by Celgene. You
indicated that the--I believe the market price for that was
over $200,000 per year. Is that right?
Dr. Fowler. Yes, that's my understanding.
Mr. Kennedy. And do you know what your out-of-pocket
expenses were, roughly, in 2017 or 2018?
Dr. Fowler. Well, back when I was still employed, my out-
of-pocket expenses for the year were about $600.
Mr. Kennedy. And do you know how much the drug costs
annually to produce?
Dr. Fowler. Excuse me?
Mr. Kennedy. How much it costs to produce that drug?
Dr. Fowler. To produce? My understanding is that it costs
Celgene about $240 a year to produce the drug.
Mr. Kennedy. That's my understanding. Do you have any idea
how much Celgene spent on stock buybacks those 2 years?
Dr. Fowler. I don't possess that information.
Mr. Kennedy. I will help you out. It's about--it's $5.7
billion.
Dr. Fowler. Yes.
Mr. Kennedy. Do you know if Celgene during that period of
time increased or decreased the price of your drug during that
period?
Dr. Fowler. Excuse me? The----
Mr. Kennedy. Do you know if Celgene increased or decreased
the price of your drug?
Dr. Fowler. Oh, it went up and up and up year by--I took it
under my university's plan from 2009 to 2019, for 10 years, and
it went up and up and up. It more than doubled over the course
of 10 years, constantly inching its way up.
Mr. Kennedy. So we've got a company that takes $5.7 billion
in a stock buyback for a drug that costs--in profits, right? In
profits. The drug in your circumstance is $240 to manufacture.
And did you get any benefit about of the stock buyback?
Dr. Fowler. I am sorry. I am not hearing that clearly.
Mr. Kennedy. I am sorry. A company that took $5.7 billion
stock buybacks----
Dr. Fowler. Ahh.
Mr. Kennedy [continuing]. In profits, right?
Dr. Fowler. OK.
Mr. Kennedy. For--across their portfolio. Did you get any
benefit from a stock buyback that they----
Dr. Fowler. [Laughs.] Not that I am aware.
Mr. Kennedy. Not that I am aware of either.
At a certain point, I understand the challenges and
complexities here. At a certain point, I do think we have to
say enough is enough and we will force this issue. If this is
what it takes in order to get some of our companies at the
table to help us solve this problem, then this is what it's
going to take, because I think a lot of us have been sitting
around these tables for long enough getting the runaround
without anybody actually wanting to solve this problem.
And I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
And I now recognize the gentleman, and that he is, Mr.
Bucshon from Indiana, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I was happy to hear right at the beginning of this hearing
a commitment to a subcommittee markup and regular order, and in
that vein, I think you mentioned recently we may have
additional questions for the record and that may be critical
for the witnesses to respond quickly, and I agree with that.
These answers could prove critical to helping us understand all
the issues, and I would like to know if you can commit to
receiving the answers to the written questions before we
proceed to a subcommittee markup.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, I think it makes sense that we organize
this so that the witnesses can respond in time and that you can
make use of what they respond for what comes next.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. So we'll do our best to coordinate it.
Mr. Bucshon. I appreciate that commitment because it is
important. A lot of times in 5 minutes, as you pointed out, we
can't get all our questions in, and sometimes there's more to
that story.
And also I would just like to say that the comparison of
private insurance and Medicare Part D is totally legit, and
that's why I think in a bipartisan way we need to proceed with
Medicare Part D reform that does limit out-of-pocket costs and
make other changes that make it more effective and efficient
for the patients, and I think we can do that in a bipartisan
way. I think that is important.
I want to talk about access. I was a heart surgeon before I
was in Congress, and for me the key is patient access to
affordable healthcare. I want to talk about what a recent
report from the U.K., and this is--and I will read this--about
a father who was 38 and he--it says who can't get cancer drug
on NHS--the National Health Service. He was heartbroken as his
son, age 7, asked him, ``When are you going to get better?''
And it turns out he was diagnosed with blood cancer--I think
the same condition that you have, Dr. Fowler--at age 38. But he
knew he couldn't--he knew a drug that could prolong his life
and that was Revlimid, which is, I think, what you're on.
That's a coincidence. That wasn't--I didn't plan that. Didn't
know that you were on that. But he didn't qualify for the
treatment under the NHS because, at the National Health
Service, you have to have--it says here you have to have a
failure of therapy three times--you have to have a recurrence
before you qualify for this new, innovative drug.
And so I just wanted to point that out that one of the
risks of doing the wrong thing in the U.S. on drug pricing can,
in my view, severely limit potential access to medication that
we would otherwise have available.
And I agree, we need to get the out-of-pocket costs down,
but there are other ways to do that. So with that, Dr.
Ippolito, quickly, in my last 2 minutes, several of the
countries referenced in H.R. 3 governments frequently denied
patient access to drugs using standards that determined the
value of a person's life.
This is a situation we are in here. Under the standards,
the value of some people's lives, such as a disabled person or
an elderly person, gets a lower score than the value of a
younger, healthier person.
For example, a child with a neuromuscular disorder may be
worth half as much as a healthy child. That's not my words.
That's what's been reported that countries do. This can result
in fewer vulnerable individuals having access to treatments
that they need.
Do you feel it's ethical to place a value on a life of a
human being?
Dr. Ippolito. I don't know if I am best suited to answer
the ethical element, and maybe it's a bioethicist or something.
But it's certainly--I mean, the general point I think you're
making is it speaks to the fact that, if you want to do cost-
effectiveness-based coverage decisions and pricing decisions,
you do need to make some fairly explicit decisions.
Mr. Bucshon. Correct.
Dr. Ippolito. What are you willing to pay for as a country,
how much is that worth? And this does vary by a variety of
characteristics.
Mr. Bucshon. Right. So my point as a provider would be, is
that the U.S. Federal Government, potentially, in the
negotiations could make policy decisions that are essentially
medical decisions on who gets access and who doesn't based on
cost.
Dr. Ippolito. There is some question, in my view, about how
exactly the HHS Secretary would consider how good a drug is
relative to previous therapies and a few of those other
considerations.
But that is at least nominally part of the calculus they're
supposed to consider.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes. So, I mean, again, as a provider I
don't--I think it's up to the medical professionals and the
families and the patients to work through these situations. It
is up to us to figure out how to improve Medicare Part D--no
doubt about that.
But one of my big concerns is, if the Federal Government
gets more into this space, which is being proposed in H.R. 3,
is that you will indeed have financial decisions being made by
different administrations that may very well limit access based
on the Government's perceived value of your individual life and
the lives of the American people as a whole.
I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. Doctor yields back, and now I would like to
recognize Mr. Schrader from the State of Oregon for 5 minutes
for his questions.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Madam--thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Dr. Fowler, you talked eloquently about your situation and
Medicare--going from private care to Medicare. It gives me
pause when I hear all this call for Medicare for all, and I see
Medicare does not provide quite the same benefit that your
private care did, which is something we should all consider.
But more to the point, you also talked about some of the
other problems we have in the prescription drug space. You have
talked about the CREATES Act and the issue that it tries to
address.
This committee worked on a very bipartisan basis to push
out a number of bills--my BLOCKING Act. We talked about the
patent reform the Chair and others worked on.
Do you feel those types of bills would be of much benefit
to beneficiaries in Medicare, or just the population writ
large?
Dr. Fowler. So you're asking in particular about the
CREATES?
Mr. Schrader. Yes. Use that. That's the one you're familiar
with.
Dr. Fowler. What I know of that--when I first learned that
that was being discussed, it really intrigued me because it
seemed to make a great deal of sense for my situation with
Celgene, who apparently has written the textbook on how to
avoid the production of a generic. They've been stupendously
successfully in avoiding a generic, and so I would be delighted
to see action finally taken on something like that.
Mr. Schrader. Well, I wouldn't pick on any one company
personally, but there's a lot of, you know, unfortunate
loopholes I would call them in the current legal construct that
allow companies to game the system a little bit to their
advantage. That's the nature of business, to some degree.
But we passed a bunch of bills along those lines that I
would hope we have a chance to get passed out of the House of
Representatives as a bloc of bills that would have wide
bipartisan support because we worked really, really hard on
those.
Taking a little different tack, Dr. Anderson, you know, the
bill before us is a good, solid attempt to lower costs,
frankly, for every American, not just those that are seniors.
We have some negotiation that goes on already in the VA and
DOD. Why not adopt that? Why not adopt a VA price, for goodness
sakes? I know they've got a formulary. But I think you could
get past the formulary issue with Medicare by just supplying
the Medicare reduction from commercial rates to the class of
drugs that a drug that's not on the formulary would be in and
get some huge savings.
We'd save a lot more money. Wouldn't have to create a
second bureaucracy. If it's good enough for the VA, should be
good enough for seniors, for goodness sakes. Seems like a
smart, commonsense way to go that we can implement pretty
rapidly.
Dr. Anderson. So the VA pays, and so does DOD, about 30 to
40 percent less than what Medicare does. So yes, you could
adopt that.
The problem, of course, is, you know, can you do that for
all Americans or can you do that just for the VA? And, you
know, that's the uncertainty of this thing.
But I think you should definitely be taking a look at the
VA approach to setting rates because they do negotiation and
they've been doing it for many years and you, the Congress,
authorized them to do it very successfully.
Mr. Schrader. Yes, bipartisan would keep us from getting--
it would help--some of my folks on the far left are very
concerned we are not including enough drugs, and on the far
right, you know, we are taking some other countries' standards
for our own. We've been doing this for a long time. It's
bipartisan, and I think there's a way to actually get that--get
it done.
Dr. Ippolito, you're concerned about the Secretary being
kind of the judge of all things, having total discretion. I
share some of that concern.
In Oregon, where I am from, we have a list of prioritized
services that medical experts, not politicians like me, get to
talk about what's the most cost effective, what's the best
value, how we should go about things.
We have MedPAC here that we use, another group of medical
experts, not politicians and not appointees, to decide, you
know, what could be best practices that, you know, they provide
us information.
What do you think of the Senate bill's approach where they
actually have this advisory P&T committee that would be a more
technical, a more science-based group of folks than just one
person deciding how these drugs negotiations go on?
Dr. Ippolito. It's probably a step in the right direction.
I think you're going to run into some of the same challenges.
Scaling up a real--if you really want to get into something
like a cost-effectiveness-style recommendation, that's a fairly
advanced undertaking.
The man to my left probably would be a good choice to lead
that, though, if you wanted to do it. But I think adding some
expertise would help. I don't know outside of giving some
formal guidance that it would solve one of the big concerns I
have, which is the uncertainty element. That's one element I
would keep in mind.
Mr. Schrader. Fair enough.
With that, I yield back. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Pleasure to recognize the gentleman from Georgia, the only
pharmacist in the United States House of Representatives.
Mr. Carter?
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Madam Chair. And in the Senate as
well, so thank you. In Congress, we'll say.
Madam Chair, seriously, I want to just take just a second
and thank you because I will tell you the truth, we just
finished a five-week break during August, and in my district I
went around the whole district telling them that I serve on the
oldest, most diverse, most bipartisan committee in Congress,
and that is the Energy and Commerce Committee, and I truly
believe that.
And what we've been working on here and what we--and I told
them about what we were working--robocalls, surprise billing--
that we've worked on in a bipartisan fashion.
We've also worked on prescription drug pricing in a
bipartisan fashion. We passed at least nine bills out of here
in a bipartisan fashion, three of which I was the cosponsor on
that I am very proud of. I have to tell you that I was
extremely disappointed whenever I saw the Speaker's plan here.
And we knew it was coming, we never saw it--but when we saw
it. But I want to thank you for your commitment that we will
have a markup in subcommittee on this because it is extremely
important for us to engage in regular order, and that's very
important.
Why is this issue so personal to me, and it is so personal
to me? Because listen, I was the one on the other side of the
counter for so many years. I was the one who had to tell the
patient how much this medication was. I was the one who
witnessed the mother crying because she couldn't afford the
medication for her daughter. I was the one who watched the
senior citizens try to make a decision on whether they were
going to buy medicine or whether they were going to buy
groceries.
That's why it's so personal to me, and that's why I want to
do something about it and I am going to do something about it,
and we are doing something about it.
Let's not sell ourselves short. We've passed some good
legislation in this committee that we need to continue to work
on.
I am concerned because, I will be quite honest with you, my
years of practice in pharmacy I've seen nothing short of
miracles as a result of research and development, and I applaud
the pharmaceutical manufacturers for that.
However, it does you no good whatsoever if you can't afford
it. I understand that, and I get that. But I am extremely
concerned--and I want to ask you, Dr, Ippolito--about the
impact on research and development, about this proposal
specifically about what I consider to be the price controls,
because the price controls, I feel like, are going to inhibit
research and development, and I cannot adhere to that. I cannot
go along with that.
Dr. Ippolito. Yes. I mean, I think I share some of your
core concern, which is, you know, it would be great if we
could, you know, get every drug under the sun. But if nobody
can afford it, well, then it doesn't do anybody any good,
right.
So I don't want to spend the entire country's GDP on
pharmaceuticals. But the question is, How do we make sure that
we keep making progress while actually having folks get access
to these drugs?
And when I look at--I mean, when I look at the Part D--I
know you want to talk about the pricing, but the Part D
redesign I think is a good example of that.
Mr. Carter. And if I could mention, we have actually in
this committee--we have actually sought input. What you see
here are 83 different comments that we've had about how we can
revamp our Part D system. We can make it better.
Dr. Ippolito. Yes. And so I think--I do want to keep
emphasizing that. I really do think there's a lot to like
there, and it does get at, I think, this balance that you're
trying to strike.
With the price setting, you know, like I've said, we know
the direction of the effect. If you reduce the prices a lot,
you're going to see some reduced innovation. The question is
exactly how much, and that's hard for anybody to predict.
Mr. Carter. It is hard to predict, but--and listen, as
abrasive as we find it to be, you're absolutely right. Venture
capitalist are--this is going to make them look elsewhere.
I mean, I would like to think that, yes, they're in it for
the good of man and I am sure some of them are, but they're
also in it to make money. And I am not opposed to anybody
making money, but at the same time we have to be realistic
here.
And I've looked and I see what we've done. I am cochair,
along with my good friend Representative Mark DeSaulnier from
California, of the Cancer Survivor Caucus here in Congress.
What we've seen--we've seen a 22 percent decrease in cancer and
deaths due to cancer since 1991. And HIV and AIDS--we've seen
an 85 percent decrease since 1995 as a result of research and
development. This is phenomenal.
And when I hear this, I think about the dreaded disease
Alzheimer's, what kind of impact. By 2050, it's estimated that
14 million people will have this disease, and it will cost this
country $1.1 trillion. If we don't have research and
development into this, we are going to lose. We are going to
lose that battle. That's why we've got to make sure that that
incentive remains there.
Dr. Ippolito. Yes, and I think that's exactly the kind of
thing that I think about. There are access today--there are
concerns about access today. But we've got to keep in mind
access tomorrow, and access tomorrow means access to something
that we don't actually know what it's going to be, and that's
kind of the hard part of it. But when you put it in terms of
things like Alzheimer's, I think it's a good way of
understanding just the kind of rewards that are out there if we
do this right.
Mr. Carter. I realize I am out of time. But I will say
there are plenty of things that we can do outside of drug price
controls.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back. I think any company
would be interested in the market--very interested in a market
of 14 million people.
I now would like to recognize the gentleman from Vermont,
who has spent a considerable amount of his legislative time in
the Congress working on the very issue that we've called the
hearing on today, Mr. Welch, for 5 minutes of his questioning.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much, and thank you for the
hearing.
First, I would like to put in the record three letters. Mr.
Carter and I have been working on DIR fees, and I would like to
introduce a letter from the National Community Pharmacists
Association and also one from the American Pharmacists
Association, and third, a statement from our good colleague,
Elijah Cummings, chair of our Oversight and Government Reform--
Oversight Committee, who's been a champion on trying to bring
down drug prices.
Ms. Eshoo. So ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Welch. A couple of things. We have done a lot together
in this committee. But we are now facing a very clear question,
and it's--let's be candid. We have a disagreement, and the
question is, Do we need to have our Government play a role to
protect consumers or maintain the status quo where we don't?
That's it, and there's an honest difference of opinion on that.
There are arguments that I am hearing from some of my
colleagues who oppose this, that they're worried about
innovation. Totally valid concern. We have to have innovation.
There are concerns that this is, quote, ``price setting''
because it's unusual for government to be involved in
negotiating.
Now, my view, the price setting is being done by the pharma
industry, because here is what's happened: We are here, in my
view, because of egregious overreach by the pharmaceutical
industry.
You know, we went with an industry that started out with
scientists and pharmacists trying to come up with cures, and
that was a good day's work for them when they came up with
something, to these pharma companies essentially being Wall
Street entities.
And, bottom line, many of the patents that they have are
not a result of them inventing the drug. They bought the drug.
NIH--taxpayers paid for it and then smart Wall Street folks
bought it, and with the benefit of the patent they used that
pricing power to overreach.
And secondly, they're in a situation where they've got a
market because people like Dr. Fowler have to have it. Your
family wants you to have it. Your employer wanted to have it.
Think about how much it costs your employer to provide that
insurance. But our employers around this country want to help
their workers, so they buy employer-sponsored healthcare, and
that includes pharma coverage, in many cases.
So that's a guaranteed market for the drug companies. And
then, of course, you have legislators passing the Medicare
program, the Part D program, and the Medicaid program. Drugs
are included, and that's a market. So you have got pharma that
benefits from taxpayer research, buys the product--doesn't
invent it in many cases--spends more on advertising than it
does on research, spends more on price--stock buybacks than it
does on research, and then they're called to account for some
of these other maneuvers like selling their drug to an Indian
nation as a way of trying to extend their patent--or
evergreening--their constant defense is, if you do that it'll
stifle innovation.
You know, I've had it. It's not true. It's bogus. And this
is the hard question for us because this is a bipartisan
committee. But we really do have a disagreement on this
question of whether the Government should be involved. There's
a lot of folks that think if Government gets involved it's
automatically bad. Sometimes that's true, but this is a case I
believe where if Government isn't involved the status quo
continues. It's going to crush everyone.
I just want to ask you, Dr. Anderson, on this question of
innovation--when I was in a meeting with Secretary Azar, he
expressed with clarity, and he's got significant experience as
a leading executive in one of our best pharmaceutical
companies, that it is not true.
Your view on that? How can we avoid stifling innovation if
we have some type of price negotiation?
Dr. Anderson. So, essentially, what you got to recognize is
where innovation is really starting, and it's starting at the
NIH and going to academic medical centers. That's where all the
basic science and the first drug development typically occurs.
It's not occurring in the big drug companies. And so the
key question is, Are you going to continue to fund NIH, and I
assume you will. And so we will continue to get drug
development.
Mr. Welch. OK. Dr. Ippolito, I mean, I share your concern.
I mean, certainty--there is certainty right now whatever price
you want to charge, we'll pay. That's the certainty we have.
On the proposed bill, money that is saved, some of it will
go back into scientific research at NIH. Is that a good thing,
in your view?
Dr. Ippolito. Yes. The NIH does a lot of really good basic
research.
Mr. Welch. Appreciate that. Thank you.
I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back, and we are all
grateful to you for the work that you have done for--over a
long period of time.
Pleasure to recognize the gentlewoman from Indiana, Mrs.
Brooks, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I apologize.
We've been going between a couple different hearings this
morning. But thank you all so very much for being here today.
I think there's no question that Americans pay too much for
healthcare, including the cost of prescription drugs. In this
committee we've held many hearings to try to work through
solutions, and we actually even came to some bipartisan
agreements in the process, which I think demonstrated, I think,
contrary to what my dear friend and colleague across the aisle
just said, we aren't trying to protect the status quo. We
actually had been doing some pretty important things in this
committee, and we were making progress.
However, I think there are some very serious concerns with
H.R. 3. The bill does require companies to, quote,
``negotiate'' prices with the Federal Government for up to 250
drugs that don't have the generic or biosimilar competition. We
were working on that in some bills also. We were working on
access to generics before H.R. 3 was dropped, and if companies
would refuse they'd face a huge penalty tax on gross sales of
each drug. And for Medicare drug programs, if a drug price
rises faster than inflation going back to 2016, the
manufacturer would face another huge tax on those revenues
above inflation.
And I do think we really do need to think about the
dramatic chilling effect of innovation and breakthrough
medicines coming to market. I've learned through all of this
that some of our peer nations--Germany, United Kingdom,
Australia, Canada, France, and Japan--often have access to
fewer of the new drugs than we are able to get here in the
United States, meaning that despite the cost, patients can't
get their hands on new, lifesaving drugs in many of these
countries. And if we share that same drug pricing model of our
peer nations, I worry this could become a reality in our
country.
So I want to share a story of one patient, Krystal Hekau.
Krystal lives in New Zealand. She has aggressive breast cancer.
While she inched her way up the waiting list required for
radiation treatment--the waiting list for radiation treatment--
she learned the cancer had spread to her spine. Now her doctor
tells her that a new medication could prolong her life. But the
government's drug-buying entity, PHARMAC, has not approved it.
She has two children at home. The oldest is 5. And so while--
and so she may not get this drug--will probably not get this
livesaving drug.
Lower drug prices are a goal this entire committee shares.
But I think if we push forward this particular piece of
legislation it will reduce access to drugs, and lower prices
aren't going to matter because many people aren't going to get
access to drugs that they need.
Dr. Ippolito, is it possible that the economic incentives
under H.R. 3 would lead to manufacturers denying their
lifesaving products to patients in our country or in other
countries?
Dr. Ippolito. It is unlikely, in my view, that at least as
it's currently written, that a drug manufacturer would decide
not to offer a drug that currently exists or that they've
already made in the United States.
In part, the reason is that simply they'd be fined more
than they would even make if they sold the drug in the first
place, regardless of what the price they got was.
So that I have less concern about. I think I have more
concern about--well, depending on how this evolves, which is
hard to predict, but depending on how low the prices are, the
question is who's going to want to enter and to discover new
drugs and who's going to want to market new drugs. That's the
bigger question to me.
Mrs. Brooks. And so let me ask you about that, because my
home State of Indiana is a top life sciences hub. A lot of
medical innovation, public-private partnerships happening
between industry and academia all the time. It's really created
tremendous growth and innovation to patients and to the
companies in Indiana, not just--but, more importantly, to the
benefit of the patients from this innovation.
How would--what is your concern about how this, the drug
pricing plan, will impact U.S. jobs and workers, and the
companies that are bringing these drugs to market?
Dr. Ippolito. You know, I think the biggest concern would
be on not on the basic science side, where it's more the
academic medical centers and NIH-funded work. You would be more
concerned about the people who are currently being funded by
venture capital firms or who are currently recouping lots of
money when a large pharmaceutical company buys their compound
or whatever it may be. It's hard for me to put any sort of firm
number on that kind of thing. But yes, sure, I think
directionally we know which direction that would go.
Mrs. Brooks. And that would go in a negative direction when
it comes to innovation. Is that correct?
Dr. Ippolito. Yes, I think that's correct.
Mrs. Brooks. OK. I yield back. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back.
Who is next? Recognize Dr. Ruiz from California for his 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you, Madam Chair. Seeing firsthand the
devastating effects of skyrocketing drug prices in my practice
in the emergency department and speaking with a lot of
patients, and I have treated patients who never got their
prescription filled because they couldn't afford it or patients
who rationed their medication to make it last longer.
And I know I've told this story in this committee before,
but it's an important example for folks in the room who haven't
heard it.
I had just finished a community forum prior to even
thinking about running for Congress on healthcare access, and
as I was leaving the church where we held the forum, I noticed
an elderly woman who was digging in the trash--a big trash bin.
I went over there and I asked her, you know, what are you
doing. She said, ``Well, I am digging for aluminum cans to get
some extra money so I can pay for my insulin.'' I said,
``Really, you're having to do this?''
She said, ``Yes.'' Then she said, ``But don't worry,
Doctor. Don't worry. I am only taking half of my dose so that I
can make it last longer.''
And as you know, it's almost like not taking anything at
all, and a lot of patients are doing that. In fact, according
to a Kaiser Family Foundation poll, close to 30 percent of
adults have either not filled their prescription, rationed
their medication, or skipped medication in 2019. Thirty percent
of adults, one out of--nearly one out of three.
So, in other words, the sick are not getting the care or
the treatment that they need. And that same poll showed that
one in 10 adults reported a decline in health. So it's not just
that they're not getting the medication. Their health is
getting worse because they couldn't afford to take their
medications prescribed by their doctor.
So I just want to remind everybody here that this isn't
about a cost savings to the Government or some pay-fors for
other things. This isn't a cost savings to drug makers or to
health insurance companies. This isn't even about saving costs
to hospitals.
The primary goal here is to save patients' out-of-pocket
costs. That should be the number-one metric in which we
evaluate any policy that comes out of this committee and this
House of Representatives, to make sure that patients don't pay
more out of their own pocket.
So when we talk about the importance of reducing the cost
of medications, we need to talk about the out-of-pocket costs
to the patient and how we ensure that the policies that we are
considering here result in savings to the patient.
So H.R. 3, the Lower Prescription Drug Costs Now Act, does
just that by capping out-of-pocket costs for our seniors.
Additionally, it is imperative that we require HHS to negotiate
drug prices and that those negotiated prices will apply to
Medicare and commercial plans.
So, Dr. Fowler, I was very intrigued by your story and your
experience, and stories like yours are not uncommon, which is
why we are here discussing these important issues today.
So can you amplify your history and what--on a personal
level, how has the cost of your medication impacted your life?
Dr. Fowler. Thank you. I guess I would return to what I
said earlier about the double anxiety over my medical
condition--I have to do lab work every 3 months to check on my
numbers, and I will do that as long as I live because I have an
incurable disease.
So there's that constant thought in the back of my mind
that I am living with such a disease. But I keep my wristband
on from the International Myeloma Foundation so I am constantly
remembering that I have that to deal with, even though the day
is going well.
But then there's the financial--the financial uncertainty
that we may run out of money, God knows what expenses might pop
up on down the road.
Mr. Ruiz. And we know the importance of mental health and
stressors have on ultimate outcome of illness and treatment. So
the additional stress of having to figure out if you're going
to be able to afford the medication, in your case for multiple
myeloma--is that correct?----
Dr. Fowler. Yes.
Mr. Ruiz [continuing]. Is adding to the burden of disease
for you. Was there anything that you had to postpone or
decisions you made that you couldn't do for yourself or your
family because of the cost or the worry for the cost of
medication?
Dr. Fowler. No, thankfully. I had excellent coverage
through my employment, and that worked wonderfully well, and I
am very, very grateful for that.
Mr. Ruiz. And what kind of doctor are you?
Dr. Fowler. I am a Ph.D.
Mr. Ruiz. Ph.D. kind of doctor. Great.
Dr. Fowler. A religion scholar.
Mr. Ruiz. Wonderful. I love that. Thank you so much for
your service.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
I now have the pleasure of recognizing Mr. Hudson from
North Carolina for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you, Chairwoman Eshoo, for holding this
important hearing.
I know we all agree that drug prices are too high and that
Congress must take action to help our constituents. Since I
first came to Congress, I've followed two guiding principles:
Any legislation I work on should benefit the people of North
Carolina's 8th District, and second, I will work with anyone,
Republican or Democrat, to get a good policy across the finish
line.
The legislation we are considering today is extremely
partisan, though, and it holds no chance of becoming law. It
threatens the golden age of innovation and the access to new
breakthrough therapies we've seen in the last 20 years.
Our constituents don't care which party had which idea.
They just want relief at the pharmacy counter. When there are
serious bipartisan options on the table that would save our
constituents money and preserve the overwhelming greater access
we enjoy in our healthcare system, why are we considering
legislation that threatens to undo the very real positive in
our healthcare system?
My main focus in this debate is to save constituents money,
to protect access to lifesaving cures, and to promote
innovation in the rare disease space.
So, Dr. Ippolito, I have a few questions for you, if you
don't mind. I recently read reports in the Mirror and Black
Pool Gazette about the U.K. denying coverage of a drug for
Batten disease, a rare childhood illness.
According to the reports, two children with the disease
died waiting for treatment while the drug was undergoing a
quote, unquote, ``cost effectiveness review'' by the
government.
Is the U.K. one of the countries that would be referenced
under H.R. 3?
Dr. Ippolito. Yes, it is directly referenced, and then it's
also--secondarily it's referenced by a bunch of the other
countries in the basket as well.
Mr. Hudson. I appreciate that. In Medicare Part D, most
beneficiaries with trouble affording their medications are on
complex drugs with big price tags. Would you agree it would be
less disruptive to our unmatched access in the U.S. to
institute out-of-pocket caps, which many Medicaid Advantage
plans use to save beneficiaries money?
Dr. Ippolito. Yes. I mean, I think that's one of the things
that there's been a lot of agreement on, especially when you
think about the whole point of insurance.
I mean, the whole point is that you're supposed to avoid
these catastrophic financial hits. And so, when you look at the
Medicare Part D benefit design right now, aside from--there's
all sorts of incentive problems the Part D benefit redesign
that's in this bill helps to improve, but there's this other
just completely unforgivable element, which is it's not really
insurance if there's no cap on what you can spend.
And so I think it makes total sense as a future as a
redesign of the program.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you. Do you believe H.R. 3 will push
manufacturers to address diseases with unmet needs or, rather,
towards lower-cost follow-on products?
Dr. Ippolito. See, this is one of the interesting
questions, I think--what kind of compensation of drugs would we
get under this system.
And so the way I think about it anyway is, well, what drugs
would be liable or which ones would be eligible for negotiation
and which wouldn't, and the answer is single-source drugs.
And so, in general, that's kind of an interesting decision
because we have a policy that literally makes drugs single
source by, you know, legislation. And so it's a little bit odd
to sort of focus on those.
But it's particularly concerning if you're a--you treat a
smaller population because you are going to face fewer
competitors in the near to mid-term. And so what that means is
you're going to be eligible for rate regulation for a long
time. And so it's entirely possible that a second-to-market
drug could be more profitable than a first-to-market drug. It's
something to really, really consider, and you've also got to
consider things like, you know, the kind of gamesmanship that
you may get when you launch a drug but then you also launch an
authorized generic so that you're not the only sole source.
So it's a long way of saying that the answer is yes, I
worry about that space, but I worry about a lot of this.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you for that.
Some view the biopharmaceutical industry as just taking and
marketing innovations developed by NIH. However, the NIH has
noted it is the private sector that makes the investments to
translate basic science discoveries into potential new drugs.
Clinical trials were the most expensive aspect of the
research and development pipeline, and just over one in 10
drugs actually make it from clinical trials to patients.
The private sector spent an estimated $97 billion in R&D,
three times the total NIH budget. Can we afford to lose or cut
that investment, as is likely under this legislation?
Dr. Ippolito. I would prefer not. But it's also important
to me--you bring up the NIH. The NIH does good work. I mean,
they fund real science that matters.
But it's important to understand what problem they're
solving, which is they're solving a public goods problem in
sort of economic parlance, which is there's a bunch of facts
about, like, the human body that you cannot patent. You can't
have intellectual property protection over those.
And so we worry that, if we just left it up to the market,
we'd get too little innovation in the basic science, and so
that's what the NIH is really good at. It's filling in that
basic science first level about things that we need to know
about the human body, and then it's private sector that comes
in and some academics and things where they come in and say,
``OK, well, what can we use that information to actually do
now?'' And that's the key.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you, Madam Chair. My time has expired. I
yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
It is a pleasure to recognize the gentlewoman from
Delaware, Ms. Blunt Rochester, for her 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman and
Ranking Member Burgess, for the recognition and for the
hearing, and also to the witnesses for joining us today.
Whether it's shopping in the grocery store or taking a tour
of a small business in Delaware or even a constituent who
approached me, like you, Dr. Fowler, who was in need of
lifesaving cancer drugs but she can't afford them, this is the
number-one issue that I hear about in my state.
It is just the number-one, whether it is the cost of
healthcare in addition or more specifically the cost of
prescription drugs.
And so today, we really have an opportunity to take
critical steps towards lowering drug costs in a way that
patients will feel directly. I mean, they will feel it in their
pocketbooks.
And I would like to start by focusing on a concerning trend
that's impacting low- to middle-income seniors who don't
qualify for Federal subsidies that help with drug costs.
According to USC's Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and
Economics, from 2007 to 2015 the share of beneficiaries with
high drug spending who do not qualify for low-income subsidy,
or LIS, assistance and reach the catastrophic phase of their
prescription coverage increased from 18 to 28 percent.
Dr. Anderson, what beneficiaries typically have reached the
catastrophic phase of their drug coverage and are faced with
continued costs?
Dr. Anderson. So when the legislation passed back in 2003,
it was people that had multiple chronic conditions who were
taking a lot of drugs. What's changed over the last 10 or 15
years is it's now one drug that costs $30,000, $50,000,
$500,000. That puts you immediately into the catastrophic cap.
So we have a new set of drugs that we didn't have when the
legislation was passed.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. You anticipated my next question,
which is why do you think that number has increased from 18
percent to 28 percent, and I don't know if there's more that
you want to share about the why.
Dr. Anderson. No. I mean, it is essentially that we now
have new drugs that we didn't have before, which is a very good
thing.
But when Medicare pays 80 percent of the cost and they
can't negotiate, then it doesn't matter how much of the cost
that you can charge--$300,000, $400,000, $500,000, and Medicare
is going to pay for it.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. And according to the Kaiser Family
Foundation, in 2017, 1 million Medicare Part D enrollees had
out-of-pocket spending above the catastrophic threshold, with
average annual out-of-pocket costs exceeding $3,200, over six
times the average for all non-LIS enrollees.
Furthermore, Part D enrollees with high out-of-pocket costs
but no LIS assistance would have saved a collective $1.4
billion if Medicare Part D had a hard cap on out-of-pocket
spending.
Dr. Anderson, there are disagreements about where to place
the out-of-pocket cap. Do you think a $2,000 cap would be a
significant help to many beneficiaries, and why?
Dr. Anderson. So if I am on--just on Social Security, I am
going to get about $20,000, maybe $22,000. So $3,000 versus
$2,000, that's really money to me. That's 1 month of Social
Security. I care that I get an extra $1,000 and have it to
spend on other things that I want to do.
So I think going from $3,000 to $2,000 is very important.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you.
And USC also found that the average total per-person
spending has grown more rapidly for non-LIS beneficiaries who
reach catastrophic coverage compared to beneficiaries who
received LIS subsidies.
This spending growth was primarily because of the
difference in the price and utilization of cancer and mental
health drugs.
Dr. Anderson, how can this multipronged approach taken in
H.R. 3 address the cost of prescription drugs in a way that
just capping out-of-pocket costs can't do alone?
Dr. Anderson. So the first thing you've got to recognize is
that many of these drugs are more expensive because they keep
raising the price.
So putting something into the legislation that says you're
going to cap the price increase at inflation or something like
that is absolutely important because many of these very
expensive drugs were not very expensive 5 or 10 years ago, and
they've become expensive because of increasing prices.
So that is a very critical thing that we haven't talked
about very much today.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you. My time is about to expire.
But I did, again, want to thank you so much for your testimony.
I, too, come from a State that believes in innovation and know
that innovation is important.
But I also know that we can't price these drugs like we do
a car. This is about people's lives. And so I thank you so much
for your testimony. I thank you for this important hearing,
Madam Chairwoman.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman completes her questioning.
We are going to recess now. We have, what, two votes? Two
votes on the floor, and we will return on the heels of our
voting on those two votes and continue with the Members that
haven't questioned yet as well as those that are waiving onto
the committee and would like to ask questions.
So we'll stand in recess.
[Recess.]
Ms. Eshoo. The committee is now back in session, and we
will now recognize the gentleman from Montana, Mr. Gianforte,
for 5 minutes of his questions. Thank you for your patience,
too.
Mr. Gianforte. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you to the
panel for being here today.
The costs of prescription drugs are too high, and Montanans
are struggling to pay for the medications that they need.
Republicans and Democrats on this committee have been working
together across party lines to bring down the cost of
prescription drugs with increased transparency, better access
to generics, increased permitting of biosimilars.
We've worked on and passed these bills that will save
billions of dollars in drugs for patients. We've voted to
remove barriers to generic drugs and stop pharmaceutical
companies from gaming the system and preventing competition.
Unfortunately, our bipartisan work on drug prices is too
often hijacked and politicized by House leadership. The Pelosi
drug plan is no different. It was written behind closed doors.
It's an end run around our bipartisan work.
Speaker Pelosi continues to put politics above bipartisan
progress to bring down prescription drug prices. Her plan would
have devastating consequences for patients. It would lead to
rationing of lifesaving medication, big government price
fixing, and Government bureaucrats between you and your
medication.
Speaker Pelosi could have joined our bipartisan efforts to
bring down prices for patients and create more transparency in
the system. Instead, she bypassed this committee, ignored our
bipartisan work, and chose to put out a socialist plan that
won't even get a vote in the Senate.
This is not a pragmatic approach, and the American people
deserve better than this.
Dr. Ippolito, Montana is a graying State. In fact, a
quarter of our State's population will be older than 65 by
2030. This is far faster than the national average. It's also
estimated that in Montana rates of Alzheimer's will increase by
35 percent by 2030, and nationwide the disease will cost more
than $1 trillion by 2050 if we don't get a new treatment.
We have all known or loved someone with this devastating
disease and seen its impacts firsthand. Cures for Alzheimer's
and other diseases will be critical for our seniors and for
health of my State's economy.
The Pelosi plan establishes an exorbitant excise tax, or
rather price control, of up to 95 percent of the gross sales of
a drug if a manufacturer does not negotiate or fails to reach
an agreement on price.
Could you explain what is the economic signal that this
bill sends about the seriousness of our Nation in dealing with
these devastating costs that are going to be coming as our
population ages?
Dr. Ippolito. Sure. So, I mean, the decision that any drug
investment--somebody making a drug investment is going to have
to make is a simple one. You're going to have to make a
prediction of what are my expected profits, right.
As much as I would like to think that everyone's doing
things just for the good of other people, we have to be a
little bit more realistic. And so you have to make some
prediction about how much am I going to be able to sell this
drug for and what are my costs going to be.
And as I look at this particular plan, I see a very
challenging calculus, in particular, because when you make that
prediction you're going to know that, well, we certainly know
the maximum the price can be, at least in concept. But we need
to then say, ``Well, geez, how much lower is it really going to
be?'' And as I've tried to emphasize with my written testimony
and oral, there's a lot of uncertainty that goes into that, and
I feel there's going to be a tremendous amount of political
pressure to really emphasize short-term gains, which are good.
You know, everyone likes paying less. But they do come at the
expense of long-term benefits as well--long-term costs, I
should say. You know, you can almost make an analogy to we
often have trouble with the national debt because there's an
emphasis everybody wants to spend now and nobody ever wants to
be the person really putting a cap on spending.
Mr. Gianforte. It has been said that capital is a coward
and it tends to flee risk. I think that's part of the problem
with this approach to price controls.
The Pelosi plan would also mirror a socialized foreign
healthcare system with price controls for the U.S. Despite
research that shows that price controls suppress innovation and
impede patient access to new medicines, are you worried like I
am that only one in 10 drugs ever get approved by the FDA and
that we've seen more and more companies getting out of the
Alzheimer's space after high-profile costly clinical trial
failures? Shouldn't we be concerned that we are going to tax
this industry out of existence?
Dr. Ippolito. Yes. I mean, I think this is the number-one
long-term question that we have to think through. How much are
we willing to incentivize? I think, you know, I don't want to
spend the entire GDP on drugs, and I doubt anybody else does. I
like schools and roads and things of that nature, too.
But as you note, there's tremendous value to some of these
cures, and that's part of what I worry when I look at this
bill, is we are identifying drugs that are really successful.
You can be successful for a lot of reasons. It could be
that you're totally taking advantage of loopholes in the
system, and I--you know, I think I am with anybody there where
I say, yes, let's close those down. Let's get rid of these
delaying tactics, you know, when we should be having generics
and so on.
But, boy, do we really want to signal these really valuable
drugs and make them the most exposed--that is, these brand-name
drugs that are really successful? You know, I worry a little
bit, and the Alzheimer's example is exactly the kind of example
that I would worry about.
Mr. Gianforte. OK. Well, I just--Madam Chair, I would just
submit to you that we agree on the objective. We need lower
drug prices. I would like to see American ingenuity continue to
be plied against these diseases that are going to be so costly
and so detrimental to families.
And with that, I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Now I am pleased to recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. Cardenas, for 5 minutes of his questions.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much. It's unfortunate that we
are discussing such an important topic and I think I just heard
the Fox News description of the legislation we are
contemplating today, ``the Pelosi plan,'' just like what
happened with the Affordable Care Act. All of a sudden, it
became Obamacare.
And even though many Americans have benefited tremendously
from it, they actually polled people and said, ``Are you for
Obamacare?'' and they said no. Then they said, ``Are you for
the Affordable Care Act''--same person, different question--
``Are you for the Affordable Care Act?'' and they said yes,
once they started receiving that care.
So, hopefully, we can get through this legislation with the
least amount of politics and focus on the issue at hand. The
issue at hand is that I don't think there's a person who has
run for Congress, successful or not--I think the people up here
have been successful, I assume--who hasn't told their American
constituents, ``Would you like me to lower drug pricing? Would
you like to see that happen?,'' and everybody probably cheers
them on and says yes and then, ultimately, we get voted for and
here we are with the opportunity to actually discuss and,
hopefully, pass legislation that hits the mark and does it
well.
Thank you, Doctor, Doctor, Doctor. for being here and
giving us your expertise and your perspectives on what we are
trying to do here.
First, I would like to ask a question of Dr. Fowler. You
transitioned from private insurance to Medicare, correct?
Dr. Fowler. Yes.
Mr. Cardenas. Can you give me either something you choose,
positive or negative, that you have experienced in that
transition that you either continue to benefit from slightly or
maybe in a more positive way and maybe something that perhaps
you haven't when it comes to prescription drug pricing?
Dr. Fowler. Oh, my. Just very briefly, being under the
insurance policy of my university was so simple and easy,
transparent. When my wife and I realized we needed to take the
plunge into Medicare, it was--the complications of the whole
system were just so incredibly baffling.
We have a wonderful person who walked us through
everything. In Ohio, we call it the OSHIIP program, the State--
housed in Columbus--and this wonderful person walked us through
all the Medicare options in two three-hour sessions, and we
finally made our decisions.
And, of course, everything was complicated because I had
this super drug at a super cost. So there's that. But and then
the shift in the cost. Once upon a time, I paid almost nothing
for copays for this super drug, and now it looks like it's
going to cost me $12,500 a year for my Revlimid. So----
Mr. Cardenas. But the drug itself, did it cost Medicare
and/or your private insurer a similar amount, I mean, on the
same day?
Dr. Fowler. I am not sure I understand the question.
Mr. Cardenas. What I am getting at is, we are talking about
prescription drug pricing and they only give me so many minutes
and I just wanted to know if, when it comes to the price of the
drug that somebody was paying for that price, whether it was
the insurance and then passing a portion of that onto you or
not. You had the benefit of that drug coming to your ability to
use it. At the end of the day, Medicare is still providing you
that opportunity to take that drug.
Dr. Fowler. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. In the interests of time, I would like to
reiterate what the chairwoman pointed out earlier.
Mr. Ippolito, you mentioned something about gout, which is
an interesting example, and then the chairwoman pulled out what
seems to be a fact--I don't doubt her--that NIH has not
provided funding for research for gout. Yet, when you mentioned
malaria, Mr. Ippolito, she mentioned that NIH is in fact--has,
in fact--provided funding for research on malaria, thank God,
which I think was an excellent example of should we as an
incredible nation, should we be in the business of trying to be
assistive with solutions to make lives better, healthier, and
provide opportunities for innovation?
And I think that one of the things that's interesting that
actually has been criticized already in this committee is that
some of the money actually goes to NIH instead of going back
into the ecosystem, perhaps back into the insurers' pockets for
having paid that original price for those prescription drugs
and/or perhaps a portion of that going back to the consumer. I
think that I have tremendous confidence that, by the time this
is done, this legislation, hopefully, will have shaped it in a
way that people have the confidence that they should have that
we do need to reduce prescription drug pricing in America and
we do need to pay attention to the fact that sometimes the
United States can learn from other countries and actually do
something a little bit better than we have.
I am sorry, I am out of time. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
A pleasure to recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Bilirakis, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for
holding this hearing. I really thank the witnesses for being
here and their patience.
But, Madam Chair, what I want to do, first of all, I am the
cochair of the Rare Disease Caucus, and lowering prescription
drug prices and increasing patient choice without impeding
research and development of breakthrough cures and treatments
is very important to me. Obviously, it's important to everyone.
We all agree on that.
Mr. Ippolito, I have some prepared questions. But let me
ask you this: What is your position--I know what your position
is on H.R. 3, but how can we lower prescription drug prices? Is
it through competition? If you can give me a statement on that,
I would appreciate it. How would you do it if you were in our
position?
Dr. Ippolito. Well, I think I would focus primarily on the
incentives that people making the drugs have, namely, what kind
of pricing incentives do they have and then what kind of
research and development incentives do they have.
And so, when I look at exactly what you guys are talking
about in terms of reforming the Part D benefit design, I see a
very good combination, at least in concept--there's details to
be hashed out--in concept there's a really good reform there,
where we say we are no longer going to engage in this behavior
where we have this terrible benefit design where these really
high list price that Gerry was talking about in large part or
at least in part can betraced back to this incentive that's in
this benefit, which is jack up your list price as high as you
possibly can so that you can offload all this cost onto the
Federal Government, and patients are stuck there paying these
massive out-of-pocket costs.
And so, when I look at that benefit redesign, I see a
really nice shift towards a much more sustainable program. I
see much better incentives facing insurers who have to care a
lot more about the costs of the drugs that they're providing,
and we are now knocking down this idea that we are just going
to get away with high prices not because we have some great
value that we are proposing but because it's a way to take
advantage of a benefit design.
So I think I would look at the incentives that are facing
the market actors here, and I think the Part D redesign is a
really good example of that.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. Thank you.
OK. Now to H.R. 3, and I know that the--I am just following
up on what some of the Members have asked, and I will give you
some more time.
Do the economic incentives in H.R. 3 signal to
manufacturers to invest in rare diseases or lower-cost follow-
on products?
Dr. Ippolito. Yes. So this is a very--this is a good
question. The composition of drugs--we don't just care about
how many drugs or how much money was spent on research. We care
about what we get out of it.
So we care about the composition of drugs and what kind of
treatments are we getting. And so one of the things that you do
need to think about is how are different drugs going to be
affected differently under this proposal.
And so one of the things that I would certainly emphasize
is that this price-setting arrangement would only apply to
single-source drugs--only apply to drugs that do not have
competition.
Drugs that are less likely to have competition tend to be
drugs with smaller market share--excuse me, market sizes. And
so if you are particularly concerned about rare diseases, that
is something that I would emphasize that it's--if you expect
it's going to be a longer time before you get that second
entrant, well, then you're going to be eligible for this rate
restriction for a very long time. So it may actually depress
the incentives there particularly.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you for your input.
Again, the Commerce Department found that the price
controls in foreign countries already suppress worldwide
private research and development investment by 11 to 16 percent
annually, leading to fewer new medicines launched each year.
Under this price-control plan--H.R. 3--would the U.S.
remain the leader in biomedical R&D? If not, which countries
would take the lead in biopharmaceutical research, in your
opinion?
Dr. Ippolito. So there's two things: There's where is this
kind of research and investment taking place, and then there is
which market is it aimed at.
So right now, there is a good and bad thing, which is that
we are the biggest market for pharmaceuticals in the world,
period. I believe IQVIA puts us at spending about the same
amount as the rest of the top 10 spending countries in total.
So we are likely going to still be a large spender in terms
of pharmaceuticals. But it is entirely possible, as we have
other large countries like China and India becoming wealthier
and so on, that they become more of the target markets for
these kinds of things, or perhaps the EU as their policies
evolve.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much.
And Madam Chair, under your leadership--your capable
leadership--you know, we've already proven it this year, early
this year, we can come up with a good bill and we can all agree
on it and, of course, it must pass the Senate. Otherwise, it's
not going to do any good.
So, you know, I hope that we make some progress and get
something out by the end of the year. So I really appreciate
your holding this hearing, and I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back. I share your wish,
and we'll work hard. This needs to be resolved for the American
people. Every single Member here knows that.
And now it's a pleasure to recognize the gentleman from
Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie, his 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much. It is great to be here,
and thanks to the chair for holding this hearing.
Getting on this subcommittee has been one of the blessings
of my time in Washington, DC. It's amazing. I had a person in
my office about 3 days ago or last week who was talking about
that they're on the verge of curing sickle cell anemia--that
they can actually reprogram a gene to go in and replace
through--not a transfusion but a bone marrow transplant in
sickle cell anemia, and just an artificial pancreas. We can
cure hepatitis C with a pill now. It used to be a liver
transplant. I mean, all the things that's coming out of the
United States, and it's both NIH and it's private research.
And I know one of my friends here was talking earlier about
NIH and our support for NIH. That's one thing people ask me in
town halls or things--well, can you all agree on anything in
DC. I say, ``Well, yes, the stuff you don't see on
television.'' There's a Cures bill with NIH. It's been
bipartisan. I think we can all look--not that we did it, but
hopefully we created a platform that very smart people focusing
on very strong diseases can move forward.
And at the beginning of this Congress, I met with the
ranking member of the O&I of this subcommittee--so Oversight
and Investigations--of this stuff within our jurisdiction, and
we wanted to make drug pricing our number-one issue. And we
talked about it and we said, well, you got really kind of three
buckets. One is the EpiPen situation, which Judiciary Committee
needs to handle. It is--I mean, all of us agree that that's bad
competition, and it should be handled that way.
The second one that we focused on was insulin. It's not a
blockbuster drug. It's been around for a hundred years at most,
but it's gone up from $100 to $300. We've had hearings. We've
tried to move forward on legislation with that. That stalled,
and it's kind of gone to this direction.
And the third thing I said, but as we focus on that, what
we don't want to do is get in the way of the precision medicine
that's coming forward.
Because when you look at--and it's simple for me, and it's
simple for a lot of people--when you talk about drug price and
we think of we are going to figure out what--make a tablet and
we'll make a million tablets and sell them. And so we want to
figure out what that price should be, and we can--that's what
we need to focus on.
But that's not exactly what's going on today in the
research world. It's making that pharmaceutical for that person
based on that genome.
And so, Dr. Ippolito, I am really concerned that, if we
pull the private research out of that, and even though we give
it to the National Institutes of Health, do you think the
National Institutes of Health alone is going to be a good
substitute for what's happening in our world today?
Dr. Ippolito. So I can only speak to sort of the current
iteration of NIH. I don't know what you might have in mind--if
you gave them a ton more money.
But, in general, it's worth thinking about kind of the role
that the NIH fills in this research and development process,
which is quite long.
The NIH really helps us overcome what is called the public
goods problem, namely, there are a bunch of things that are
really, really important for drug development and all sorts of
other----
Mr. Guthrie. Like mapping the genome.
Dr. Ippolito. Right, like mapping the genome----
Mr. Guthrie. The brain research that----
Dr. Ippolito [continuing]. Which you can't--you don't get
intellectual property protection. That's a fact about the human
body, you know.
And so what we worry about is, if we just left that up to
the private market, well, any given firm is going to be just
disincentivized to learn about these things because they can't
hold onto it. As soon as they learn it, anybody can try and
steal it from them and use it make their own drug.
So what we do is we give the NIH money to try and help us
overcome that public goods problem, namely, let's learn some
things about the human body, for example, and then let's let a
bunch of firms use that.
So it's the reason why hepatitis C we have a cure and
within a couple years the price came down from $90,000 to
$20,000 to cure hepatitis C. It's not because it went generic.
It's because we learned something about hepatitis C, and a
bunch of firms went after and tackled the same problem.
And so the NIH is an important part of the current R&D
investment infrastructure. It really helps us do something that
is hard to do without Government intervention.
But it's not really equipped to do the whole process. So
unless you have something really drastic in mind for changing
what the NIH does, then it seems like there's still half of
this puzzle that we still need to have a market for.
Mr. Guthrie. So, and I understand some of the things I
described are more procedures than pharmaceuticals. But
chemotherapy was a procedure. Now it's become a pharmaceutical.
So and it leads to--matter of fact, I am on a bill trying
to figure out how do we treat the oral tablet like a--like the
procedure because of the way the copays and things work for
people that are going through chemotherapy. And so I don't
think we can sell too much short. As we look at this, as we
look at price controls in healthcare and we are all here trying
to get the prices down and try to make them more marketable,
and one of the problems is we are the research arm for the
world. We pay for the research the world gets, and I know I've
got a statement here. There's a lady from England, Louise
Moorhouse, who has PKU. That has been part of a study, but now
the National Health Service isn't going to cover her. She went
through a study. She changed her life. Now she can't get the
study in England because of the limits of price controls in
their system.
So that's why, hopefully, a longer legislative process and
we need to do it--can't delay it. We got to do it--I mean, we
can't go on forever. But we need to try to solve the problems.
But if we don't do this right, we are going to have some
unintended consequences and hopefully not lose the miracle
research, a lot of it coming out of my good friend's district--
matter of fact, a lot of it coming right out of there, and it's
just fantastic. And you see it every day what's happening, and
I appreciate it.
And I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
It's a pleasure to recognize Mr. Flores from Texas for his
5 minutes of questions, and thank you for your patience.
Mr. Flores. Yes, ma'am. Thank you, Chairman, and thank the
panel for putting up with us. I mean, you have been here for an
incredibly long session. I would like to continue the
discussion that Mr. Gianforte and Mr. Bilirakis started about
what happens with our ability to continue being the most
innovative pharmaceutical market in the world.
Because under the Pelosi plan--it is the Pelosi plan, it's
not this committee's plan, it's the Pelosi plan--under that,
there is a provision to negotiate prices. I think some of us
maybe could find a way to get comfortable with negotiating
prices. But it's got to be done in a way that's fair. Not the
way the VA does where veterans don't have access to 48 percent
of the pharmaceuticals that the rest of the country has. Not in
an environment where you have a 65 percent to 95 percent excise
tax.
So, Dr. Ippolito, what would a 65--I think you have already
answered the question. A 65 to 95 percent excise tax would
drive innovation to other markets? Is that still your position?
Dr. Ippolito. Yes. I think there's no question. If the
penalty is 65 to 95 percent of your gross revenue, which is
going to be more than in the--once you get to 95 percent, it's
going to be more than all of your net revenue.
Mr. Flores. Right. So if you're--whether you're a large
pharmaceutical company or you're a couple of folks in a garage
that found a new way to treat a serious disease, and you have
gone to--you go either to your investment committee and the big
pharmaceutical company or you go to your venture capital or
private equity community as the small folks who are funding,
they're going to say, ``Yes, fine, we'll do it, but don't
develop the IP in the United States. Develop it somewhere
else.''
And I think that, if you look at the countries that really
made a focused effort to try to develop IP when it comes to
pharmaceuticals, it's China and India. And so that raises a
whole new issue.
I mean, would you support that thesis, that the IP is going
to be developed somewhere else?
Dr. Ippolito. So I guess I don't know as much about
literally the legal ramifications of where exactly it's
developed. But there's no question that, you know, you
emphasized the small biotechs. That's really where this kind of
uncertainty over pricing----
Mr. Flores. Exactly.
Dr. Ippolito [continuing]. And what is going to happen is
going to really be felt.
Mr. Flores. Because their funding source is going to demand
that they go somewhere else.
Dr. Ippolito. Their funding sources are quite mobile.
Mr. Flores. And as a person who used to be funded by
private equity, I know that they always go to the place that's
going to provide the least risk and the highest return.
And so, since we are talking about the fact that it could
wind up in China or India, let's talk about China and drug
safety there for a minute.
Eighty percent of the ingredients in U.S.-branded
pharmaceuticals come from China today because they've made an
overt effort to invest in this space and to drive U.S.
manufacturers out of business.
And so I've got several examples, two of which affect me
personally. The first example is Heparin, which doesn't affect
me personally, but we know that we had 81 deaths from that in
2007-2008.
Then a couple that affected me personally and for
hypertension, losartan, it was recalled because it had NMBA in
it, which is a carcinogen. And I think that one of the things
that that's used in is rocket fuel.
Then so the replacement drug was valsartan, and then it got
recalled later because it was contaminated with NDMA. And so,
if you think about the impact that we could--that bad policy on
pricing could have in terms of the safety of healthcare for
Americans, it's pretty profound.
So with that, Madam Chair, I would ask unanimous consent to
enter a few articles into the record.
The first is from the South China Morning Post dated July
18th of 2018. It says, ``Chinese blood pressure pills sold in
the U.S. recalled over cancer-linked ingredient.'' The next one
is August 14th, 2018, from NBC News, says ``FDA Recalls: A
Reminder that China Controls Much of the World's Drug Supply.''
And one of the lines in here about this says because they
are toxic to the DNA, you have to control them.
The next one is from WebMD dated November 19th, 2018, and
it talks about the challenges American drug companies have
because their sources--their drugs are coming from overseas.
Another one dated January 14th, 2019, from USA Today,
``Blood Pressure Drug Recall: FDA Investigates Foreign Plants
that Made Drugs with Cancer-Causing Impurities.''
Then the next one is from Bloomberg dated January 30th,
2019, said, ``How a Tainted Heart Drug Made in China Slipped
Past the FDA.''
The last one--excuse me, the next one is from NBC News
dated September 30th--excuse me, September 23rd, just a few
days ago--``FDA Explains Blood Pressure Drug Recall Again.''
And the last one is also dated the same day, September
23rd, 2019, from CBS News, ``More Blood Pressure Pills Recalled
Over Cancer-Causing Chemical.''
Everybody on this committee needs to know that we can't do
anything that drives innovation to another country like China
that could cause us to have a tainted drug supply or that, as
one of these articles talks about, pharmaceuticals from China
could be used as the next weapon against us if it's all
produced there.
Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back, and so ordered. All
of those articles will be made part of the record of our
hearing.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Eshoo. And too, just very briefly to the gentleman's
comments, I think that as we are examining this issue today, as
large as it is, as impactful, as important, as critical as it
is, I really think that our Health Subcommittee needs to do a
lot more work relative to America's drug supply.
We have shortages. We have tainted products. We have to
bring the FDA in. I think you all saw--I sent to you the op-ed
that Congressman Schiff and I did that the Washington Post had
published, and I think it's a national security issue as well.
So we are going to have a joint hearing on that. But our
subcommittee has a lot of work to do, and I am very pleased
that you brought those articles to place them in the record.
We appreciate it, Mr. Flores.
Mr. Flores. Madam Chair, if I may----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes. Sure.
Mr. Flores [continuing]. With your forbearance, thank you.
I look forward to that, and thank you for letting me waive on
today. I hope to waive on when we get into that particular
issue.
Ms. Eshoo. Wonderful.
Mr. Flores. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. You're always welcome here.
Now, to recognize not the last--what do they say, the first
shall be last? Last but not least.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Engel, for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Madam Chair. I have a statement I am
going to make, and I hope we can get to the questions at the
end. If not----
Ms. Eshoo. Why don't you--do you want to put your statement
in the record and ask your questions?
Mr. Engel. Well, I will----
Ms. Eshoo. So that you have time? Because you have waited
all day.
Mr. Engel. Let me--yes. Let me--let me----
Ms. Eshoo. Whatever you wish.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding
today's important hearing on proposals to--would allow the
Federal Government to negotiate drug prices and bring relief to
our constituents.
I am always shocked, and I was here at the beginning--and
disappointed to know that other countries pay far less for the
same medications than we do.
A recent study of 10 other high-income countries found
that, on average, they spend only 56 percent of what we pay for
the exact same drugs, and unlike our broken drug-pricing
system, these countries negotiate their drug prices.
So I am pleased to see that we are considering the Medicare
Prescription Drug Price Negotiation Act from Congressman Welch,
which would repeal the noninterference clause enacted by the
2003 Prescription Drug Improvement and Modernization Act.
This horrendous 2003 law, which I voted against, prevents
Medicare from using its purchasing power to lower the cost of
lifesaving drugs such as insulin, and Congressman Welch's bill
would go a long way in righting this wrong.
I want to also thank Speaker Pelosi and Chairman Pallone
for their leadership in crafting the Lower Prescription Drug
Costs Now Act, which I am pleased to cosponsor.
This comprehensive legislation delivers on our promise to
the American people to lower prescription drug prices by
allowing the Federal Government to negotiate, eliminating price
gouging and capping out-of-pocket costs.
I look forward to helping move this legislation to the
House floor, and while we work on these bills we should also
continue our work on legislation that addresses the other
factors of rising drug prices.
This past August, I introduced the REFUND Act, which would
protect Medicare beneficiaries from wasteful spending on
excessively large single-use drug vials. This commonsense
legislation would enable seniors and the Medicare program to
recoup money wasted on these oversized vials.
Earlier this month, Congressman Guthrie and I led 90 of our
House colleagues on a bipartisan letter to the FDA on drug
shortages, which can increase the cost of vital drugs in some
cases.
And last week, Congressman Larry Bucshon and I introduced
the bipartisan, bicameral Advancing Education in Biosimilars
Act. This legislation would create Federal programs to promote
the use of biosimilar drugs, which are generic versions of
high-priced biologics.
Our constituents are demanding action on high drug prices,
and I am honored to serve on this committee, where our
chairwoman, Anna Eshoo, does such a great job which is leading
the effort so far to fix the epidemic of price gouging.
So let me ask Mr. Anderson this. The 2003 Prescription Drug
Improvement Modernization Act created Medicare Part D. Again, I
voted against it, and it provides inadequate drug coverage for
seniors.
Currently, 60,000 of my constituents are enrolled in Part D
plans, and my constituents, especially those with chronic
conditions such as diabetes, frequently tell me that Part D
coverage is too expensive.
In 2019, seniors in my district will have to spend upwards
of $5,100 before they receive some relief from a so-called
catastrophic phase of the Part D benefit.
As we all know, many seniors have fixed incomes, with the
majority of seniors living with incomes below $26,200.
But, Dr. Anderson, you note in your written testimony that
Medicare Part D was designed on budget constraints instead of
sound insurance principles.
It's my understanding that H.R. 3 would reform this
benefit. So how would the Lower Drug Costs Now Act address
rising out-of-pocket costs for seniors with Medicare Part D
coverage in a district like mine?
Dr. Anderson. Well, in yours and probably everyone else's,
basically, Dr. Fowler has talked of how the fact that his drug
benefit was quite good when he was employed by the university
and not very good when he was employed and he's under Medicare.
And the reason is he didn't have to pay very much when he
was under the university. He has to pay a significant amount.
He says $12,000. You say $5,000 in your district, on average.
That's a huge amount of money for somebody who's on Social
Security and that's all their income. Five thousand dollars is
probably 2 months out of 12 of their total income.
They don't have that amount of money. So limiting it to
$2,000 is still a lot of money. It's probably 1 month of their
Social Security income. But it's way better than 2, 2 \1/2\
months of their Social Security income.
So I think this is a very important change.
Mr. Engel. Thank you.
Dr. Fowler, I know you have talked about the financial
hardships. Can you describe the financial hardships and
emotional toll that Revlimid's price increases have placed on
you and your family?
This drug costs four times more in the U.S. than the United
Kingdom. It's outrageous.
Dr. Fowler. So you're asking me about the--what the trauma
of dealing----
Mr. Engel. What an average family goes through with this.
Dr. Fowler. Excuse me?
Mr. Engel. What an average family that gets these costs
goes through.
Dr. Fowler. I am not sure I am understanding the question.
What would an average family--how would they have to face this?
What kind of challenges they would deal with?
I am not sure I am an average family so----
Mr. Engel. OK.
Dr. Fowler [continuing]. I am fortunate to have had good
coverage as an employed person, and I think we are going to be
OK on Medicare. But I am very nervous about it because the out-
of-pocket price under Medicare is so significant and that, on
top of the medical issues of facing my disease, altogether the
package is very daunting.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. I thank the gentleman.
And he--let's see, is Mr.--yes, Mr. Walberg of Michigan is
welcome to the subcommittee and recognized for 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate that and
appreciate the panel for being here. It's an important subject
that we ought to be dealing with and spending a lot of time on
dealing with it.
Mr. Ippolito, thank you for being here. You have made it
clear that the risk associated with bringing a drug to market
is rather large, and if you don't have a chance of getting your
investment back it's really going to discourage some of that.
Can you explain along that line that to lower costs in the
current prescription drug market we need more of what works--
competition and market innovation--and less of what doesn't,
meaning more bureaucracy and Washington interference?
Dr. Ippolito. Well, I think there's a number of ways to
lower drug prices and, indeed, there are a number of ways where
we can harness competition.
I think one of the things that I know this committee has
worked on but some others have, is we have a regulatory
framework for drugs. We give exclusivity, and then we have this
exclusivity period end. Then we have competition come in, and
we drive prices down.
And one of the things that I think a lot of folks have
mentioned in this discussion is that that might not be working
quite as well as it's designed to work.
And so one of the things that Congress can do is work to
make it so that patent thickets or so-called REMS abuse, which
is in the CREATES Act, and other sort of evergreening style
tactics aren't as successful at delaying the competition that
we are supposed to be getting after these exclusivity periods.
So I do think there are ways. Even if we just look at our
current framework, we can just focus on making it better as a
step one and then kind of go from there.
Mr. Walberg. OK. Take some of the impingements out of the
way.
It's my understanding as well that the industry provides a
source of funding for research at universities and academic
medical centers like those in my State, University of Michigan,
and other places, and that these collaborative efforts are
often focused on the Nation's most scientific and technological
health challenges.
Mr. Ippolito, what would be the impact of this plan on
universities and academic research centers?
Dr. Ippolito. Yes, there is no question. I mean, the
industry does--it's sort of funny. I think a lot of folks think
of there being this very hard wall between the pharmaceutical
industry and academic research and so on.
But there really isn't. They do fund and they do engage in
a lot of collaborative efforts. You know, a number of my--the
colleagues that I work with, when they were grad students or
post-docs, were funded by industry resources.
So there's no question that there's some benefit from that.
It's not the only source of the way that they fund research,
and it's not the only way that universities are funded, but
there's no question that there is positive benefit.
Mr. Walberg. But making it more difficult would make it
more difficult as well to fund programs that in fact helped
your colleagues?
Dr. Ippolito. Sure. Yes. No, I like them having jobs, so on
a personal level----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Walberg. And the impact that they had, going forward,
for the drugs as well.
Brand-name drugs pay numerous discounts and rebates across
many channels. Is it fair to contrast the pricing of drugs in a
single Federal program to that in a whole nation or basket of
nations?
And secondarily, would it not be more appropriate to
consider the aggregate cost to net price for a drug?
Mr. Ippolito?
Dr. Ippolito. Yes. So this gets at--this is kind of in the
weeds but, I mean, this is actually a really big deal when you
talk about drugs: What is the price?
That's a surprisingly hard question to answer, and yes, so
drugs, when they leave the factory they have a price, and it's
basically the list price and it's like the MSRP on an item of
clothing or a car.
The only problem is, it doesn't actually represent the
transaction price of almost anywhere in the supply chain,
except for sometimes a patient's out-of-pocket costs are based
on that number.
And so what you get is this extremely complicated pricing
environment. So in my written testimony I included just to show
in 2019, for example, branded drugs, the amount that the
manufacturer actually gets paid ranges anywhere from 5 percent
to 95 percent of the list price of the drug.
And so, when you think about trying to do this on an
international scale and understand what exactly they pay, I
think that's actually going to be extremely difficult--just
empirical challenge whether or not you think it's a great idea.
So I do urge some caution when you go down that route.
Mr. Walberg. OK. And finally, wouldn't an inflation penalty
as envisioned in H.R. 3 merely incentivize manufacturers to
charge high introductory prices?
Dr. Ippolito. Certainly if there's no restriction on the
launch price, there is no question that you would try to.
Manufacturers launch at a low price, try and get a lot of
market share, and then they increase their price over time.
To the extent that you are not allowed to increase your
price over time, of course, there's going to be attention to
try and retilt the pricing schedule--that is, increase your
launch price. Exactly how much they're going to do that is up
for debate. But I don't think the direction there is any
debate.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back. It's called whack-a-
mole.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Eshoo. I remember that word.
Now, I am pleased to recognize the gentleman from Ohio, and
he really is a gentleman, Mr. Latta, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Madam Chairman, and I
want to thank you very much for allowing me to waive on to
today's very important subcommittee's hearing. I really
appreciate it.
And I also want to thank our witnesses for being with us
today.
This is an issue all about the patient. It's about my
constituent who is seeking a lifesaving medication or picking
up a blood pressure prescription at the local pharmacy.
I want to see prescription drug prices go down just as much
as the rest of America, and I've repeatedly voted for measures
that aim to do just that.
However, H.R. 3 isn't that answer. Under the Pelosi plan,
you know, this went against the bipartisan nature of this
committee, which has a history of working together and
delivering solutions.
I encourage the same partnership to help our constituents
by focusing on bipartisan legislation that will reduce drug
costs in patients and ensure patient access to current and
future medical treatments.
If I could start with you, Mr. Ippolito. In 2018, the FDA
approved an advanced medicine for treating migraines, saying it
gave patients a novel option for reducing the number of days
with migraine for this painful and also debilitating condition.
Yet, more than a year later, this treatment still is not
available in three of the countries that are referenced in H.R.
3, being Australia, France, and Japan.
And could you explain why this might be the case? And, you
know, just talking about migraines, when I was a kid I had
migraines. And so I understand what people go through. Back
when I was a kid you just--you didn't have anything--you know,
you just hoped--take an aspirin, that was it.
However, I met someone--it hasn't been too long ago, that
has a persistent migraine 24 hours a day. So I am not sure how
the person functions, because I know what a migraine is.
But could you explain why, when you look at Australia,
France and Japan, why this might be the case that these would
not be available in those three countries?
Dr. Ippolito. Sure. I don't know the exact reason for the
specific drug that you're talking about, but there are a couple
candidates.
So the first is that at least some of the referenced
countries that we are talking about use various forms of
negotiations, cost effectiveness analysis or what have you.
That takes time. That is, they need to make a decision
about whether a drug is worth covering or not. That doesn't
happen instantaneously. And so it is often the case that the
United States tends to be on the leading edge of getting access
to medicine relative to some of our international peers.
The second is that, even after they go through that
process, they still have to make a decision about whether or
not they're going to offer that drug to be covered under the
health plan.
And so the answer could be it's in delay or the answer
could be that they concluded their analysis and decided that
it's just not worth covering.
Mr. Latta. Let me just follow up with that because, again,
I think that's an important point.
If they're not going to cover that drug, what is a person's
option then? You know, let's just say it's a lifesaving--not
just maybe a migraine-type medication but maybe a lifesaving
cancer treatment drug. What's a person's--you know, in one of
those countries that will not be covered, what's their option?
Dr. Ippolito. Well, so I suspect it would depend a little
bit on the country. But often the way this works is you would
get denied initially or not recommended for coverage, and then
you could go back effectively to the negotiating table and they
say, we'll accept it if you lower the price, and go through
some prolonged negotiation.
You know, these are the kind of, even--I don't want to
assign sort of a normative value to any of this--these are the
hard decisions.
If you're going to centralize these decisions, somebody has
got to care about costs. Either you have to incentivize low
cost or somebody has to draw a line somewhere, and these are
the kind of hard decisions that you do have to make if you have
it so that it's centralized where, you know, say, it's the
National Health Service in the U.K., making a decision about
what is and what isn't covered.
Now, the question and what's a little bit different about
H.R. 3 on this point is that it's--in theory we are saying that
everything is going to be covered, but we are going to come
with this, you know, negotiation that, you know, we'll either
take your intellectual property or--not in H.R. 3--we'll take
all your revenue if you don't accept it.
It seems to me that that wouldn't be as much of an issue in
H.R. 3. In H.R. 3, I would worry more about not the stuff that
already exists. I would worry about that next wave of stuff
that doesn't exist yet. That would be the real concern for me.
Mr. Latta. In my last half minute, let me ask another real
quick question, if I may.
Isn't it true that beneficiaries still pay coinsurance on
Part B drugs based on the ASP plus 6 percent, so an inflation
cap does nothing to reduce beneficiary costs?
Dr. Ippolito. That's a good question. I do need to--so the
way this interacts with Part B I do need to go back and
revisit, because basically the ASP calculation is a calculation
of the average sales price to a whole bunch of payors. And then
you have a plus 6.
And so it depends whether or not that is really going to
include this new mandated price from HHS or not and how that
gets folded in.
And so I have to plead a little bit of ignorance on the
exact answer.
Mr. Latta. Madam Chair, I see my time has expired, and
thank you again for letting me waive on.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman waives back. You're always welcome
here at our subcommittee.
And, yes, I would like to ask for unanimous consent to
place the following in the record--the documents for the
record: the statement of support from AARP, statement of
support from the AFL-CIO, a statement of support from AFSCME,
statement of support from the American Hospital Association,
statement of support from America's Health Insurance Plans,
sometimes known as AHIP, a statement of support from Families
USA, statement of support from Patients for Affordable Drugs
Now, statement of support from the Pacific Business Group on
Health, statement of support from the Alliance for Retired
Americans, a statement of support from the California Medical
Association, letter of support from the American Medical
Association, a letter of support from the United Auto Workers,
a letter from 340B Health, statement from the National
Association of Chain Drug Stores. We'll have to tell our
colleague Mr. Carter that.
A letter from the National Association of Specialty
Pharmacy, a letter from the American Society of Health-System
Pharmacists, a letter from the National Grange, a statement
from the Americans for Tax Reform, a statement from the
Partnership to Improve Patient Care, a statement from
RetireSafe, a statement from Academy of Physicians and Clinical
Research, a statement from the Council for Affordable Health
Coverage, and a letter from Chairman Elijah Cummings.
So these--hearing no dissent, those will be placed in the
record. And how do you want me to do this, Doctor? Do want me
to take it?
So ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Walden. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank
you, Dr. Burgess, and I appreciate the courtesy.
I just wanted to follow up on earlier comments and thank
the chairwoman for hers, and I know she's genuine in this
because we've worked together on a lot of things, her openness
to working with us, and we will set up that appointment ASAP to
see where we can find common ground.
And your comments at the beginning of the hearing about
regular order and the importance of it, including the markup in
subcommittee, which I hope will be fulfilled because I think
that's--I am telling you, we are all in agreement. This is a
huge issue we need to address.
We have some differences of opinion on how to get there. We
have them at the witness table. We've been blessed with three
really bright, capable people. They don't even agree.
And so we want to get it right, Madam Chair. So thanks for
agreeing to the subcommittee markup. Thanks for also agreeing
to make sure we get the answers to the questions that we pose
back before we have to begin voting, and I do hope we can go
through a real regular order on this and get to a positive
conclusion for consumers out there.
And I hope as we are getting this bill evaluated as well,
Madam Chair, that we would get more than just the number for
savings to the taxpayers from CBO, but also I think we are all
committed--what's it mean for the patient? What's it mean for
the mom that's going up the counter? What's it mean to the dad
who's going up to the drug counter? Are they going to see
savings out of pocket? Because I think that's also our ultimate
goal as we reform the modernized Medicare Part D.
So, with that, Madam Chair, thanks for you indulgence, and
look forward to working with you again, and I will yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. I thank the gentleman, my friend.
And I will do my utmost so that we have a process here that
is a solid one, the way it should be done. That doesn't mean
that everyone is going to agree with everyone. We may just end
up having some differences, and we need to respect that with
one another.
But in coming out of the gate, I have--I am more than
comfortable making these commitments because I think that
regular order is exactly what it is. There should be a
regularity to it and that we move in a way where we are
respectful of one another.
H.R. 3 is written for patients. It's written for patients.
And I think it was Mr. Sarbanes said, you know, when you count
the number of members of the committee, each one of us
representing 750,000 people, they all care about this.
So we have our work cut out for us. I can--I see where the
different fissures are, and--but that doesn't mean that we
can't stretch ourselves to see if we can come together on--
because we all care about it.
So with that, I don't have anything else to add to the
record. You have already inserted your records, and all of our
thanks to the three of you. You have been here for a long time.
10:30, let's see, 11, that's a long time. Three, 4, 4 \1/2\
hours.
But know that your testimony has mattered to Members. I
think there have really been probing, excellent questions from
all of my colleagues on the subcommittee.
And I think that you have helped us to understand things in
a broader, deeper way today.
So Dr. Fowler, our thanks to you. Stay healthy. We want to
bring down your copay. Twelve thousand five hundred is too
much.
Dr. Ippolito, you don't look old enough to come and testify
here. But thank you for it, and while I don't agree with some
of the takes of your testimony, I think you have presented
yourself in a very nonmenacing way, and I think that's very
pleasant. I am going to remember you for that.
Dr. Anderson, thank you for your forthright--and your
wonderful necktie. To everyone that stayed in the hearing room,
thank you.
This subcommittee meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:55 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
