- PROTECTING AND SECURING CHEMICAL FACILITIES FROM TERRORIST ATTACKS

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROTECTING AND SECURING CHEMICAL FACILITIES FROM TERRORIST ATTACKS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 11, 2019

__________

Serial No. 116-59

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-311 PDF           WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              GREG WALDEN, Oregon
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York             FRED UPTON, Michigan
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           PETE OLSON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California           DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico            H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PAUL TONKO, New York                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York, Vice     BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chair                            BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa                 LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts                    MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California            RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California                TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DARREN SOTO, Florida
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
------

Professional Staff

JEFFREY C. CARROLL, Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Deputy Staff Director
MIKE BLOOMQUIST, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change

PAUL TONKO, New York
Chairman
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York           JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
SCOTT H. PETERS, California            Ranking Member
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California    CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware       BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
DARREN SOTO, Florida                 BILLY LONG, Missouri
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              BILL FLORES, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
JERRY McNERNEY, California           JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California, Vice Chair    GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, prepared statement.....................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    10

Witnesses

David Wulf, Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for Infrastructure
Protection, Department of Homeland Security....................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Answers to submitted questions...............................   147
John Paul Smith, Legislative Representative, United Steelworkers    47
Prepared statement...........................................    50
Michele L. Roberts, National Co-Coordinator, Environmental
Justice Health Alliance........................................    58
Prepared statement...........................................    60
Scott Whelchel, Chief Security Officer and Global Director of
Emergency Services and Security for Dow........................    63
Prepared statement...........................................    65
Answers to submitted questions...............................   149
Matthew Fridley, Corporate Manager of Safety, Health, and
Security, Brenntag North America, Inc..........................    70
Prepared statement...........................................    73
Answers to submitted questions...............................   155

Submitted Material

H.R. 3256 the Protecting and Securing Chemical Facilities from
Terrorist Attacks Act of 2019..................................    94
Letter of August 23, 2019, from The Chemical Facilities Anti-
Terrorism Standards Coalition, to Mr. Pallone and Mr. Walden,
submitted by Mr. Tonko.........................................   131
Letter of September 11, 2019, from Ross Eisenberg, Vice
President, Energy and Resources Policy, the National
Association of Manufacturers, to Mr. Tonko and Mr. Shimkus,
submitted by Mr. Tonko.........................................   137
Statement of September 10, 2019, from Timothy R. Gablehouse,
Past-President/Director Government Affairs, the National
Association of SARA Title III Program Officials, submitted by
Mr. Tonko......................................................   141
Letter from Chris Jahn, President and CEO, The Fertilizer
Institute and Darrin Coppock, President and CEO, The
Agricultural Retailers Association, to Mr. Tonko and Mr.
Shimkus, submitted by Mr. Tonko................................   144

PROTECTING AND SECURING CHEMICAL FACILITIES FROM TERRORIST ATTACKS

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 11, 2019

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Paul Tonko (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Tonko, Clarke, Peters, Barragan,
Blunt Rochester, Soto, DeGette, Schakowsky, Matsui, McNerney,
Ruiz, Dingell, Pallone (ex officio), Shimkus (subcommittee
ranking member), Rodgers, McKinley, Johnson, Long, Flores,
Mullin, Carter, Duncan, and Walden (ex officio).
Staff present: Jacqueline Cohen, Chief Environment Counsel;
Adam Fischer, Policy Analyst; Rick Kessler, Senior Advisor and
Staff Director, Energy and Environment; Brendan Larkin, Policy
Coordinator; Mel Peffers, Environment Fellow; Anthony
Gutierrez, Professional Staff Member; Jerry Couri, Minority
Deputy Chief Counsel, Environment and Climate Change; Peter
Kielty, Minority General Counsel; Mary Martin, Minority Chief
Counsel, Energy and Environment and Climate Change; Brandon
Mooney, Minority Deputy Chief Counsel, Energy; and Brannon
Rains, Minority Legislative Clerk.
Mr. Tonko. The Subcommittee on Environment and Climate
Change will now come to order.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

I recognize myself for 5 minutes for the purposes of an
opening statement.
The events of September 11th transformed how we think about
what it means to be safe in our communities. America responded
with a national mobilization to confront the threat of future
attacks, including the establishment of programs like the one
we will consider here today.
We learned a hard lesson that we must always be vigilant
and acknowledge that our federal government, including this
Committee, plays a critical role in safeguarding the health and
safety of the people working in, living near, and responding to
incidents at our Nation's high-risk chemical facilities.
Thank you to our colleagues on the Homeland Security
Committee for starting this process. Mr. Richmond and Chairman
Thompson's bill, H.R. 3256, the Protecting and Securing
Chemical Facilities from Terrorist Attacks Act of 2019, is the
basis for today's legislative hearing.
Since 2007, chemical facilities have been regulated to
address risks under the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism
Standards, or CFATS, program that has been implemented by the
Department of Homeland Security.
CFATS is an important part of our Nation's counterterrorism
efforts to secure high-risk chemical facilities. Under CFATS,
around 3,300 manufacturing, handling, and storage facilities
must implement risk-based performance standards in some 18
areas.
The program received its first multiyear extension in 2014.
And in January of this year, Congress acted to extend the
program through April of 2020 and prevent a potentially
dangerous lapse.
It is my hope that this committee will once again find
bipartisan agreement on a multiyear CFATS extension that can be
supported by the leadership of both House committees of
jurisdiction from both sides of the aisle.
Everyone here understands the importance of a multiyear
extension, which would give the program a final measure of
certainty and stability, but as Congress considers the CFATS
reauthorization, we cannot afford to overlook this opportunity
to reinforce what is working well and address what could be
improved.
Today, I expect to hear that this program generally enjoys
support from chemical manufacturers, distributors, and workers
at these sites. But there remain numerous ways in which it
could be strengthened. I am open to hearing suggestions,
especially those that help ensure workers in local communities
are being consulted and participating appropriately in the
program and receiving the information they need to stay safe.
I also want to hear from our witnesses how the program can
greater incentivize risk reduction, not just risk management.
Risk reduction is ultimately the best way to ensure the
protection of workers in frontline communities.
With that said, I am skeptical of any change that would
create new security gaps by allowing for additional exemptions
to the program. We need, instead, to be looking more
holistically at the threats facing these facilities. Without
question, they are evolving, and not just from terrorism and
malicious acts. When it comes to protecting workers, first
responders in surrounding communities, safety and resilience
are as important as security.
Chemical fires, explosions, and releases can have serious
consequences, regardless of whether an incident was an
accident, a natural disaster, or an act of terrorism. We saw in
the aftermath of Hurricane Harvey in Texas that extreme weather
can be just as big a threat as more traditional security
concerns.
The people working at these facilities and living in nearby
communities should be able to expect the same measure of
protection and risk mitigation. And I hope the appropriate
agencies will work to ensure the development of industry
guidance to help facilities assess their risks from extreme
weather.
September 11, 2001, forever changed how our Nation thinks
about security. We have achieved much in the 18 years since,
but we cannot rest on our heels or become stagnant in our
thinking. Threats to chemical facilities continue to evolve,
from cybersecurity to extreme weather events. And the programs
that guarantee the safety of workers, first responders, and
frontline communities must also evolve to meet these threats.
Thank you to Mr. Wulf for appearing before the subcommittee
once again, and I also welcome our witnesses on the second
panel.
With that, I look forward to today's discussion, and I
yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonko follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Paul Tonko

The events of September 11th transformed how we think about
what it means to be safe in our communities.
America responded with a national mobilization to confront
the threat of future attacks, including the establishment of
programs like the one we will consider today. We learned a hard
lesson that we must always be vigilant, and acknowledge that
our federal government--including this Committee--plays a
critical role in safeguarding the health and safety of the
people working in, living near, and responding to incidents at
our nation's high-risk chemical facilities.
Thank you to our colleagues on the Homeland Security
Committee for starting this process. Mr. Richmond and Chairman
Thompson's bill, H.R. 3256, the Protecting and Securing
Chemical Facilities from Terrorist Attacks Act of 2019, is the
basis for today's legislative hearing.
Since 2007, chemical facilities have been regulated to
address risks under the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism
Standards, or CFATS program implemented by the Department of
Homeland Security.
CFATS is an important part of our nation's counterterrorism
efforts to secure high-risk chemical facilities.
Under CFATS, around 3,300 manufacturing, handling, and
storage facilities must implement risk-based performance
standards in 18 areas.
The program received its first multi-year extension in
2014, and in January of this year, Congress acted to extend the
program through April 2020 and prevent a potentially dangerous
lapse.
It is my hope that this Committee will once again find
bipartisan agreement on a multi-year CFATS extension that can
be supported by the leadership on both House committees of
jurisdiction from both sides of the aisle.
Everyone here understands the importance of a multi-year
extension, which would give the program a vital measure of
certainty and stability.
But as Congress considers a CFATS reauthorization, we
cannot afford to overlook this opportunity to reinforce what is
working well and address what could be improved.
Today I expect to hear that this program generally enjoys
support from chemical manufacturers, distributors, and workers
at these sites, but there remain numerous ways in which it
could be strengthened.
I am open to hearing suggestions, especially those that
help ensure workers and local communities are being consulted
and participating appropriately in the program and receiving
the information they need to stay safe.
I also want to hear from our witnesses how the program can
greater incentivize risk reduction, not just risk management.
Risk reduction is ultimately the best way to ensure the
protection of workers and frontline communities.
With that said, I am skeptical of any change that would
create new security gaps by allowing for additional exemptions
to the program.
We need instead to be looking more holistically at the
threats facing these facilities. Without question, they are
evolving, and not just from terrorism and malicious acts.
When it comes to protecting workers, first responders, and
surrounding communities, safety and resilience are as important
as security.
Chemical fires, explosions, and releases can have serious
consequences regardless of whether an incident was an accident,
a natural disaster, or an act of terrorism.
We saw in the aftermath of Hurricane Harvey in Texas that
extreme weather can be just as big a threat as more traditional
security concerns.
The people working at these facilities and living in nearby
communities should be able to expect the same measure of
protection and risk mitigation.
And I hope the appropriate agencies will work to ensure the
development of industry guidance to help facilities assess
their risks from extreme weather.
September 11, 2001 forever changed how our nation thinks
about security.
We have achieved much in the 18 years since, but we cannot
rest on our heels or become stagnant in our thinking.
Threats to chemical facilities continue to evolve--from
cybersecurity to extreme weather events--and the programs that
guarantee the safety of workers, first responders, and
frontline communities must also evolve to meet these threats.
Thank you to Mr. Wulf for appearing before the Subcommittee
once again, and I also welcome our witnesses on the second
panel. I look forward to today's discussion, and I yield back.

The Chair now recognizes the ranker of the subcommittee,
Representative Shimkus of Illinois.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the time.
Today, the subcommittee will not only check in on the
progress of the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
program, commonly known as CFATS, at the Department of Homeland
Security but also review legislation introduced to both save
the program's authority from expiring as well as make
significant changes to the program.
The CFATS program, which Congress first authorized in the
fall of 2006, was a continuation of congressional efforts since
the terror attacks that occurred 18 years ago today. This law,
then referred to as Section 550, surgically and directly
addressed gaps in Federal law regarding terrorism and other
intentional acts against high-risk facilities due to their use
or possession of chemicals of concern at levels of concern.
The core of this new security-focused law was a process
where DHS issued risk-based performance standards that required
vulnerability assessments and site security plans by covered
facilities. Most importantly, to avoid overlapping with other
Federal programs, CFATS was designed to foster collaboration
between government and regulated parties.
Unfortunately, the early years of CFATS program
implementation were marked with several growing pains, some
more hurtful than others. No one knows that more than our
witness from the Department of Homeland Security, David Wulf. I
said last June that his commitment and longevity with the
program make him the Cal Ripken of CFATS, and I think others
would agree with me.
Last June, we learned that Mr. Wulf not only set many
remedial goals to address the issues he and the Government
Accountability Office found in the CFATS program, under his
watch tremendous progress has been made towards correcting
those programs, reinvigorating morale, improving communication,
and reviving the confidence in the CFATS program.
My congratulations to you.
I think today CFATS has earned an extension of this program
authority. That is great, but Congress needs to ensure the
CFATS program is a success, because it is a success, and not
just because of the leadership of one or two people. After Cal
Ripken retired, his team took ten years to recover to a
competitive position. Given that stopping terrorism is CFATS'
job, we should not assume stability after so much change to
correct this program's problems.
That is why I don't believe that CFATS needs to expand its
mission. I am concerned by provisions in H.R. 3256 that either
provide DHS authority to offer CFATS to unregulated facilities
or require study of those facilities exempted from CFATS
facilities--exempted because Congress gave them their own anti-
terrorism programs for their unique circumstances.
I am also concerned about the precedent for layering
specific requirements onto site security plan approval, no
matter how well-meaning, when meeting the risk-based
performance standards already accomplishes those requirements.
A third thing that bothers me in this legislation is the
redefinition of ``risk'' for the CFATS program and the
directive to deploy that new definition. The existing
definition of ``risk'' for CFATS--vulnerability, threat,
consequence--is based on GAO recommendations and the National
Infrastructure Protection Program.
One of the biggest problems DHS had to rectify is that the
CFATS program used an incomplete definition of ``risk'' that
discounted vulnerability and placed more facilities into the
program and at higher-risk categories. DHS spent years undoing
this mess, but the legislation acts as if the mistakes were
correcting the risk formula to make it more consistent.
More significantly, I am concerned that this legislation
rolls back essential protection and vulnerability information
that would create a roadmap for terrorists. There are multiple
Federal laws that require disclosure of information to the
public and first responders for any number of reasons. The
difference between this bill and those laws is that CFATS
information is not focused on pollution or accidents, but how a
high-risk chemical is being protected from theft or intentional
detonation. First responders and local officials already have
access to this information if they have a need to know and are
trained in handling it. Making this information public will
cause material, physical, and economic harm to these facilities
and their communities.
My misgivings aside, I look forward to receiving language
from you, Mr. Chairman, and meaningfully working with my
colleagues to a good place where we can support this bill when
it gets marked up.
I want to thank our witnesses for being with us today, and
I look forward to the meaningful dialogue with them.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. John Shimkus

Thank you, Mr. Chairman for yielding me this time.
Today, the Subcommittee will not only check in on the
progress of the Chemical Facilities Anti-Terrorism Standards
Program at the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), but also
review legislation introduced to both save the program's
authority from expiring as well as make significant changes to
the program.
The CFATS program, which Congress first authorized in the
fall 2006, was a continuation of congressional efforts since
the terror attacks that occurred eighteen years ago today. This
law--then referred to as section 550--surgically and directly
address gaps in Federal law regarding terrorism or other
intentional acts against high-risk facilities due to their use
or possession of chemicals of concern at levels of concern. The
core of this new security-focused law was a process where DHS
issued risk-based performance standards that required
vulnerability assessments and site security plans by covered
facilities. Most importantly, to avoid overlapping with other
Federal programs, CFATS was designed to foster collaboration
between the government and regulated parties.
Unfortunately, the early years of CFATS program
implementation were marked with several growing pains, some
more hurtful than others. No one knows that more that our
witness from the Department of Homeland Security, David Wulf. I
said last June that his commitment and longevity with the
program make him the Cal Ripken of CFATS--and I think others
would agree with me.
Last June, we learned that Mr. Wulf not only set many
remedial goals to address issues he and the Government
Accountability Office found in the CFATS program; under his
watch, tremendous progress was made towards correcting those
problems, reinvigorating morale, improving communication, and
reviving confidence in the CFATS program. I think today's CFATS
has earned an extension of its program authority.
That's great, but Congress needs to ensure that the CFATS
program is a success because it is a success and not just
because of the leadership of one or two people--after Mr.
Ripken retired, his team took ten years to recover to a
competitive position. Given that stopping terrorism is CFATS's
job, we should not assume stability after so much change to
correct this program's problems.
This is why I don't believe that CFATS needs to expand its
mission. I am concerned by provisions in H.R. 3256 that either
provide DHS authority to offer CFATS to unregulated facilities
or require study of those facilities exempted from CFATS--
facilities exempted because Congress gave them their own anti-
terror programs for their unique circumstances.
I am also concerned about the precedent of layering
specific requirements onto site security plan approval, no
matter how well-meaning, when meeting the Risk Based
Performance Standards already accomplishes those requirements.
A third thing that bothers me in the legislation is the
redefinition of ``risk" for the CFATS program and the directive
to deploy that new definition. The existing definition of risk
for CFATS--vulnerability, threat, consequence--is based on GAO
recommendations and the National Infrastructure Protection
Program. One of the biggest problems DHS had to rectify is that
the CFATS program used an incomplete definition of risk that
discounted vulnerability and placed more facilities into the
program and at higher risk categories. DHS spent years undoing
this mess, but the legislation acts as if the mistake was
correcting the risk formula to make it more consistent.
Most significantly, I am quite concerned that this
legislation rolls back essential protection of vulnerability
information that would create a road map for terrorists. There
are multiple Federal laws that require disclosure of
information to the public and first responders for any number
of reasons. The difference between this bill and those laws is
that CFATS information is NOT focused on pollution or
accidents, but how a high-risk chemical is being protected from
theft or intentional detonation. First responders and local
officials already have access to this information if they have
a need to know and are trained in handling it. Making this
information public will cause material physical and economic
harm to these facilities and their communities.
My misgivings aside, I look forward to receiving language
from you, Mr. Chairman, and meaningfully working with my
colleagues to a good place where we can all support this bill
when it gets marked up.
I want to thank our witnesses for being with us today and I
look forward to a meaningful dialogue with them.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.

Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Pallone, chairman
of the full committee, for 5 minutes for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Tonko.
Today, on the 18th anniversary of the September 11th
terrorist attacks, we are here to discuss important security
legislation that could help prevent another attack.
We will never forget 9/11 and its longstanding impacts on
families, first responders, and our Nation as a whole. The
lessons we learned in the days and years after 9/11 should
inform our efforts to strengthen the Chemical Facility Anti-
Terrorism Standards program, otherwise known as CFATS. And this
program provides critical national security protections by
requiring chemical facilities that are high-risk terrorist
targets to assess and address their vulnerabilities.
High-risk chemical facilities hold large stores of
industrial chemicals that pose a safety and security risk to
the American people if they are released or detonated. A recent
report found that more than 134 million Americans live in the
vulnerability zones around chemical facilities. That is more
than one-third of Americans. And the communities most at risk
are disproportionately low-income communities and communities
of color.
And, unfortunately, the threats to these facilities are
only increasing as climate change makes extreme weather more
and more common, and CFATS-regulated facilities have been
impacted by hurricanes, floods, and wildfires, putting us all
at risk.
So I have been an advocate for increased safety and
security at our Nation's chemical facilities for many years,
well before the CFATS program was established in 2006. My home
State of New Jersey, which has a high population density, also
has a large number of chemical facilities, so the consequences
of lax security could be devastating there. And that is why New
Jersey led the way on chemical plant security, adopting
requirements for the assessment of so-called inherently safer
technology and adopting mandatory security standards before the
Federal program was in place.
Earlier this year, the CFATS program came close to lapsing.
Despite the importance of the program and support on both sides
of the aisle, the authorization came within ten days of
expiring during the Trump government shutdown. A bill in the
Senate also sought to seriously weaken the program with
changes, including an ill-advised exemption for explosives.
Fortunately, Ranking Member Walden and I were able to work
with our colleagues on the Homeland Security Committee to
extend the program through April of 2020 without these
misguided changes. So now we have the opportunity to strengthen
and improve the program, and I look forward to continuing to
work in a bipartisan fashion to move the legislation forward
again.
It is critical that we get this done. Three major chemical
incidents this year--one in Crosby, Texas, another in La Porte,
Texas, and a third in south Philadelphia--underscore the need
to do more.
H.R. 3256, the Protecting and Securing Chemical Facilities
from Terrorist Attacks Act of 2019, would extend the
authorization for this important program and make some welcome
improvements.
The bill would strengthen the role of workers at covered
facilities and improve reporting to Congress. It would require
the Department of Homeland Security to verify information
submitted by a covered facility before using it to lower that
facility's risk tier. And it would eliminate the worrisome
Expedited Approval Program.
So I look forward to hearing from the stakeholders today
about these and other improvements that can be made to the
program. And I hope we can continue to work together to ensure
the security of these facilities and protect the surrounding
communities.
I don't think anyone wants the time, so I will yield back,
Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Today, on the 18th anniversary of the September 11th
terrorist attacks, we are here to discuss important security
legislation that could help prevent another attack. We will
never forget 9/11, and its longstanding impacts on families,
first responders, and our nation as a whole. The lessons we
learned in the days and years after 9/11 should inform our
efforts to strengthen the Chemical Facility Antiterrorism
Standards program, otherwise known as CFATS. This program
provides critical national security protections by requiring
chemical facilities that are high risk terrorist targets to
assess and address their vulnerabilities.
High risk chemical facilities hold large stores of
industrial chemicals that pose a safety and security risk to
the American people if they are released or detonated. A recent
report found that more than 134 million Americans live in the
vulnerability zones around chemical facilities--that's more
than one-third of Americans. The communities most at risk are
disproportionately low-income communities and communities of
color.
And, unfortunately, the threats to these facilities are
only increasing as climate change makes extreme weather more
and more common. CFATS regulated facilities have been impacted
by hurricanes, floods, and wildfires, putting us all at risk.
I have been an advocate for increased safety and security
at our nation's chemical facilities for many years, well before
the CFATS program was established in 2006. My home state of New
Jersey, which has a high population density, also has a large
number of chemical facilities, so the consequences of lax
security could be devastating. And that's why New Jersey led
the way on chemical plant security, adopting requirements for
the assessment of so-called ``Inherently Safer Technology" and
adopting mandatory security standards before the Federal
program was in place.
Earlier this year, the CFATS program came close to lapsing.
Despite the importance of the program and support on both sides
of the aisle, the authorization came within ten days of
expiring during Trump's government shutdown.
A bill in the Senate also sought to seriously weaken the
program, with changes including an ill-advised exemption for
explosives. Fortunately, Ranking Member Walden and I were able
to work with our colleagues on the Homeland Security Committee
to extend the program through April of 2020 without these
misguided changes.
Now, we have the opportunity to strengthen and improve the
program, and I look forward to continuing to work in a
bipartisan fashion to move legislation forward again. It's
critical that we get this done. And three major chemical
incidents this year--one in Crosby, Texas, another in LaPorte,
Texas and a third in South Philadelphia, Pennsylvania--
underscore the need to do more.
H.R. 3256, the ``Protecting and Securing Chemical
Facilities from Terrorist Attacks Act of 2019'' would extend
the authorization for this important program and make some
welcome improvements. The bill would strengthen the role of
workers at covered facilities and improve reporting to
Congress. It would require the Department of Homeland Security
to verify information submitted by a covered facility before
using it to lower that facilities risk tier. And it would
eliminate the worrisome Expedited Approval Program.
I look forward to hearing from the stakeholders today about
these and other improvements that can be made in the program. I
hope we can continue to work together to ensure the security of
these facilities and protect the surrounding communities.

Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Walden, the ranking
member of the full committee, for 5 minutes for his opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this really important hearing and your dedication to
this issue.
And I want to thank my colleague, the chairman of the full
committee, for the work we did last Congress and the work that
we are going to do in a bipartisan way this Congress. So thank
you for that.
On this day of 9/11, we should also remember our freedom is
never free and never can be taken for granted. And that is kind
of--that event led us to this bill.
I remember being at a table much like this one--it was
older and scratched up, because they have remodeled the
building, but--after 9/11 when we had one of those discussions.
And I remember we were talking about community right to know
and how everything was posted on Web sites about where all the
worst things were so your first responders would know, and then
we realized that was a roadmap for the terrorists. And
everything changed on that day and the way we approach these
issues and how to protect and secure. And I will never forget
some of those discussions about how things have changed.
So we know CFATS was then created after that terrorist
attack on 9/11. And at that time, Congress examined Federal
authority to address theft and diversion and terrorism at
chemical facilities and found the existing accident prevention
and process safety laws were insufficient and inappropriate to
tackle these concerns.
Congress decided a separate and distinct body of law and
requirements were needed to secure these facilities and that,
leaving the Clean Air Act to address general safety and
accident concerns that might affect air quality, Congress used
CFATS to fill the legal gaps for addressing those intentional
acts that compromise the security of this critical
infrastructure sector.
So CFATS was not intended to be your garden-variety
regulatory program. CFATS not only covers huge chemical and
petrochemical complexes but also racetracks and, importantly in
our region, with my friend from Washington, wineries and
breweries, universities and colleges, and hospitals and other
healthcare providers.
Due to the scope of the program and the fact that each
facility faces different security challenges and to avoid
overlapping with other Federal programs, CFATS was designed to
foster collaboration between the government and the regulated
parties. And this collaboration and compliance leads to
facilities that are actually more secure. So it is a
partnership.
I mentioned at the start of our hearing last fall that the
CFATS program had to overcome some tough years. Our
subcommittee received testimony that day from the Government
Accountability Office and other stakeholders that the
Department spent four years correcting the program, including
updating its application of the Department risk criteria, the
decisions under CFATS.
CFATS must provide value to taxpayers, the Federal
Government, and the facilities that could fall victim to
intentional attacks. And to do that, I believe the program
improvements must be sustainable and they must be reliable. For
this reason, I am skeptical of making major changes to the
program that would either dilute or divert the Department from
its statutory mission or replicate authorities that other
Federal agencies have been given by Congress.
Mr. Chairman, I know we are here to discuss legislation
that keeps CFATS authority from expiring this coming April, and
we should not have this anti-terrorism program expire, period.
I understand the Homeland Security Committee marked up this
bill 12 weeks ago, and it passed on a straight party-line vote
with no Republicans supporting it, but I also understand they
have not formally reported their bill.
Our committee has been overseeing this program since its
inception, and today continues the Energy and Commerce
Committee's work. So I look forward to working with you, Mr.
Chairman, and the full committee chairman to see where we can
strike a bipartisan agreement that works for the country.
So I want to welcome our witnesses for being here today and
thank you all for sharing your views.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back the balance
of my time. And as a disclaimer, we have a second subcommittee
hearing going on simultaneously, so I must depart for that one.
But thank you for holding this hearing. We look forward to
working with you in good faith.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for holding
today's hearing.
On this day that reminds us that our freedom should never
be taken for granted and that we should never forget the
sacrifices made or those that are necessary to keep us safe, I
appreciate that you have focused the subcommittee's attention
on legislation to maintain the authority of the Chemical
Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards program--or CFATS.
This program was created after the terrorist attacks of
September 11, 2001. At that time, Congress examined federal
authority to address theft, diversion, and terrorism at
chemical facilities and found that the existing accident
prevention and process safety laws were insufficient and
inappropriate to tackle these concerns. Congress decided a
separate and distinct body of law and requirements were needed
to secure these facilities. Leaving the Clean Air Act to
address general safety and accident concerns that might affect
air quality, Congress used CFATS to fill the legal gaps for
addressing those intentional acts that compromise the security
of this critical infrastructure sector.
CFATS was not intended to be your garden variety regulatory
program. CFATS not only covers huge chemical and petrochemical
complexes, but also racetracks, wineries and breweries,
universities and colleges, and hospitals, and other healthcare
providers. Due to the scope of the program and the fact that
each facility faces different security challenges, and to avoid
overlapping with other federal programs, CFATS was designed to
foster collaboration between the government and the regulated
parties. And this collaboration and compliance leads to
facilities that are more secure.
I mentioned at the start of our hearing last fall that the
CFATS program has had to overcome some tough years. Our
subcommittee received testimony that day from the Government
Accountability Office and other stakeholders that the
Department spent four years correcting the program, including
updating its application of Department risk criteria to
decisions under CFATS.
CFATS must provide value to taxpayers, the Federal
Government, and the facilities that could fall victim to
intentional attacks. To do that, I believe program improvements
must be sustainable and reliable. For this reason, I am
skeptical of making any major changes to the program that would
either dilute or divert the Department from its statutory
mission, or replicate authorities that other Federal agencies
have been given by Congress.
Mr. Chairman, I know we are here to discuss legislation
that keeps CFATS authority from expiring this coming April--and
we should not have this anti-terrorism program expire. I
understand the Homeland Security Committee marked up this bill
12 weeks ago--that it passed on a straight party line vote with
no Republicans supporting it; but I also understand they have
not formally reported the bill.
Our committee has been overseeing this program since its
inception and today continues Energy and Commerce's work. I
look forward to working with you and the full committee
chairman to see where we can strike a bipartisan agreement.
I want to welcome our witnesses for being with us today and
thank them for sharing their views with us. With that, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.

Mr. Tonko. Well, thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back.
The Chair would like to remind Members that, pursuant to
committee rules, all Members' written opening statements shall
be made part of the record.
Mr. Tonko. I now introduce our sole witness for our first
panel, Mr. David Wulf, Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Infrastructure Protection at the Department of Homeland
Security.
Thank you, Secretary Wulf, for joining us. We appreciate
your time and your ideas and thoughts on the legislation.
Before we begin, I would like to explain the lighting
system. In front of you are a series of lights. The light will
initially be green at the start of your opening statement. The
light will turn yellow when you have 1-minute remaining. Please
begin to wrap up your testimony at that point. The light will
turn red when your time expires.
So, at this time, the Chair will recognize Mr. Wulf for 5
minutes to provide his opening statement.
Secretary Wulf?

STATEMENT OF DAVID WULF

Mr. Wulf. Thank you. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member Shimkus, and other members of the committee.
I really do appreciate the opportunity to be here today to
provide an update on the progress the Chemical Facility Anti-
Terrorism Standards program, or CFATS, continues to make in
fostering security at America's highest-risk chemical
facilities.
So, recognizing that we are here today on September 11th
and recalling the devastating terrorist attacks carried out on
the state 18 years ago, it is important to note that, as a
Nation, we have made much progress in securing America's
critical infrastructure.
Of course, we can never let our guard down, however, which
is precisely why we come to work every day at the Department of
Homeland Security and in our new Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency focused on securing today and
defending tomorrow.
And with respect specifically to the CFATS program, a
program that remains squarely focused on securing high-risk
facilities and preventing acts of chemical terrorism, the same
holds true.
So it is no secret that the CFATS program faced some
significant challenges in its early years. In 2012 and 2013, as
we were laying the foundation for key improvements, I did come
before this committee and I emphasized the importance of long-
term authorization for this critical national security program.
And I am very grateful for the leadership the committee
demonstrated in securing the 4-year CFATS authorization that
was signed into law in December of 2014. And I am grateful, as
well, for your role in attaining the 15-month extension of that
authorization through April of 2020 that was enacted earlier
this year. So I am appreciative that the committee is again
working to ensure a continuing long-term authorization of
CFATS.
So the stability that was ushered in with long-term
authorization has absolutely driven unprecedented progress as
our team has worked with the CFATS-covered facilities to make
America's high-risk chemical infrastructure a truly hard
target. With literally tens of thousands of security measures
having been put into place at high-risk chemical facilities
across the Nation, these facilities have achieved, on average,
a 55-percent increase in their security posture as a direct
result of CFATS.
The stability afforded by long-term authorization has
facilitated our planning and execution of important
programmatic improvements, a few of which I will detail in a
moment, while it has also afforded regulated industry
stakeholders with the certainty they deserved as they planned
for and made capital investments in CFATS-related security
measures.
Later today, you will have the opportunity to hear directly
from industry and other stakeholders about their experience
with CFATS. The gains I have just noted would not have been
possible without the commitment and hard work of companies
across the Nation that have put CFATS-focused security measures
and, in many cases--have put those measures in place and, in
many cases, have provided important feedback and ideas that
have helped us to improve our processes and our effectiveness.
Many of those stakeholders are here in the room today. I
appreciate their presence. And I am looking forward to the
perspectives that will be shared by the next panel.
And, of course, I do want to acknowledge our very
hardworking CFATS team, 250 folks here in Washington and across
the Nation, who have built a truly world-class program and who
are laser-focused on securing America's high-risk chemical
infrastructure.
So about those programmatic improvements I mentioned, what
have we been doing to make CFATS even stronger as we have
enjoyed the stability of long-term authorization? We have
improved processes, eliminated bottlenecks, and seen
unprecedented progress in the pace of inspections and in the
review of facility site security plans, eliminating a backlog
of security plan reviews six years ahead of earlier GAO
projections.
We have developed and launched an improved risk-assessment
methodology. We have implemented the CFATS Personnel Surety
Program, affording CFATS-covered facilities the ability to
ensure that individuals with access to critical assets have
been vetted for terrorist ties. And we have dramatically
reduced burden across our stakeholder community.
And while the stability afforded by long-term authorization
has yielded all of this progress over the past four or five
years, we are not done yet, and continued long-term
authorization will be absolutely critical to ensuring that we
are able to focus on driving even more effective and even more
efficient approaches to fostering chemical security.
Now, as we look toward the future, I do think it is
important to note that CFATS regulatory coverage is targeted to
the Nation's highest-risk chemical facilities, a universe that
currently is composed of approximately 3,300 facilities. And
while CFATS has contributed to effectively hardening these
high-risk facilities against the prospect of terrorist attack,
we have actually received top-screen reports, the reports that
are filed by companies to initiate the DHS risk-assessment
process, from more than 30,000 additional facilities. And while
we have determined that these additional facilities do not
present a high risk of terrorism, they nonetheless maintain
inventories of CFATS chemicals of interest, the very sorts of
chemicals that are viewed as attractive by our adversaries and
that are used in attacks around the globe.
So, while these facilities are not considered high-risk
under CFATS, they aren't no-risk facilities. And it is for this
reason that we would very much like to work with this committee
and the Congress on a path toward authorizing our chemical
security inspectors to work with these facilities, completely
at the option of the individual facility, on a voluntary,
nonregulatory basis.
And this is a point that is important to emphasize. We
would like our inspectors to be able to share their expertise
with these facilities, to provide assistance, and to offer
consultation on security measures, not to extend CFATS
regulation to these facilities. In our view, this is an
important next step to build upon the culture of chemical
security that CFATS has fostered.
Now, as we are all too aware, the threat of chemical
terrorism remains a real and a very relevant one. Around the
globe, our adversaries continue to seek, acquire, and use in
attacks chemicals of the sort that trigger coverage under
CFATS, and the threat stream continues to reflect that chemical
facilities themselves remain an attractive target for
terrorists.
I can tell you with certainty that the work we are doing as
an extended chemical security community is making a real
difference in protecting our Nation. And having had the
opportunity to work with my counterparts in other nations, I
can tell you that what we are doing here in the United States
through CFATS, the culture of chemical security you have helped
us to build with your support for long-term CFATS authorization
is absolutely the envy of the world.
With its targeted focus on the highest-risk facilities,
with its 18 comprehensive risk-based performance standards
addressing physical, cyber, and insider threats, and with its
nonprescriptive, flexible approach to regulation, CFATS is
well-suited to enhancing security across the very diverse
landscape of high-risk chemical facilities.
So I would like to again thank this committee and your
topnotch staff for your leadership on CFATS authorization, for
your patience with my extended statement as well. We are fond
of saying that chemical security is a shared commitment. And
not unlike the role of our industry and other stakeholders and
the role of our very talented DHS team, the role of Congress in
shaping and authorizing CFATS for the long term has been hugely
important. And looking forward very much to working further
with you as we drive toward a truly long-term reauthorization.
So thank you so much. I look forward to the dialogue here
today.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Wulf follows:]

Prepared Statement of David Wulf
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Wulf. And we recognize the rather
quick pace that you set, so we didn't want to stop that flow.
So thank you so much, and thank you again for joining us this
morning.
We have concluded opening statements from our first panel.
We now will move to member questions. Each Member will have 5
minutes to ask questions of our witness. I will start by
recognizing myself for 5 minutes.
So, Mr. Wulf, again, thank you for joining us.
Does the administration support a multiyear extension of
the CFATS program?
Mr. Wulf. We absolutely do.
Mr. Tonko. And I mentioned in my opening statement the
importance of going beyond risk management to promote actual
risk reduction at these sites.
The American Institute of Chemical Engineers' Center for
Chemical Process Safety, which includes technical experts from
chemical and oil companies, has produced risk-reduction
guidance to promote measures that minimize, substitute,
moderate, or simplify hazardous processes.
It seems to me that there is a growing acknowledgment,
including by industry, of the importance of and opportunities
for risk reduction as an essential component of site security.
This might include actions like consolidating chemicals into
fewer sites, substituting chemicals for less hazardous
alternatives, and reducing the quantity of a chemical held on-
site.
Do you believe these are potentially effective measures to
reduce risk?
Mr. Wulf. I do. And I believe that CFATS has effectively
reduced risk. And, in fact, I think one of the success stories
out of CFATS is the fact that upwards of 3,000 facilities over
the course of the program's history have made risk-based
decisions to either reduce their quantities of CFATS chemicals
of interest, eliminate those quantities, move to just-in-time
delivery, change their processes such that they are no longer
considered high-risk. So my belief is that CFATS kind of
organically promotes those sorts of risk decisions.
Mr. Tonko. Now, do you believe that additional risk-
reduction measures should be given significant consideration by
facilities working to meet CFATS obligations?
Mr. Wulf. I certainly think it is a good thing for
facilities to be considering risk. I think CFATS does provide a
very solid framework for doing exactly that across 18 risk-
based performance standards that kind of form the core of the
program.
Mr. Tonko. OK.
And, right now, these types of risk-reduction measures are
a potential option for some facilities, and I believe sites
have taken these types of actions to fulfill CFATS
requirements. Currently, how does the Department actively
encourage facilities to implement risk-reduction measures?
Mr. Wulf. So our inspectors, throughout the CFATS process,
work directly--as do many of our headquarters expert staff--
work directly with facilities as they think through how to
address the 18 risk-based performance standards, so standards
that cover an array of different risk-reduction measures--
measures designed to deter, detect, delay a terrorist attack;
measures focused on cybersecurity; measures focused on insider
threat, background checks; measures focused on response and
training and exercises.
So we consult. As facilities develop their site security
plans, we go back and forth, recognizing, as the ranking member
noted, that the CFATS community is a very diverse group, so it
is not a one-size-fits-all solution from facility to facility.
So we go back and forth, work with facilities as they determine
which measures are most appropriate for them, to the point at
which they are determined to meet the intent of each of the 18
risk-based performance standards.
Mr. Tonko. Now, you listed an array of potential risk-
reduction opportunities. Do you believe any one of those holds
the most promise for additional work?
Mr. Wulf. Well, I think the beauty, in many ways, of the
CFATS framework is that it is nonprescriptive and it is
flexible. So I think it really depends on the facility, you
know, which area or areas are in need of most focus. And we are
able, within the CFATS framework, to work with those facilities
to address, you know, which area or areas need that focus on a
case-by-case basis.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And while preserving flexibility in the program, can more
be done to ensure a facility is implementing or, at the very
least, assessing potential risk-reduction measures as part of
their site security plans?
Mr. Wulf. Well, I think a lot is being done already. And
CFATS is very much already focused at those highest-risk
facilities on working with the owners and operators and the
security professionals on-site at those facilities and in those
companies to reduce risk across those 18 risk-based performance
standards.
Mr. Tonko. Well, we thank you for your testimony and your
appearing before the subcommittee today.
The Chair will now recognize Mr. Shimkus, subcommittee
ranking member, for 5 minutes to ask questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again, Mr. Wulf, thanks for being here.
And to my colleagues on the subcommittee, this is really an
important issue. It is driven from the terrorist attack. And
many of us have in our districts facilities, chemical
facilities. So the balance is making sure that they are
protected as much as possible.
And I think our concern--and I think we all acknowledge the
fact that we want to get as long-term a reauthorization as we
can. And I want to thank the chairman and the ranking member
for their work in scratching, really, to get whatever it was,
18 months. We have a problem with the Senate on this issue, and
I think the due diligence for us doing this right could help us
overcome that.
Having said that, we want to continue to appreciate what is
working and make sure that we don't, our position would be, put
too much on the plate, that we start losing sight of the real
goal and objective. And I really plead with my colleagues on
the other side to help us find that narrow path so that we can
be really united as we address and fight with the Senate for
the long-term authorization.
So, as a regulatory program with enforceable requirements,
would IST-like requirements--the inherently safer technology
debate, which we have had in this committee numerous times--be
easy to understand and enforce?
Mr. Wulf. I think as a prescriptive regulatory standard, it
would not be a simple thing to do.
Mr. Shimkus. And I think I raised this question maybe last
time or in the numerous times we have been able to meet, and I
don't think we have gotten an answer back. How many of the
facilities that have gone through this evaluation have just
decided to close?
Mr. Wulf. I don't know that I have that number, but, you
know----
Mr. Shimkus. Have been there many?
Mr. Wulf. There have been facilities that have closed. I am
not certain that was as a direct result of CFATS. In fact, I am
pretty certain not as a direct result of CFATS.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. I mean--and we will mention it with the
other panel. See, cost-benefit analysis, risk, additional
costs, current markets--it is really tough to say what causes a
sector to decide to close and to move. But that is a balance
that we need to continue to address, with focus on safety, but
if--I mean, we just want to be careful that we don't drive some
good manufacturing in relatively safe areas in rural America
out of rural America.
Let me go to ask about your intense effort to realign your
risk methodology. How difficult was that to do? And proposals
for changes, would that be as difficult to redo?
Mr. Wulf. And I appreciate that question. And we did, I
think as you know, undertake a very intensive effort to retool
our risk-tiering methodology.
So kicked off in the 2013 timeframe with an extensive peer
review. We brought together an expert panel composed of experts
from across academia, government partner agencies, and industry
to take a comprehensive look at our risk-tiering methodology,
which at the time was pretty narrowly focused on the potential
consequences of a terrorist attack and less so on
vulnerabilities and threats.
So, after 18 months or so, that peer-review panel came back
with a series of very solid recommendations. And we set about
working with a second external tiering review panel, similarly
composed across those communities, to bounce ideas off of for
building a new and improved risk-tiering methodology that fully
accounts for all relevant elements of risk. And that is exactly
what we did when we set about retiering the universe of
facilities. So, beginning to end, it was about a 5-year
process.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. So thanks. Let me make sure I put this in
the record, that this relationship with DHS is because we are
focused on security, and we want to put that--make sure that is
on the table.
And just for my colleagues, the initial roll-out of this
program was a little tumultuous and challenging and with the
GAO report, and that caused us to really get involved in
looking deeply at this. And, again, Mr. Wulf was able to help
right the ship, and we thank him for that.
And, with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Peters for 5
minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Wulf, for being here today.
I note there are about 3,400 chemical facilities in the
United States; 350 are in California; three are in San Diego.
And of the 3,400, 3,321 are high-risk. And so I think that
there is a general consensus that this is a program that needs
to be reupped. I think that is pretty clear, so that is a big
step.
Are you familiar with the particular bill that came out of
Homeland Security? Are you familiar with that draft?
Mr. Wulf. I am a little bit familiar with it, yes.
Mr. Peters. Does the administration or do you personally
have issues with that bill that you would like to see changed,
or are you OK with it, do you think?
Mr. Wulf. So I think what we are concerned most about is
that we achieve a long-term authorization for the program, as
you noted. And that bill would afford us a 5-year period of
authorization.
You know, I am happy to discuss individual proposals in the
bill here today, but, you know, from our perspective, getting
to that long-term authorization is the absolute highest
priority.
Mr. Peters. Yes. And so five years is a good number of
years, you think?
Mr. Wulf. I feel like maybe a zero is missing.
Mr. Peters. OK, 0.5.
Mr. Wulf. But five is a good start.
Mr. Peters. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Wulf. Five is a good start.
Mr. Peters. I get it. OK. Well, that is helpful, actually.
Let me just ask you a specific question. On the next panel,
one of the people who will be appearing is Mr. John Paul Smith
from the United Steelworkers. I want to read you a quote and
see if you have an issue with this.
Reauthorization ``should include a requirement for CFATS
facilities to generate, document, and effectively transmit
actionable chemical and process information to first
responders, including employees and their union representatives
at self-responding facilities. DHS should also be required to
generate, distribute, and make publicly available the practices
facilities have used to tier out or tier down in the program.
This information-sharing is critical to ensure that risks are
not just being shifted and so that other facilities can use
those lessons across the industry to reduce risks and
hazards.''
Do you have an opinion or anything you want to say about
that? Is that something you agree with, disagree with, or is
not important to the administration?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, I think, broadly speaking, with respect to
information-sharing, this is a security-focused program, so we
need to strike the--continue to strike the correct balance
between ensuring that we are able to share information with
those who have a need to know that information--so law
enforcement, first responders, emergency planners who are
charged with protecting our communities--and ensuring that we
don't provide a roadmap, that we don't----
Mr. Peters. Right.
Mr. Wulf [continuing]. Distribute information so widely
that it does become available to those who would seek to do us
harm.
You know, that list of folks with whom information should
be shared also includes employees with a security background
who can contribute to the development of a facility site
security plan.
With respect to the sharing of best practices across the
universe of chemical facilities, I think that is a good thing.
It is, you know, certainly something we can talk some more
about and work toward. But best practices that have been put in
place by companies under CFATS to improve security, we
absolutely want to share those to the greatest extent possible
with other chemical facilities.
Mr. Peters. Great.
And as far as today, you don't have particular objections
or suggestions for this draft bill to accommodate those
concerns? Or do you?
Mr. Wulf. Well, I think we are in a good place, actually,
already, as is, with the program with respect to being able to,
you know, continue with that appropriate balance between
sharing of information and protecting sensitive information
from the prying eyes of our adversaries, and already,
certainly, have authority to share information across the
community of chemical facilities.
Mr. Peters. Great.
Anything else you would like to tell us about this draft
before we hear from the next panel?
Mr. Wulf. Fifty years would be----
Mr. Peters. Fifty years? OK. Awesome.
OK. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative McKinley for 5
minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Sorry. I didn't realize that I was going to
precede her.
What I would like to know is, firstly, have there been any
incidents since this has been put in place, challenges to the
system that have been caught as a result of a risk assessment?
Mr. Wulf. Terrorist attacks?
Mr. McKinley. Yes, terrorist attacks, yes.
Mr. Wulf. No. I mean, I firmly believe that the CFATS
program has effectively hardened those 3,300 high-risk
facilities as targets. So, no, we have not seen a terrorist
attack.
Mr. McKinley. OK.
Secondly, apparently, we have 21 high-risk facilities in
West Virginia. Are any of those in tier 1 or tier 2?
Mr. Wulf. I would have to get that information back to you,
but my initial inclination would be to say yes.
Mr. McKinley. Your--would be what?
Mr. Wulf. I believe so, but I will have to confirm that.
Mr. McKinley. That is what I have been given the
impression, that we may have some that would fall into that
category.
One of the concerns that I share with this is that this
area, in northern West Virginia particularly, is embarking on
quite a petrochemical complex of buildings and industries that
is going to be popping up as a result of the shale gas and the
location of the cracker facility in Monaca, Pennsylvania, and
possibly one in Ohio. So we are seeing there is going to be a
quite an influx of businesses that are going to be in the
chemical business in northern West Virginia.
I am curious to see the advantage of making a change at
this point in how this works if it has been successful to date.
That is what I am trying to understand, the value. What do you
think is behind having this--other than extending--I would like
to see it extended--but making changes to the program. Can you
share with us the value in making the changes?
Mr. Wulf. You know, I do think that CFATS provides a very
solid framework now. It is a flexible framework, so we are able
to stay ahead of the continually evolving threat curve.
I do very much appreciate the work that has been done in
the Committee on Homeland Security. You know, we see that bill
as a very important first step toward long-term
reauthorization. But that remains, you know, our key goal, is
ensuring that long-term reauthorization.
Mr. McKinley. So you have--and I think I picked up enough
from your testimony and some of the responses some of the
others have said, that sharing this data, does that put it more
at risk, by putting this information out?
Mr. Wulf. Sharing sensitive----
Mr. McKinley. Because we all know that--any of us have sat
in on enough briefings, we know people are hacking into our
systems, they are paying attention to what we are talking
about. If we start identifying and sharing information back and
forth, that means that information is going to be exposed to
the bad actors who are around the world. So help me a little
bit understanding the value of why we want to make that change.
Mr. Wulf. Yes. So I think we would not like to see much, if
any, change on the information-sharing front. We want to retain
the flexibility to have that balance, to be able to share
information with those who have a need to know, who are charged
with protecting our communities, but to ensure that we keep
that sensitive information--and that is the reason we have
within CFATS a chemical terrorism vulnerability information
protection regime--to keep that sensitive information away from
the eyes of our adversaries.
Mr. McKinley. But you don't have a problem, necessarily,
with the whistleblower aspect of it, strengthening the
whistleblower concept?
Mr. Wulf. I think we have whistleblower provisions
already----
Mr. McKinley. Maybe tightening it up, you know, the
concept----
Mr. Wulf. I think we are very much, you know, open to
opportunities to tighten up the whistleblower language.
Mr. McKinley. So where----
Mr. Wulf. And I would say, too--I am sorry--there are other
things for which additional tweaks might be helpful: the
ability to execute a petition process, to more effectively be
able to look at products that might pose less risk and to
potentially let them out of the program----
Mr. McKinley. Could you share some of that information with
us, as to how we might tweak this, if you think that--other
than what you have already testified to?
Mr. Wulf. Yes. Absolutely.
Mr. McKinley. If you could get that to our office, I would
like to take a look at that.
Mr. Wulf. Absolutely.
And, you know, on that front, as well--and I noted in my
opening statement the ability to be able to use our chemical
security inspectors not only to implement the regulation with
respect to those highest-risk facilities--and I think that
continuing narrow focus for CFATS is important--but to be able
to work on a voluntary basis with those other 30,000 facilities
would be helpful to us as well.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you very much. I look forward to
getting the list, if you could, of the ones in West Virginia.
I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Blunt Rochester for
5 minutes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to all of the witnesses today.
It is such an important day. I had to step out to meet with
representatives from our Delaware VFW. And I think all of us
can remember where we were on September 11th. I was head of
State personnel for the State of Delaware at the time, so there
was a lot of concern about what would happen to employees.
There was a lot of concern about communities and schools and
Dover Air Force Base. And I am reminded of how important the
role of Congress is and how important your role is in ensuring
that Americans are protected. It means something, and
especially today.
And so I have a few questions, just a few.
One, you mentioned getting rid of the backlog for
inspections. Can you talk a little bit about that, what you
did, how you did it?
Mr. Wulf. Yes. So I appreciate that question.
We, at one point, had a very significant backlog of
facility site security plan reviews and approvals. GAO
projected that it would take us up to nine years to eliminate
that backlog. So that was during the early days of the program.
We were getting our legs under us. We had some process issues.
We rolled up our sleeves. We have a great team within the
program. We retrained our workforce. We eliminated bottlenecks.
And we were able to eliminate that backlog nearly six years
ahead of those earlier GAO projections.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. So you had the right amount of
resources in terms of dollars. You had the right workforce. You
didn't have any challenges there. And do you foresee any as you
move forward?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, we have a very highly qualified workforce.
We have enjoyed and continue to enjoy great support from within
the Department.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. My second set of questions are really
just related to, in your testimony, I didn't see much about
engagement of local communities. And even, like, relatively
minor release of chemicals from tampering could have an effect
on communities, serious ramifications, especially for
vulnerable populations or hospitals or senior homes.
Can you describe or detail the work that you at DHS
currently do to bring community and stakeholders into the
process?
Mr. Wulf. Sure. I am glad to, and I appreciate that
question as well.
Certainly the reason that CFATS exists is to protect our
communities, to protect the American public from the threat of
terrorist attack on facilities that might cause a release of a
chemical into a surrounding facility or the theft or diversion
of a chemical to be deployed in an attack offsite, away from
the facility.
And so we absolutely prioritize getting information to
those who are charged with protecting those communities, so law
enforcement, first responders, emergency planners. We have done
extensive outreach with local emergency planning committees to
ensure that they are aware of the CFATS program and, again, to
share with cleared members of those communities, those who do
have that need to know, sensitive information on CFATS
facilities.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. I think that is part of the challenge,
is defining need to know and who needs to know. And you talked
about the shared commitment, and I know you just referenced
many stakeholders. But one of my questions is, how do you
balance that, not just the need to know for law enforcement but
community advocates?
And could you tell us if you have any plans to increase
those in affected communities in the planning process?
Mr. Wulf. Yes. So we certainly include within the realm of
those who have a need to know emergency planners who plan on
behalf of those local jurisdictions for emergencies. And within
the CFATS program, within our 18 risk-based performance
standards, we have one, RBPS 9, focused on response.
And with respect to release facilities, facilities that
pose a threat of release of a chemical into the surrounding
community, one of the requirements we place on covered
facilities is a requirement to reach out to local communities,
to members of the public, to ensure that they have awareness of
shelter-in-place protocols and that sort of thing. So I think
that is an important way in which we engage the community
within CFATS.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. I am currently working on legislation
that will focus on community notification, and so we would love
to follow up on this conversation.
You know, we talk about need to know, and I think it is
really important to drill down deeper. Some of the testimony
that may be coming later references the fact that sometimes
communities are confused and things are not clear to them. And
so I think, as we move forward, if we can have some dialogue
about that.
And I thank you.
And I yield back my time.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Johnson for 5
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Wulf, thank you for being here again today to talk
about this very important program. You know, it is imperative
that we all understand this program and especially understand
the impact that the proposed changes in H.R. 3256 will have on
CFATS. We can't produce a bill that creates unintended
consequences. Nobody wants to do that. So your participation is
very much appreciated.
A topic at our last CFATS hearing was improving training
for compliance inspections and enforcement. Can you briefly
tell us what steps DHS has taken to improve in this area?
Mr. Wulf. Sure, and I am glad to. I appreciate the
question.
So we very highly prioritize training for our workforce. We
continue to operate, you know, a robust training program that
includes basic training for all of our new inspectors. It
includes advanced training for our inspector cadre on topics
such as cybersecurity, on topics such as the Personnel Surety
Program.
And, more recently, we have initiated--or we have
established a corps of senior inspectors across the country. So
these are folks who are in place to provide not only on-the-job
training for our inspectors, to serve in sort of a mentorship
role, but to focus on building and ensuring that we have a
consistent approach as we work with facilities across the
country.
And on that front, as well, we have recently established an
audit program. So we are internally looking at our own actions,
we are auditing our inspections, we are generating best
practices to share among and across our inspector corps, and,
you know, identifying areas where we may need some improvement.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right.
Does DHS have minimum qualification requirements for
inspectors to demonstrate their knowledge and understanding of
the facilities they encounter and relevant guidance on
enforceable requirements?
Mr. Wulf. Absolutely we do. So those inspectors, you know,
need to get through the basic and advanced training. There are
exams at the end of the training. There are basic requirements
to be selected, to become a chemical security inspector.
And, you know, we have, as a result, a very talented
workforce. We have folks with vast experience across military,
law enforcement, chemical industry----
Mr. Johnson. Yes. Let's dig into that a little bit, because
we have talked about training, but what types of professional
development exists for these auditors and inspectors to stay
proficient on industry, you know, new developments and that
kind of stuff?
Mr. Wulf. So there is that on-the-job training, that sort
of internal training. But we ensure that our inspectors are
active members of relevant associations and have access to
those resources.
So I, earlier this week, was at the annual Global Security
Exchange put on by the American Society of Industrial Security.
So we have membership for all our inspectors in that
organization. They are all part of the local chapters, able to
be part of that network and able to be plugged in and to stay
on the leading edge of evolving----
Mr. Johnson. Are there continuing education requirements or
anything like that? Do you require them to go to any kind of
seminars in their specific areas of concentration?
Mr. Wulf. Yes. We manage that internally. So we----
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Wulf [continuing]. Develop training on, for instance,
advanced cybersecurity and require that members who have the
sort of certification to engage with the more complex cyber
cases----
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right.
And I know this has been touched on a little bit already.
You know, some people argue that greater public sharing of
chemical vulnerability information is necessary for communities
to be better protected.
And I know you know that CVI is used to protect information
developed under CFATS regulations that relate to
vulnerabilities of high-risk chemical facilities that possess
chemicals of interest for terrorist attacks.
So, Mr. Wulf, is it wise to have CVI publicly available?
Mr. Wulf. No, I do not believe it makes good sense from a
security perspective to have CVI information, most sensitive
information about high-risk chemical facilities available to
members of the general public.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back an entire eight seconds.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the chair of the full committee,
Representative Pallone, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Tonko.
The CFATS program is different from other regulatory
programs overseen by this subcommittee, and it is different
because it is implemented by your department rather than the
EPA and because it does not have the same public recognition as
landmark environmental laws that protect the public from
contaminants in our air, our drinking water, our soil. And
while this program is just as important to keeping the public
safe, it is far less accessible and transparent to the public
than other programs.
And when we reauthorized the program in 2014, the law
included a requirement that the Department prepare an outreach
implementation plan for stakeholder engagement. You published
an outreach plan for fiscal year 2019, so I wanted to ask a few
questions about that.
First, how have you engaged workers and their
representatives under the outreach plan? And what mechanisms
are in place to ensure that employees play a role in the
implementation of CFATS?
Mr. Wulf. So I appreciate that. We certainly, as we conduct
outreach--and we very much prioritize outreach to all of our
stakeholder communities. We think awareness of the CFATS
program is very important to its success. We include in that
outreach, efforts to maintain open lines of communication with
labor organizations at the national level. And on a facility-
by-facility basis, you know, we require that facilities, as
noted in the existing legislation, to the greatest extent
practical, engage employees with relevant security-focused
expertise in developing their site security plans, and that
certainly includes employees of bargaining units with the
relevant expertise at those facilities.
So, as our inspectors go out and conduct inspections at
those facilities, compliance inspections at those facilities,
they are talking to employees; they are talking to members of
the relevant bargaining unit about their role in the security
plan, about their role in the facility's security----
Mr. Pallone. And what about community groups and community
members around the regulated facilities, does the Department
engage them as well?
Mr. Wulf. So we do. And we--within CFATS and with respect
to facilities that pose a threat of release, as I mentioned a
little earlier, we require facilities to do that community
outreach to discuss things such as shelter-in-place protocols.
And, you know, we are engaged. I have personally participated
in community meetings with members of the community who live in
areas close to CFATS-covered facilities. And, you know, we
strive to be as open and transparent as we possibly can be,
recognizing, of course, that this is a security-focused program
and we want to strike the right balance between sharing
information with those who have that need to know and keeping
that information away from those who would do us harm.
Mr. Pallone. I have got to get to the climate issue, but
can I just ask about Native American Tribes, are they involved
in developing and implementing CFATS?
Mr. Wulf. Yes. Absolutely. And one thing I neglected to
mention in my response is that we have very much prioritized
outreach to local emergency planning committees, so more than
800 of those committees in the last year and, as well, Tribal
emergency response commissions. So absolutely included in that
mix and, you know, very important that we get the word out
about CFATS to those communities.
Mr. Pallone. I mean, obviously I want to make sure all
stakeholder voices are heard, and I find it--it bothers me when
the Department talks about the stakeholders but seems to be
referring to the regulated facilities because we do have to
hear from the public. So I appreciate what you said.
I just wanted to spend a minute on the serious concerns
posed by these facilities because of climate change and
increasing extreme weather. Can you tell me how many CFATS
facilities approximately are vulnerable to extreme weather
events?
Mr. Wulf. I think you could argue that, you know, that we
are all potentially vulnerable to weather events.
Mr. Pallone. OK. And when Hurricane Harvey struck Houston,
historic flooding impacted chemical facilities across that
region. At one facility, the Arkema plant in Crosby, the
flooding disabled all the control measures in place to contain
their dangerous chemicals because they all depended on backup
generators below the water line. Can you tell me how many CFATS
facilities approximately have evaluated how their security
systems would fare in an extreme weather event and then, I
guess, also how many facilities have provisions in their site
security plans to ensure that their target chemicals remain
secure even in extreme weather?
Mr. Wulf. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. You only got about half a minute.
Mr. Wulf. I will take my best shot at it.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
Mr. Wulf. You know, so CFATS, which is focused, I think
appropriately, on the security of high-risk chemical
facilities, you know, includes provisions to ensure that
security systems are appropriately redundant, that there does
exist backup power for, say, closed-circuit TV cameras and
other security systems. So I would say that, you know, all of
our CFATS-covered facilities have had that discussion and have
put in place those sorts of redundancies, that, although put in
place for the CFATS antiterrorism, security-focused purpose,
have ancillary benefits when there is a weather event.
Mr. Pallone. All right, thank you.
Mr. Wulf. Of course.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tonko. The chairman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Duncan for 5
minutes.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Back in 2014, when the CFATS was authorized by Congress, I
sat on the Homeland Security Committee, so I remember the
debates back then. Also, sitting here, listening to the
conversations this morning, on the 18th anniversary of the 9/11
terrorist attacks on our country, I can't help but think about
why the Department of Homeland Security was stood up in the
first place, and that was because we had a lot of agencies at
the Federal Government working independently, sharing--or not
sharing--information, stovepiping of that information,
protecting their turf, their fiefdoms, and so we decided to put
the security concerns of our Nation into one department, the
Department of Homeland Security, to focus on areas that need to
be protected and hedged against terrorist attacks of the
future. I think protecting our chemical facilities that could
be vulnerable to terrorist attacks is important. We talk with a
lot of chemical companies in our State about these issues and
did back in the early 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, before CFATS was
passed.
Mr. Wulf, I think there is an importance of maintaining a
focus on site security. EPA plays a role when there is a
chemical spill. OSHA plays a role when there are work-site
accidents or sets forth guidelines for the protection of the
employees at facilities around the country. That is their role.
That is their mission--safety and hazard protection in the
workplace and environmental protection if there is a chemical
spill or the possibility of a chemical spill, putting
guidelines in place to keep railcars or chemical facilities,
55-gallon drums from being subject to spills and contaminating
the environment.
The Department of Homeland Security has a mission, and that
is to keep me and you, my fellow Americans, safe from terrorist
attacks. That is their role. That is why they were stood up.
But now you want to bring two more agencies into that role, and
I am fearful that we have gotten away from the lessons learned
after 9/11. And that is, this stovepiping of information, the
failure to share information between agencies because of turf
battles. Come on, folks; 18 years ago, we learned these
lessons. We are going to talk about climate change with
regarding to chemical safety. My gosh, we are talking about
keeping us safe from terrorist attacks.
Mr. Wulf, I appreciate you being here, your perspective.
From your perspective at DHS, why is it so important to avoid
diluting the CFATS program's mission?
Mr. Wulf. And I appreciate the question. And, you know, we
feel it is important to retain a focus on security. That is our
mission at the Department of Homeland Security.
Mr. Duncan. You are not trying to protect your turf at
Homeland Security, are you?
Mr. Wulf. We are not.
Mr. Duncan. You are trying to protect Americans?
Mr. Wulf. Absolutely right. It is an antiterrorism program.
The threat is as real and as relevant as it ever has been. It
is as high as it has ever been from a chemical-terrorism
perspective. It continues to evolve into, you know, realms such
as unmanned aircraft systems, cyber attacks, and insider
threat, and beyond, and I feel as though we do need to
maintain, within the CFATS program, a laser focus on security.
And with CFATS, we are talking about America's highest risk
chemical facilities. It is a targeted program, I think
appropriately so, and it has been a successful program, so we
do not want to take our eye off that ball.
Mr. Duncan. I appreciate that. How is further expanding the
program into environmental and worker space--safety space
deviating from the CFATS mission?
Mr. Wulf. So CFATS is a security program. So the 18 risk-
based performance standards are focused on securing facilities
against terrorist attacks. As I noted a few minutes ago, there
are ancillary benefits in the--you know, in terms of reducing
risk in weather scenarios, but, you know, our 150 chemical
security inspectors are security professionals. They are
trained and well equipped to work with facilities to put in
place security measures, and that is what our program is here
to do. It is a small program, but it is a successful one.
Mr. Duncan. Yes, well, I thank you for that. And I just
urge us to keep our eye on the ball and understand, again, why
the Homeland Security Agency was stood up--to protect us
against terrorist attacks, not to protect us against chemical
spills, accidents in the workplace, whatever. We have agencies
to deal with that. This is about protecting the chemical
facilities from terrorist attacks. We are reminded on the 18-
year anniversary of 9/11, we ought to keep our eye on the ball
to keep America safe. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Soto for 5 minutes,
please.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Acting Deputy Assistant Director Wulf, how far along are we
on securing our chemical facilities since the beginning of 2007
through now?
Mr. Wulf. We are well along, and I think in a very good
place. As discussed earlier, we eliminated that backlog of site
security plan reviews and approvals, and we are very much in
sort of steady state for the programs. So the vast majority of
inspections we are conducting across the country are the post
site security plan approval, compliance inspection variety of
inspections, and I will say those inspections are going well.
You know, on occasion, issues are noted, but they are typically
very quickly resolved. We have tremendous commitment. We have
tremendous buy-in across our industry stakeholder community,
and I can tell you absolutely, those high-risk chemical
facilities, those 3,300 or so, are hardened against terrorist
attack.
Tens of thousands of security measures have been put into
place at those facilities, and on average, a CFATS-covered
facility has increased security to the tune of 55 percent from
the point at which the facility enters into the program to the
point at which I sign their site security plan approval, and
they enter into that regular cycle of compliance inspection
activity.
Mr. Soto. So, just so we are clear, all major chemical
facilities in the Nation now are under this purview and are
being maintained and get continual inspections?
Mr. Wulf. So CFATS is a targeted program, and I think that
is appropriate. We are focused on the highest risk facilities.
So about 30,000 facilities across the country have recognized
that they have threshold quantities of CFATS chemicals of
interest and have submitted what we call a Top-Screen report to
initiate the risk-assessment process through which we determine
which facilities are at high risk.
So about ten percent of facilities are determined by us to
be at high risk of terrorist attack or exploitation. We have
put those facilities into risk tiers, tiers 1 through 4,
highest of the high risk, to lowest of the high risk but still
high risk. And it is with those facilities that we work to
develop site security plans and to put them through the regular
cycle of compliance inspection activity.
I noted earlier that we have those other 30,000 facilities
out there. We would like very much to work with those
facilities as well on a voluntary basis, you know, at those
facilities' complete option, not on a regulatory basis, not
extending the regulatory requirements to those facilities, but
being able to lend a helping hand, to consult on potential
security measures, to consult regarding potential
vulnerabilities. So I think that is an important next step for
us, from a chemical security perspective. But we are in a very
good place with respect to those high-risk chemical facilities.
Mr. Soto. In the proposed legislation, subsection F, it
requires the Department of Homeland Security to share more
information with State and local emergency officials. And, you
know, it has been 18 years since the 9/11 terrorist attacks. I
have a first responder who was--Vivian Rodriguez, in my own
office who was there responding to that. We have a lot of
retired NYPD in central Florida. I think that shouldn't
surprise anybody. I have heard firsthand that they were told
that the air was safe after the attack, and we saw obviously a
large loss of life because government agencies said that all
first responders were safe during the cleanup. So, with this,
with the current law and with the new proposals, Homeland
Security and other agencies responsible, should a chemical
facility, God forbid, be attacked, they would be working with
our local officials to let them know whether the air was safe,
let them know whether the water around and under the facilities
were safe, so we won't have this happen again. Is that fair to
say given the current law and the reforms in this bill?
Mr. Wulf. So, you know, my sense is that those are areas
within the domain of our friends at EPA.
Mr. Soto. But Homeland is supposed to be the point on a lot
of these things, so you would be working with the EPA. So would
this bill help make sure that our first responders and others
would be told if the air wasn't safe to breathe or other
aspects, given that you all are there to coordinate when we
have a terrorist attack among the agencies?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, I would have to take a closer look at the
bill. My sense is that it doesn't contain provisions that would
do that, with respect to our security-focused antiterrorism
program, but I will say that within the CFATS program, we
continue to prioritize that outreach, we continue to prioritize
sharing of information about CFATS-covered facilities with
those community--with those emergency planners, with law
enforcement, with first responders who are charged with
protecting the public.
Mr. Soto. Well, obviously, we never want that to happen
again, so a big issue, we hope to hear back from you soon on
that.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Rodgers for 5
minutes, please.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank both
the panels for being here today.
Securing our critical infrastructure from terror attacks is
vital, and we are especially reminded of that today, on this
important anniversary, 9/11. The CFATS program has been
instrumental in ensuring chemical facilities at risk of terror
attacks are protected. As we consider reauthorization of this
crucial program, I am interested in making sure we are
particularly focused on ensuring DHS can effectively implement
its core mission under this program--protecting our vulnerable
chemical infrastructure from acts of terrorism and intentional
attacks.
Mr. Wulf, last June, you appeared before us for three hours
to discuss DHS' efforts to correct the CFATS program-identified
deficiencies. Have any new program deficiencies been
discovered, and what are you doing about them?
Mr. Wulf. Thank you for the question. So, recently, well,
within the last couple of years, GAO conducted a comprehensive
review of the CFATS program. It had only a couple of
recommendations, noting broadly that the program has been
successful, that we have made--had made significant,
significant improvements and really were clicking on all
cylinders. The couple of recommendations focused on defining
metrics for success, how we could measure the effectiveness of
the program and the reduction in vulnerability of facilities.
And we took that on and we are able now to measure the
extent of improvement in a facility's security posture over the
course of the program, and that is that 55 percent average
improvement in security at CFATS-covered facilities.
The second finding was focused on outreach to local
emergency planning committees, and we undertook to redouble our
outreach efforts in those regards, reaching to more than 800
LEPCs across the country, and actually hit within the last year
or so local emergency planning committees for all counties that
have five or more CFATS-covered facilities, and over the course
of the program's history, literally thousands and thousands of
outreach engagements with local emergency planning committees.
No other deficiencies have been identified. As noted, we
have addressed, confronted head-on areas where we thought
improvement was necessary. We retooled that risk-tiering
methodology. We eliminated that site security plan review and
approval backlog. We are in steady state for the program. We
are conducting inspections that are going well.
The facilities covered under our program are really and
truly hard targets and owes very much to the hard work not only
of our dedicated team, but companies across the country that
have embraced the program and that have put in place CFATS-
focused security measures.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. So what type of quality control
has been established to catch these problems earlier on in the
future?
Mr. Wulf. One of the things we have done is to put in place
an internal audit program. So we are sending some of our own
senior personnel along on inspections to audit them and to
identify where issue--you know, in the event issues arise, in
the event there are things we can be doing better, to address
those, and to identify where things are going well, and to
ensure that we are able to foster consistency on a national
basis across our ten regions so that facilities in California
experience a CFATS inspection the same way as facilities in New
York. So we have done that. We have put in place a cadre of
senior inspectors who are also charged with, on a day-to-day
basis, ensuring that we are acting consistently across the
country and providing on-the-job training to our inspectors to
ensure that the latest and greatest in terms of program
guidance, policy guidance, is disseminated and taken in across
our workforce.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK. Earlier this year, Congress narrowly
avoided having the authority for the entire CFATS program
disappear. Previously, the CFATS program had been operating on
a 4-year authorization. What is the difference between managing
a program with a very short authorization and one with a longer
lead time?
Mr. Wulf. Thank you. I guess I have done both, and I will
say that when we are on a short-term situation--and you could
argue that this 15-month extension is sort of that--our team
spends a lot more time up here with you all, focusing on
getting long-term reauthorization. But, substantively, long-
term authorization offers us a stability that is so important
for moving the program forward. You know, it is the stability
that enables us to make improvements, that has enabled us to do
things like enhance the risk-tiering methodology and eliminate
that backlog and put in place online systems that reduce
burden, among many, many other things. It provides certainty
for our industry stakeholders as they think about making
capital investments in security. It sends a message to those
who might seek to avoid their obligations under CFATS, that the
program isn't going anywhere, that it is here to stay, and it
is super helpful from a morale standpoint in terms of our
ability to recruit and retain the best and the brightest.
Mrs. Rodgers. Super. Thank you. Thank you for your
leadership.
Mr. Wulf. Of course, and I thank you.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Representative Ruiz for 5 minutes, please.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this hearing on such an important topic.
Mr. Wulf, in your testimony you talked about the rapidly
changing threat environment that sensitive chemical facilities
are facing. One unique aspect of that changing landscape I
would like to touch on is cybersecurity. You see, we think of
threats in terms of physical attacks, leakage, thefts,
assaults, vandalism, but in the digital age that we live in,
bad actors armed with a keyboard can cause extremely high
levels of damage or act as an accomplice to those who may be
seeking to gain access to harmful chemicals. Can you give me
the worst-case scenarios in one of these facilities where a
cybersecurity vulnerability manipulation attack, and what can
it pose to the facility and to the surrounding communities?
Mr. Wulf. Yes. I mean, I suppose that in the worst-case
scenario, where a facility has cyber systems that are, you
know, pretty fully integrated with its industrial control
systems, with its chemical process systems, that a, you know,
cyber attacker could work to manipulate those processes
potentially causing a release of chemicals. You know, where
cyber systems are integrated with business process systems, you
know, a cyber attack could seek to divert a shipment of
chemicals or something along those lines.
Mr. Ruiz. In the required reporting of vulnerability
assessments in site security plans, is cybersecurity
specifically a reporting requirement for those facilities?
Mr. Wulf. It is. Cybersecurity comprises one of our 18
risk-based performance standards. The CFATS program, I think,
was very much out front with respect to cybersecurity. Our
risk-based performance standard eight is focused on cyber. Our
inspectors engage in discussion during inspections and in the
process of working with facilities as they develop their site
security plans----
Mr. Ruiz. One of the biggest concerns that we have as a
Nation is a lack of cybersecurity experts to fill those spots.
There are studies that have shown that we have a cybersecurity
shortage in the workforce, and so we are looking into ways that
we can help beef that up.
Let me talk to you about another issue that has been
mentioned by Ranking Member Pallone in terms of consulting with
the surrounding communities. The majority of these locations
are around communities, like you said, that are minority or
underserved, and there is a quote here from the Environmental
Protection Agency that says, catastrophic accidents at chemical
facilities, historically about 150 each year, can result in
fatalities, serious injuries, evacuations, and other harm to
health and human health. We heard earlier that 134,000 people
live around those areas. This is particularly concerning to me
because this is an environmental-justice issue.
So you mentioned earlier that you consult with surrounding
communities. I would like to go a little more specific in that.
How do you do it? How do you decide with which community, when,
how frequent, and with who do you consult with? Give me an
example.
Mr. Wulf. Yes. So an example would be any one of the
thousands of outreach engagements we have held with----
Mr. Ruiz. What are those outreach engagements? Is it a
newspaper article? How do you engage specifically?
Mr. Wulf. So it will be plugging into a, you know, in
person, to a local emergency planning committee meeting and
talking there to----
Mr. Ruiz. Like with who? Because oftentimes in these
underresourced communities, rural areas, they don't have the
technical assistance. So who exactly are you reaching out to?
Are you reaching out to the city mayor? Are you reaching out to
the environmental justice community stakeholders? Who exactly
and how are you doing it? See, the problem is that we have
learned from different examples that the Federal Government
oftentimes has a check-the-box kind of attitude, where if they
send a letter to somebody that might not have actual
connections with the community, they have checked the box and
say we have engaged. But we are trying to redefine what
meaningful engagement, meaningful consultation is, so that
communities actually have a voice and a say and a participation
to help you mitigate risks. And, also, if there is a risk, who
is responsible for cleaning it up? Is there any provision where
the community can go to the chemical facilities and ask for
compensation for the environmental or health damage that can
result from these leaks, potential leaks?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, so I would say there is a lot to unpack
there, but we certainly do not pursue a check-the-box approach
to outreach engagement with communities and local emergency
planning committees in particular. So we send inspectors who
work in those communities, who work in those regions to engage
personally. And those LEPCs can include not only emergency
responders from the community, law enforcement, and other, but
members of the public as well, the news media in some
instances. So we are out there in person, and we have made that
a very high priority.
Mr. Ruiz. At the next panel we have some environmental
justice stakeholders, and I am curious to see what they say
about that as well. Thank you.
Mr. Wulf. Of course.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Flores for 5
minutes, please.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Tonko and leader Shimkus, we appreciate you
holding this important hearing today.
Mr. Wulf, thank you for appearing again today and welcome
back to the committee.
Reauthorizing CFATS is important to me and to my district,
which includes the community of West, Texas. Since our last
hearing in June of 2018, I am pleased to report that we were
able to extend CFATS through April 2020, ensuring that the
program does not expire as we work on a long-term solution. And
as you have heard earlier, I am among the group that has strong
concerns regarding the recent partisan bill that came out of
the Homeland Security Committee. That said, I am hopeful that
we can still work together to find consensus on a bipartisan
bill that can also pass the Senate and be sent to President
Trump's desk for signature. I would like to thank all of the
witnesses on both panels for providing their perspectives.
Mr. Wulf, questions about the personnel surety or the
identity-verification processes against the terrorist screening
base have constantly been an issue with CFATS. Now that you
have finished with the highest risk, high-risk facilities, or
tiers 1 and 2, DHS is now implementing these requests at the
tier 3 and tier 4 facilities. How is this new universe of
facilities different than the highest risk facilities in terms
of sizes and challenges?
Mr. Wulf. So I appreciate that question, and I would say
the biggest difference is in the size of the population. So
tier 1 and 2 facilities with which we have worked over the last
three years to implement terrorist-ties vetting, pose about ten
percent of our regulated population. But the other 90 percent
falls within tiers three and four. So that is about 3,000
additional facilities with which we will be working over the
next three years to ensure that--and I think this is
important--that they know and have the assurance that those who
have access to their facilities, to those high-risk chemical
facilities and the critical assets on those facilities, have
been vetted for terrorist ties.
Mr. Flores. OK. As you know, you had to get through the
tier 1 and 2 facilities and a backlog build-up. You were able
to resolve the backlog with respect to personnel surety
verification. How does DHS intend to expand the personnel
surety process to the tier 3 and tier 4 facilities without
developing another critical backlog?
Mr. Wulf. Our plan is to do this incrementally, to do sort
of a--to take a phased approach, and to work with between 80
and 85 companies--and 85 facilities on a monthly basis to talk
them through their options for complying with the terrorist-
ties vetting piece of our personnel surety risk-based
performance standard. We have the capability to do this. We
have the capacity to do this. We anticipate working through the
tier 3 and 4 facilities within the next three years.
Mr. Flores. Let's assume that the worst case developed, and
we hope--all of us hope it doesn't. And I know you will be
committed to not having this happen. But let's assume that a
big backlog did develop. What accommodations should be made to
avoid jeopardizing the entire CFATS program if that backlog
develops for the tier 3 and tier 4 facilities?
Mr. Wulf. Well, I think that in going in a phased fashion,
we will avoid the prospect of a backlog. But if we were to find
ourselves with a backlog, we could--we would have the
flexibility to ratchet back a little bit, but I am very
confident we will not get a backlog in the personnel surety
arena. And we are going to work with facilities, you know,
those 80 to 85 a month. We are going to be sensitive to the
operational needs of facilities, particularly where we have
companies that have multiple CFATS-covered facilities. We don't
want to hit them all at the same time with these requirements.
So we have and expect to continue to work very successfully and
cooperatively with the facilities as we move through the
personnel surety process.
Mr. Flores. OK. In an industrial-accident context, the EPA
is required to consider worst-case scenarios from a community,
health, and welfare perspective. When looking at CFATS for
tourism purposes, how does DHS evaluate the communities
surrounding high-risk facilities like schools, hospitals, and
population density?
Mr. Wulf. So we look at the entirety of the surrounding
population. We model that based on potential directions of
prospective plumes of released chemicals. We evaluate it with
respect to daytime and nighttime populations, and that
certainly includes those who are found in schools, those folks
who are in hospitals.
Mr. Flores. OK. Thank you for your important feedback, and
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the Representative from Michigan,
Representative Dingell, for 5 minutes, please.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Chairman Tonko, and I thank you
for having this hearing today.
And, Mr. Wulf, I thank you for your work, because it really
is very important, and I do hope we are able to find some
bipartisan common ground on this. And it is particularly
fitting that we are doing this on 9/11. And I come from
Michigan, which actually my district has a number of those
chemical facilities or borders on them, and I suspect I am
probably one of the only people that--it was 2001, but earlier
that year that I had a funeral in Riverview, had the explosion,
and we went through an evacuation. So I remember the fear in
that community--and it was an accident. I don't even know if
you are familiar with it.
So Michigan is one of the States that has got a lot of
chemical facilities, and we have been hit hard by the PFAS
contamination, so I am going to focus on that today. And I have
got questions about the use of these chemicals in what we are
doing to notify people in the area, and how quickly are we
developing other replacements. I have spent a lot of time on
this in the last month during the August recess talking to
people, and it is clear when you have high-intensity fires, et
cetera, that PFAS right now, foam, is one of the things that
can deal with it the most effectively, but are there other
things that are available? When the Intercontinental Terminals
Company facility caught fire in Deer Park, Texas, in March of
this year, PFAS firefighting foams were used to stop the
blazes. When the EPA tested the nearby Galveston Bay, they
found PFAS contamination at about a thousand times higher than
it is currently allowed in drinking water. And while the ITC
facility is not a DH facility--it is a maritime transportation
security facility--it is emblematic of the larger concerns
around chemical facility safety and the use of inter--foam, an
emerging contaminant we have been talking about on PFAS. So,
Mr. Wulf, I wanted to know what you have done to update your
instructions to CFATS participants to limit the use of PFAS
foams to fight fires at covered facilities, and are there
alternatives, and are we moving fast enough to develop safe and
effective alternatives?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, so I appreciate that question, and I think
certainly a significant concern. You know, I think that is
something I am going to have to take back and reach back to you
upon.
Mrs. Dingell. I think that is really important. So, as you
are doing this, do you know if you have got a--DHS has a plan
to phase out firefighting foams as part of your site security
plans?
Mr. Wulf. I am going to have to get back to you on that as
well.
Mrs. Dingell. So let me keep asking questions that I--this
is just real because I mean, I am living--Michigan has got more
contaminated PFAS sites than any State. Quite frankly, I don't
think we know whether we have got more than anybody, or we have
tested more than any other State. So I suspect we are going to
start to see this in a lot of other States. We just know about
it.
But when a chemical security inspector enters a facility
for compliance, are they looking for or documenting how much
PFAS chemicals are at the facility?
Mr. Wulf. So those inspectors--and I appreciate the
question--are looking across an array of risk-based performance
standards and assessing the extent to which a facility is
complying with the security measures it has promised to put
into place within its site security plan. And those include
measures related to incident response. So to the extent
specific chemicals are used in that response, they would be
looking at that.
Mrs. Dingell. So, when you get back to me, is there a way
to use safer chemicals or chemicals in lower thresholds and
limit the need for PFAS firefighting foams? And are you working
with the Department of Defense, who has contributed to this, to
also develop those foams? I know you got to get back to me. But
at the end of your testimony--and I have only got 25 seconds--
you say DHS is focused on ways to enhance and evolve the CFATS
program. You also say you are taking a deep dive into
efficiency and enhancements to CFATS. Does that include PFAS
chemicals?
Mr. Wulf. You know, it is not something that we have looked
at, but----
Mrs. Dingell. I am out of time, but if you lived in
Michigan, and the one that I lived through, the spill closed,
but I still have--my down rivers have lots of facilities. So we
care, and so does--my whole district does but in different
ways. So thank you for the work you do, but this one matters,
too. Thank you.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Carter for 5
minutes, please.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Wulf, for being here, this is extremely
important. We appreciate your participation in this.
I have had the opportunity during our August break, to
visit a number of the chemical manufacturers in my district,
and I have been very impressed. All of them are cooperative.
They get it. They understand. They want to do what is right.
What they don't want is just unnecessary changes that aren't
really going to increase safety but instead just increase
costs. And I noticed during your testimony that one of the
things that you said was that, since you started the program,
that there has been a dramatic improvement in the pace of
inspections and reviews and approval. How has DHS done this?
How have you been able to make this work?
Mr. Wulf. So, you know, I appreciate that question. We
rolled up our sleeves. We looked at areas where we had
bottlenecks in processes. We looked at areas where we felt as
though we could do more to train our workforce, and we got to
work. And I will say that a big part of being able to do that
was that we enjoyed, beginning in December of 2014, the
stability that came along with long-term authorization of the
program. Before that point, we were sort of going from fiscal
year to fiscal year through the appropriations process or,
worse, from continuing resolution to continuing resolution. We
didn't know whether, in the event of a funding hiatus, a
government shutdown, whether the program would cease to exist
for a period of time. So that was really no way to operate, but
the stability that long-term authorization has afforded has
really enabled us to make those key improvements.
Mr. Carter. It is my understanding that you had a GAO audit
and that this led you to make some changes in your efforts, and
I was just--and also in risk-reduction metric, as well as
enhancing outreach to local emergency planners. How have you
done that?
Mr. Wulf. So, with respect to the metric, we have dug in
and built a methodology through which we can assess the level
of security at the beginning of a facility's entrance into the
CFATS program, and the level of security increase that it has
achieved at the point at which we get to approving the facility
site security plan. And on average, facilities have shown a 55-
percent increase in security between those two periods.
With respect to outreach, to local emergency planning
committees, that has always been a priority of ours. We have
redoubled our efforts over the last year or so and have
personally engaged upwards of 800 separate, local emergency
planning committees that represent the highest concentration
counties--of counties with the largest number of CFATS
facilities found in them.
Mr. Carter. Would you describe your relationship working
with the businesses as being good? I mean, do you feel like
they are cooperating, feel like they are receptive?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, I absolutely would. You will hear from a
couple of our industry stakeholders on the next panel.
Industry, writ large, has embraced this program, has worked
with us to help improve the program over the years. We could
not--we could not accomplish the chemical security mission
without that level of commitment.
Mr. Carter. OK. In my last minute and a half, I want to ask
you specifically about some things related to my district. I
represent the entire coast of Georgia, including two major
seaports. Tell me what you would do differently, if anything,
in the way of safety in the seaports, particularly when they
are transferring the chemicals, if they are shipping them or if
they are bringing them in, importing them?
Mr. Wulf. Yes. So that is a good question, and we work
closely with our friends in the U.S. Coast Guard who implement
something called the Maritime Transportation Security
Administration Program. So facilities that are on the water are
regulated, from a security standpoint, by the Coast Guard, but
sometimes there are facilities that are co-located. There may
be a CFATS-covered facility that is in the midst of a MTSA
facility regulated by the Coast Guard. And so we work hand-in-
hand with the Coast Guard captain of the port to harmonize our
activities in those areas and ensure that everything is covered
from a security standpoint.
Mr. Carter. OK. So it is the Coast Guard's responsibility
when it gets to the port. What about the transportation from
the port to the end user?
Mr. Wulf. So, if it is at a fixed facility, if it is
sitting at a chemical distribution facility, for example, that
facility will fall under, generally speaking--unless it sits on
the water--the CFATS program, and we will work with that
facility. Among the risk-based performance standards, among the
security measures that will be in place will be measures
related to the shipping and receiving of CFATS chemicals of
interest. So we will work with those facilities as they put in
place those measures. We will inspect against those measures
when we go out for compliance inspections.
Mr. Carter. Absolutely. Thank you very much, and I yield
back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the Representative from Colorado,
Representative DeGette, for 5 minutes, please.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and I am so
happy you are having this hearing.
We have had a number of investigative hearings about the
risk of chemicals over the years, and so looking at this
legislation, it is really important. And I am glad to be here.
Mr. Wulf, I wanted to ask you about some of the facilities
that are reporting. The EPA says that my home district--I am
like many of the members here; I have an urban district with a
lot of facilities that manage hazardous material in Denver. And
the EPA says Denver has 27 facilities that are managing enough
hazardous material to be required to complete risk-management
plans under the Clean Air Act, and it has 21 facilities that
manage enough hazardous chemicals to be reporting under the
Toxic Release Inventory. But Department of Homeland Security
staff told my staff yesterday that only three facilities in my
district are deemed high enough risk to be subject to the
chemical facility anti-terrorist standards that are the subject
of this hearing. So I am wondering if you can tell me what the
difference is, why we would have all these facilities that have
to have this other reporting, but yet only three that DHS has
determined to be at a high enough risk.
Mr. Wulf. Yes, no, I appreciate that question. So CFATS is
a security-focused program, and it is focused on the highest
risk facilities----
Ms. DeGette. Right, I know that.
Mr. Wulf [continuing]. And our antiterrorism security
program, you know, means those facilities that, based on a
number of different factors, are at the highest risk of
terrorist attack or exploitation. So it may relate to the types
and quantities and/or concentrations of the chemicals that may
be of more or less interest to potential terrorists,
adversaries. It may relate to the location of the facility in
relation to populated areas. Those are a variety of the
factors.
Ms. DeGette. I mean, I know what the standards are, but I
guess my question is, do you know--I mean, you may not know
specifically about the first congressional district of
Colorado. But does your agency review all of these other
facilities that have these kinds of chemicals that have to do
the reporting to determine whether they do meet that threshold
or not?
Mr. Wulf. So, yes, the sort of entry point for CFATS is the
requirement to file a Top-Screen to initiate that risk-
assessment process. So, you know, more than 30,000 facilities
have initiated the process because they have one or more of our
CFATS chemicals of interest at or above the threshold
quantities or concentrations. And so, you know, we have tiered
as being at high risk of terrorist attack or exploitation about
ten percent of those facilities. So it is very conceivable that
some of those other facilities are among those 30,000
facilities that have----
Ms. DeGette. Right. They probably are.
Mr. Wulf [continuing]. Have filed Top-Screens.
Ms. DeGette. So they have been reviewed by your agency is
what you are saying?
Mr. Wulf. Yes. We----
Ms. DeGette. OK. So----
Mr. Wulf. Likely, if they have threshold quantities of
CFATS chemicals, it is likely that they have submitted a Top-
Screen.
Ms. DeGette. So the other thing is the DHS people wouldn't
tell us which three facilities were listed. Is there some
reason for that?
Mr. Wulf. So, you know, certainly we strive to balance, you
know, balance things on the information-sharing front, but I
think we certainly can make that information available to you,
yes.
Ms. DeGette. Because what I am looking at is, in the First
Congressional District, which, as I say, we have a lot of
chemical facilities. You know, you have to balance between
secrecy so that terrorists don't find out about it. You know,
so I have to--they will find out so the public knows what is in
their neighborhood, and that is why I asked the question.
Mr. Wulf. Yes, it is a balance.
Ms. DeGette. OK. All right. So they will let me know.
Now, is it true that some facilities have minimized the
inherent risk of their operations, for example, by reducing the
storage of hazardous materials to the point where they are no
longer considered high risk?
Mr. Wulf. It is true that thousands of facilities over the
course of the CFATS program's history have reduced their
holdings of CFATS chemicals of interest.
Ms. DeGette. And that would be in the public is interest, I
would think.
Mr. Wulf. We view that as a success of the program.
Ms. DeGette. OK, great. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlelady yields back.
And we now recognize the Representative from Illinois,
Representative Schakowsky, for 5 minutes, please.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. Thank you so much.
I want to thank the chairman for calling this hearing, and
also, Mr. Wulf, I want to thank you for returning to talk to
our committee, especially on this day, on 9/11, about these
critical programs. I also want to thank you for coming to
Illinois last summer to present at DHS chem security talk that
was held in Chicago, and at that event, you spoke about the
importance of the CFATS program and the importance of taking
the program on the road. And so I wanted to just ask you a bit
about those sessions. First, are those sessions ongoing? Is DHS
continuing to travel the country to bring important
information--that is how we viewed it--about the CFATS program
to people where they live?
Mr. Wulf. Absolutely, we are. And I appreciate the comment
on the chemical security talks we held last year, one of those
events in Chicago, one in Oakland, as well as one in
Philadelphia. This year, we held a larger forum chemical
security summit in New Orleans, and it is great to bring the
entire extended chemical security community together to share
information about CFATS, to discuss sort of hot topics, policy
updates, those sorts of things, and certainly best practices
for securing chemical facilities. So it absolutely continues to
be a priority.
And on less of a big-splash level, we continue to
prioritize getting out to local emergency planning committees,
getting out to State-level industry associations to spread the
word about the program and ensure that companies with
facilities that have threshold quantities of CFATS-covered
chemicals of interest know that they need to report those to
us.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, first of all, I wish you fun in New
Orleans. I was just there for a conference. Had a ball.
Anyway----
Mr. Wulf. It is a pretty fun spot.
Ms. Schakowsky [continuing]. Second--yes--are there any
efforts--when you think about stakeholders, are there any
efforts to make sure that some of the labor unions are involved
in these sessions at all?
Mr. Wulf. Yes. We have a good relationship with the labor
unions. You know, we certainly reach out across all stakeholder
communities, and, you know, we hope that they will be part of
sessions such as chemical security talks.
Ms. Schakowsky. Right. I think it is absolutely essential
that these stakeholders have a role in ensuring the security of
individual facilities and would like to ask a few questions
about the experience of workers. So what requirements are
currently in place to ensure that employees have a role in the
development of site security plans at covered facilities?
Mr. Wulf. I appreciate that question, and I think employees
now are very much involved in the development of site security
plans. I think specifically--and I think this is appropriate--
employees who have security-related expertise or roles in the
security process. The current, you know, the current state of
play is that there is a requirement that facilities, to the
greatest extent practicable, involve employees in the
development of site security plans, employees with that
relevant security-focused expertise, and that would include
employees at facilities that are covered by bargaining units,
collective bargaining units.
Ms. Schakowsky. I think it is so important because it can
differ from facility to facility, and the workers really know
what is going on. Do you know if, are the workers allowed to
pick their own representative when opportunities arise for
worker input?
Mr. Wulf. I believe the situation is that, you know, the
facility security officer determines which employees are best
positioned to provide meaningful input to the development of a
site security plan.
Ms. Schakowsky. Now, this is going to sound like a silly
question. Do all employees at CFATS facilities know they work
at a CFATS facility?
Mr. Wulf. So, you know, again, that is kind of where we get
to the balanced--striking the appropriate balance between
sharing information with those who have a need to know it, and
keeping sensitive information from those who might not have a
need to know. So, at a CFATS-covered facility, all employees
will be part of mandated training and exercise programs so that
they are aware of how to deal with security at----
Ms. Schakowsky. And who to go to, right?
Mr. Wulf. Oh, yes.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK. Great. Thanks. My time is up. I
appreciate you very much.
Mr. Wulf. Oh, thank you so much.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlelady yields back. Excuse me.
The Chair now recognizes the Representative from New York,
Representative Clarke, for 5 minutes, please.
Ms. Clarke. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank our
Ranking Member Shimkus for convening this important hearing on
how we can protect our workers and communities from the risk
associated with hazardous chemical facilities. As a Member of
Congress who sits on both the Energy and Commerce and Homeland
Security Committees, this legislation is particularly important
to me. Adding further significance is the fact that today is
also the 18th anniversary of one of the most tragic days in our
Nation's past, a day that me and my fellow New Yorkers still
hold fresh in our memories.
Chemical facilities throughout our Nation, which serve a
range of important functions, also pose many unique risks to
our communities. It is our duty in Congress to ensure that the
proper protections are in place to keep our constituents safe.
While a major focus of the CFATS program is to safeguard
chemical facilities against acts of terrorism, it is also
imperative that we consider the multiple risks that the climate
crisis presents to these facilities, their workers, and
surrounding communities. Many CFATS facilities are situated in
areas that are highly vulnerable to natural disasters. This is
especially concerning when you consider the fact that climate
change is already increasing the frequency and severity of
extreme weather events, including major storms and floods.
Further concerning, although not so surprising, is the fact
that low-income communities and communities of color are
disproportionately located near these facilities, and,
consequently, we are at greater risk of harm from potential
disasters. Therefore, as we seek to better safeguard CFATS
facilities from all risk, climate and otherwise, it is also
important that we recognize this reality and ensure the
vulnerable communities who are most impacted by these risks are
also present at the table so that they can have a meaningful
say in protecting their own futures.
Mr. Wulf, thank you for being here today to offer testimony
on this matter. According to the EPA's Toxic Release Inventory,
there are currently 408 chemical facilities in and around
Brooklyn, New York, that handle toxic chemicals, and you don't
need to look too closely into a map--or at a map to realize
that many of these facilities are located within or adjacent to
high-risk flood areas. So can you please describe some of the
major risks that CFATS facilities and their surrounding
communities face due to flooding and severe storms?
Mr. Wulf. And I appreciate the question, appreciate the
support for the CFATS program. Of course, CFATS is an
antiterrorism program, focused on security, but weather events
certainly pose a threat to all manner of facilities as well.
And though I think it is important that we retain within the
CFATS program our laser focus on antiterrorism and on enhancing
security at facilities that are at high-risk of terrorist
attack or exploitation, the measures that facilities put into
place, redundant--you know, redundant systems, emergency power
to enhance their security, can have additional benefits in the
weather-related realm.
Ms. Clarke. I think it was the Houston storm that we saw a
horrible incident with a chemical facility. Have we learned
anything from that event?
Mr. Wulf. So, you know, what we--we do engage, in the event
of a weather scenario, with our CFATS-covered facilities. We
are in frequent, in constant communication with those
facilities to assess their status, to talk about whether they
have any unmet needs, and I will say that, you know, those
facilities are very--certainly very security aware, certainly
very risk aware. And actually the recent hurricane scenario,
Hurricane Dorian, we were in contact with one of our facilities
in Florida that determined to make a risk-informed decision to
move a railcar of potentially toxic-release chemicals off of an
island and to an inland location.
Ms. Clarke. Let me ask, do you work with FEMA and EPA to
coordinate your programs that deal with chemical facility
management? And given the administration's proposed rollbacks
to EPA's risk-management program, do you believe that the CFATS
program can and should incorporate measures to enable more
first responder, community, and worker engagement, that will
help the facilities better prepare for and protect against
natural disaster threats or chemical incidents?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, so I think we continue to prioritize within
the CFATS program today that outreach and engagement with the
first responder communities, having been in person--not
myself--but our team to over 800 local emergency planning
committees over the course of the past year. So that certainly
continues to be a priority. And, you know, certainly remain in
contact and coordination with our counterparts at EPA and FEMA.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. Thank you very much for your
response today.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlelady yields back. That concludes our
first panel.
I would like to thank Mr. Wulf for joining us today. Mr.
Wulf, I ask that you respond promptly to any questions for the
record that you receive from our members following this
hearing. At this time, I ask that staff prepare the witness
table such that we may begin our second panel shortly.
Mr. Tonko. OK. We will resume with the second panel now to
share their thoughts.
We will now hear from four witnesses. We will start with my
left, with Mr. John Paul Smith, legislative representative for
United Steel Workers.
Thank you for joining us.
Next to him we have Ms. Michelle Roberts, national co-
coordinator of the Environmental Justice Health Alliance.
Thank you, Ms. Roberts.
And next to Ms. Roberts, we have Mr. Scott Whelchel, chief
security officer and global director of emergency services and
security for Dow Chemical Company on behalf of the American
Chemistry Council.
Thank you, Mr. Whelchel.
And, finally, Mr. Matthew Fridley, cooperate manager of
safety, health, and security, Brenntag North America, Inc., on
behalf of National Association of Chemical Distributors.
We want to thank our witnesses for joining us today. We
look forward to your testimony.
At this time, the Chair will now recognize each witness to
present 5 minutes' worth of opening statements.
Before we begin, I would like to explain the lighting
system. In front of you is a series of lights. The light will
initially be green at the start of your opening statement. The
light will turn yellow when you have 1-minute remaining. Please
begin to wrap up your testimony at that point. The light will
turn red when your time has expired.
So, Mr. Smith, you may start. You have 5 minutes, please.

STATEMENTS OF JOHN PAUL SMITH, LEGISLATIVE REPRESENTATIVE,
UNITED STEELWORKERS (USW); MICHELE L. ROBERTS, NATIONAL CO-
COORDINATOR, ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE HEALTH ALLIANCE (EJHA);
SCOTT WHELCHEL, CHIEF SECURITY OFFICER AND GLOBAL DIRECTOR OF
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND SECURITY, DOW, ON BEHALF OF AMERICAN
CHEMISTRY COUNCIL; AND MATTHEW FRIDLEY, CORPORATE MANAGER OF
SAFETY, HEALTH, AND SECURITY, BRENNTAG NORTH AMERICA, INC., ON
BEHALF OF NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CHEMICAL DISTRIBUTORS.

STATEMENT OF JOHN PAUL SMITH

Mr. Smith. Chairman Tonko, Ranking Member Shimkus, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today. I am here on behalf of the United Steel Workers
International Union. Our union is the largest industrial union
in North America and represents the majority of unionized
workers in the chemistry industry.
Before coming to Washington, I worked in this sector for a
little more than ten years and then as a police officer for
four, where I received from basic homeland security training.
In the very southern tip of Illinois, near the confluence
of the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers, sits a uranium conversion
facility where I was fortunate to earn for my family and serve
the local union in several capacities, including chairing the
Health and Safety Committee.
This facility, currently idled, processes uranium later
used in nuclear fuel. The facility housed large quantities of
very dangerous chemicals, including hydrofluoric acid, sulfuric
acid, liquid hydrogen, and potassium hydroxide. A release at
the facility would have obvious catastrophic consequences.
Worst-case-scenario models accounted for an affected radius
that included several small towns and cities.
The facility is not covered by CFATS because it is
regulated in part by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. But the
NRC does not regulate the areas of the plant where the vast
majority of these chemicals are stored. Post-9/11, the NRC did
issue a site security order and included the chemical storage
in the restricted area of the plant, meaning everything inside
the fenceline. The security order, however, did not require
employee involvement, so the people most familiar working with
the chemicals did not participate in the site security plan.
Most of the people I worked with have never heard of CFATS.
Our union makes an effort to educate our members, provides
training in addition to what they receive from employers, and
has an annual health, safety, and environment conference that
convenes as we speak.
Even with additional training and education, we have
concerns that the CFATS program is widely unknown to our
members and even more so to workers at nonorganized facilities
that do not have the benefit of the additional resources the
union provides.
We have tried to address this issue with the Department,
but meaningful progress has not been made. This is one issue
that can be addressed by Congress by requiring, as an initial
step, a worksite poster at CFATS facilities and additional
worker participation.
I know from my experience that every day our members
manufacture and handle the most toxic and dangerous chemicals
in the world. The knowledge and experience they have of these
chemicals are invaluable. We know as much or more than anyone
the hazards associated with these substances and the potential
for damage to critical infrastructure, along with injury and
loss of lives.
It is crucial that the CFATS include language requiring
worker involvement in the site security plan and that workers
are able to choose the person to best represent them. That
representative should participate throughout all phases of
security planning, implementation, and inspections.
Our members are tasked with dealing with minor accidental
chemical releases, fires, and explosions on a more regular
basis than most realize and with large-scale events, like the
explosion and fire that happened on June 21st of this year,
near HF Unit at the Philadelphia Energy Solutions refinery in
south Philadelphia, where their quick, skilled actions saved
the community from disaster.
Whether from unintentional incidents or intentional
terroristic threats, our members know the security of the
facilities they work in is of grave importance. Many of the
refineries like PES, where our members work and live, that fall
under the jurisdiction of the Marine Transportation Security
Act, are exempted from the CFATS program.
We ask for the removal of that exemption and oppose any new
exemptions. We are concerned about legislative proposals that
exempt large categories of facilities and chemicals, such as
explosives and mixtures.
Our union supports stronger language for whistleblower
protections with a provision for remedy in the bill
reauthorization. Notifying workers that are at a CFATS facility
and have whistleblower protection should be a priority. Having
a remedy process makes workers more comfortable reporting
violations.
The legislation should also encourage facilities to employ
industry practices that reduce risk and eliminate hazards.
There are facilities that have instituted controls that have
inherently reduced risks, and those lessons should be shared
for implementation across the industry.
Reducing or eliminating hazards has a far greater effect on
protecting workers and communities and target reduction than
adding fences, cameras, and guards. It is critical that
relevant information be shared with local first responders,
local officials, and unions. Workers in the public are
important stakeholders in preventing and responding to
incidents.
Our union opposes any legislation that takes the industry
down a path of self-regulation. Congress has the opportunity to
strengthen the security of our country's chemical facilities
and make workers in our community safer by closing some of the
gaps of the CFATS program and making sure the working people at
these facilities have a voice that is heard.
Once again, thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]

Prepared Statement of John Paul Smith

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you so much, Mr. Smith.
And next we will hear from Ms. Roberts. You have 5 minutes,
please.

STATEMENT OF MICHELE L. ROBERTS

Ms. Roberts. Thank you. Dear members----
Thank you very much for having the opportunity to present
before you today. It is very important because today I stand
for the many communities that many people don't see, those who
live in the shadows of these facilities.
My name is Michele Roberts. I am the national co-
coordinator of the Environmental Justice Health Alliance for
Chemical Policy Reform. EJHA is what we refer ourselves to be.
I am equally an environmental scientist.
EJHA is a national collective of grassroots groups
throughout the country working to achieve environmental and
economic justice.
As recent industrial disasters in Wisconsin, as you heard,
Texas, and others, Pennsylvania, illustrate, a major industrial
chemical release, fire, or explosion can injure workers,
endanger communities, and cause the abrupt closure of important
industrial facilities.
While those specific incidents were not terrorism related,
they show the serious vulnerability of facilities located in
communities around the country. CFATS is a critical program to
defend against these incidents. Reauthorizing CFATS represents
an important opportunity to strengthen its effectiveness.
The existing statute must be improved in several areas. To
name a few examples, it should include water treatment and
maritime facilities, include clear protections against
cybersecurity threats, and require that the Department of
Homeland Security verify statements submitted by facilities
that claim to no longer fall within the jurisdiction of CFATS.
In addition to those points, I refer you to a letter that
we submitted to the committee from a coalition of health
worker, environmental justice, and allied organizations by
BlueGreen Alliance on August 23rd, 2019.
More broadly, environmental justice communities like those
affiliated with EJHA have issues with the following areas of
the current insufficient CFATS program. Frankly, the entire
CFATS program is secretive and confusing. Even experienced
advocates are sometimes unsure about aspects of CFATS. Because
it is impossible to know for sure what facilities are even
required to participate in CFATS, it is impossible for
community members or advocates to fully understand the level of
danger, planning, preparedness, or the lack thereof, et cetera,
in their neighborhoods.
The best way to guess that a facility might be a CFATS
facility is if it is an RMP, Risk Management Program facility,
but that is not a sure thing.
The emergence of new technologies and cybersecurity
threats, coupled with this administration's attacks on the
other foundational policies and programs that protect workers
and communities from catastrophic events at hazardous
facilities, means that a really strong and important CFATS bill
and program are more important now than ever.
The CFATS program is absolutely critical to protect the
financial interests of these facilities, as well as the health
and safety of their workers and the surrounding communities,
particularly in the light of the total failure of the EPA's
Risk Management Program to do so.
Further, we need CFATS program to reduce and eliminate
potential terrorists. We need best practices information, and
lessons learned should be shared and used to guide the standard
setting for other similar facilities. We need CFATS program
should account for overburdened communities and vulnerable
populations. The CFATS program and site planning decisions
absolutely must be more inclusive of and transparent to workers
at CFATS facilities.
EJHA strongly supported and advocated for the 2017 modest,
most deeply important improvements to the RMP rule. While the
improvements didn't go far enough to be fully protective, they
added critical elements that EPA is now trying to roll back.
Though not the subject of this particular hearing, we need
each of the members of this committee to join us in strongly
calling for EPA to fully implement the 2017 improvements of the
Risk Management Program and additionally strengthen the CFATS
program for those folks who I said languish in the shadows, the
ones you don't see, until an explosion occurs. And then,
unfortunately, we are seeing traumatized folks, who, by the
way, are living in trauma daily not knowing who is actually
thinking about them should there be explosion.
Thank you very much. We need a more protective bill for our
people and for workers.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Roberts follows:]

Prepared Statement of Michele L. Roberts

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[
Mr. Tonko. You are welcome. Thank you, Ms. Roberts.
And now we will hear from Mr. Whelchel for 5 minutes,
please, and welcome.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT WHELCHEL

Mr. Whelchel. Good afternoon, Chairman Tonko, Ranking
Member Shimkus, and distinguished members of the committee.
My name is Scott Whelchel. I am chief security officer and
global director of emergency services and security for Dow, a
material science company headquartered in Midland, Michigan.
In addition to my role at Dow, I am currently vice chair of
the Chemical Sector Coordinating Council. Prior to joining Dow,
I had the privilege of serving as homeland security and
emergency preparedness director for St. Charles Parish,
Louisiana, a community with a nuclear power facility and over
20 other industrial sites.
In St. Charles, industry and government work together in an
all-hazards and whole community approach to emergency
management. While in this role, I was honored to be elected by
my peers to serve as president of the Louisiana Emergency
Preparedness Association.
I am also a member of the Security Committee of the
American Chemistry Council, on whose behalf I am testifying
today. And I hope to bring both the private and public sector
perspectives to the discussion.
I want to thank you for allowing me to participate in this
important hearing, especially on this solemn occasion of 9/11,
and I am pleased to provide important input on the CFATS
program.
Since its inception, CFATS has made many programmatic
improvements. These include improved site security inspectors
and inspections, risk-assessment processes, the security plan
authorization process, and its collaboration with the regulated
community and others.
CFATS inspectors' levels of expertise has vastly improved,
and the program demonstrates broad consistency across regions
in the application of that expertise.
CFATS has an effective model of centralized management and
decentralized execution, which allows for headquarters and the
compliance branch to resolve any confusion stemming from the
variability and the interpretation of the CFATS performance
standards. This consistency has brought trust.
CFATS and the regulated community have not benefited from
the uncertainty stemming from short-term reauthorization.
Longer authorization periods provide important stability for
covered facilities to effectively plan for security investments
as well as enabling DHS to more efficiently and effectively
manage their program.
Given this, the ACC and its member companies see the value
and the need for periodic congressional oversight and would not
support permanent reauthorization.
It has been said that failures in security happen at the
seams, the seams of people, processes, and policy. Given that,
security risk is a function of threat, vulnerability, and
consequence, it takes both industry and government and others
to work together on each of the factors in this equation.
Therefore, it is imperative that DHS remains as transparent
as possible regarding the specific factors driving the risk and
resulting risk tier levels at facilities. CFATS should embrace
the post-9/11 philosophy of need to know but responsibility to
share.
Having spent over 20 years in the intelligence community, I
fully understand both sides of this equation and recognize the
challenges inherent in sharing information that is sensitive or
classified.
In that same spirit, industry must share all relevant
information needed for comprehensive emergency planning with
local emergency managers and response agencies. Not only is
this already addressed in the CFATS risk-based performance
standards, it is best covered by safety regulations overseen by
the EPA and OSHA.
But even with those drivers, information sharing is only
one step in the cycle. It is incumbent not only on industry to
share but for emergency management officials to drive
integrated planning, coupled with implementation of
comprehensive and inclusive exercise and training strategies,
to compliment the hazard awareness that comes with that
information sharing.
In St. Charles Parish, both government and industry adhered
to a set of mutually supporting obligations. As we sit here
today, local and State emergency planners and other agencies
receive chemical inventory data. This data in many States is
available in digital form and can be immediately uploaded by
those State and local agencies into CAMEO, or Computer Aided
Management of Emergency Operations, to facilitate enhanced
emergency planning efforts.
The CFATS program has made our industry, our communities,
and our country more secure. CFATS will grow stronger by
adopting the improvements outlined in the written testimony
provided and through continued engagement of this committee to
ensure the CFATS program stays on track.
The long-term security of our Nation is a goal and a
commitment that we all share.
On behalf of both the American Chemistry Council and Dow, I
appreciate this opportunity to present our views on this
important issue. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whelchel follows:]

Prepared Statement of Scott Whelchel
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Whelchel.
And, finally, we will hear from Mr. Fridley. Welcome. And
you are recognized for 5 minutes, please.

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW FRIDLEY

Mr. Fridley. Thank you, sir.
Good afternoon, Chairman Tonko, Ranking Member Shimkus, and
distinguished members of the committee.
My name is Matthew Fridley, and I am the safety, health,
and security manager for Brenntag North America, a chemical
distribution company headquartered in Reading, Pennsylvania.
In addition to my role at Brenntag North America, I am
currently the chair of the Chemical Sector Coordinating
Council. The Coordinating Council has a strong working
partnership in both the private and public sectors to develop
industry practice and to build culture in safety and security.
I am also the vice chair of the Regulatory Affairs and
Security Committee for the National Association of Chemical
Distributors, on whose behalf I am testifying today.
I thank you for allowing me to participate in this
important hearing today, and I am pleased to provide input on
the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standard.
Brenntag is currently the largest chemical distributor
globally and the second largest chemical distributor in the
United States. Brenntag North America operates over 180
facilities, employs over 5,100 people.
Brenntag has been an active member of the NACD for over 35
years. We have been participating in NACD's Responsible
Distribution Program since its inception in 1991. This
comprehensive program addresses environmental, health, safety,
and security risks. Member companies are third-party verified
to ensure quality and performance.
While security has always been an inherent element of the
Responsible Distribution after the 9/11 terrorist attacks, NACD
added specific security elements to the program, and the
association continues to enhance these requirements.
In 2013, NACD added a specific security code to Responsible
Distribution that consolidated many prior requirements and
enhanced others. These requirements apply to all NACD members,
including those that do not have facilities subject to the
CFATS regulation.
NACD and Brenntag support a long-term reauthorization to
the CFATS. I believe the CFATS program has made the chemical
industry in our Nation much more secure. From the time of the
program's establishment in 2007, the industry has invested
significant capital in training resources towards enhanced
security measures at our facilities.
In fact, Brenntag is one of most regulated companies under
CFATS, knows the importance of this program better than most.
While these resources did not necessarily assist us in growing
business, they were nonetheless important to ensure the
security of our company, our employees, and community.
DHS has generally taken a non-adversarial, reasonable
approach in implementing the CFATS regulation. DHS has made
significant improvements in the program following the program's
2014 reauthorization.
Changes in leadership of the CFATS program help establish a
commitment to work with the regulated chemical industries,
including the Chemical Sector Coordinating Council.
Another reason for the success of the CFATS program is the
fact that DHS has taken the time to truly understand the
diversity of the chemical industry and work with the regulated
community on security measures.
The clear objective of the CFATS program is to help
facilities be more secure. While not taking a punitive
approach, DHS has excelled in outreach in three key ways. They
have published numerous fact sheets and lessons learned
documents, interacting with facility owners and operators
during the Chemical Sector Security Summits and other industry
meetings and always making inspectors and headquarter personnel
available to walk and talk through issues or questions.
The program's 2014 reauthorization, which for the first
time provided CFATS a multiyear reauthorization, further
enhanced security efforts by providing regulatory certainty to
both industry and DHS.
This stability allowed DHS to increase efficiencies in the
program while streamlining the information submission process
for regulated facilities.
It is my hope that Congress can pass a long-term
reauthorization of the CFATS program. I believe the CFATS is
strong and requires minimal change. One priority I can
recommend is to require that any changes to the Appendix A
Chemicals of Interest List remains subject to rulemaking.
Changes to the COI List could have a major impact on my
business operation and security investments. Changes may be
needed upon discovery of a new threat information, but it is
important for regulated communities like mine to be able to
provide information to DHS and explain the impacts on any
proposed changes.
I also support the creation of a program where DHS would
recognize companies that meet certain criteria, such as
participation in a program like Responsible Distribution. By
acknowledging responsible distributors, DHS would then be able
to prioritize resources for the noncompliant outliers that may
pose a greater security risk.
CFATS is recognized globally as a model chemical security
framework worldwide, and DHS frequently responds to requests to
work with other governments as they seek to build cultures on
chemical security similar to the United States.
As the only Federal program focused solely on facility site
security with COIs, this must remain as CFATS program's only
purpose.
On June 19th, the House Homeland Security Committee
approved H.R. 3256, which will now be considered by this
committee. While NACD applauds Congress' commitment to
reauthorizing the CFATS program, we are concerned that
provisions in H. R. 3256 would jeopardize the integrity of the
program. Congress must ensure the CFATS reauthorization
legislation only strengthens, not weakens, facility site
security.
On behalf of the NACD and Brenntag, I appreciate this
opportunity to present our views on this important issue, and I
look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fridley follows:]

Prepared Statement of Matthew Fridley
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Mr. Fridley, thank you. Thank you to our entire
panel.
We have now concluded opening statements with our second
panel, and we now move to member questions. And I will start by
recognizing myself for 5 minutes.
So, Mr. Fridley and Mr. Whelchel, it seems that good work
is being done by industry in terms of seeking to reduce risks.
And I fully understand that these types of risk reduction
measures might not be possible at every site. But, generally,
do you think these types of actions to minimize, substitute,
moderate, or simplify hazardous processes are worthy of
exploring when a facility is considering how to address
security at those individual sites?
Mr. Fridley. Well, we are a chemical distribution company,
so our inventory and what we have on site is directly affected
by our customers. So we are working with some of our customers
on explaining this process. We actually have a Know Your
Customer program through the Responsible Distribution program
that we go out and we work with those customers so they
understand that the chemicals that they may be ordering may be
subject to CFATS regulation.
In turn, we will work with them to maybe, is there an
alternative to their process? If there is, then that would
directly affect my inventory so I wouldn't have to carry as
much inventory that I would have at my site.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Whelchel.
Mr. Whelchel. Yes, sir. I appreciate the question.
And I remember fondly being a part of a chemical--a CFATS
reauthorization--excuse me--a CFATS Top-Screen meeting where we
were assessing the facility for whether it should be screened
in or out of the program.
And it was during the discussion with the CFATS inspector
that they put forth the opportunity to visit risk reduction in
the way of changing either the inventory or the concentration
or other variables within the COI, and it was very welcomed by
the business. And the chemistry was changed, and we were able
to make those changes to our chemical processes.
We immediately started to replicate that potential to other
sites. And I am pleased to say we did so at multiple sites.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And do you believe there could be
greater guidance or encouragement from the Department to assess
these types of risk-reduction measures as part of the broader
security plan?
Mr. Whelchel. I actually believe that the right balance has
been struck. So the conversation was initiated initially by
CFATS inspectors, but it took our knowledge of chemistry and
our ability to look at our processes to carry it the rest of
the way.
So I believe the CFATS program is doing the right thing in
terms of initiating the action, and then industry then steps in
to meet the rest of the way for developing how we do chemical
production in a safer way.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Fridley, you would concur or----
Mr. Fridley. Yes, I would absolutely concur with Scott's
answer to that.
And the biggest thing, to his point, it is a shared
responsibility. You know, we have responsibility as well to
educate our customers. And again, it goes back to your Know
Your Customer program, which is a staple in our industry.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Ms. Roberts and Mr. Smith, I want to get your thoughts on
this because, to my mind, working to reduce risks from the
outset is likely one of the most important ways to provide
meaningful protection for workers in frontline communities.
Can you give us some perspective on what it means to reduce
risk for the people you are here to represent?
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I can give one example, at least the facility I worked at.
They changed one of the processes from using anhydrous
ammonia to aqueous ammonia, inherently reducing the risk of
release of anhydrous ammonia--I am sorry--completely eliminate
it from the facility. So removed that target to a much safer
technology and also protected the workers at the site.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And Ms. Roberts?
Ms. Roberts. Yes. And just--also, it is important to
understand that many of the communities who live fenceline to
these facilities are in housing structures that are not
conducive to even sheltering in place, if that be the case.
So it is extremely important for--to minimize that, of the
reduction of risk to communities by, as you heard, minimizing
the amount of chemicals stored, the hazard of the chemical that
is stored, if indeed there can be a safer substitution that can
be utilized.
In addition to that, I know that, as we say, we are not
speaking about the climate crisis, but even that in and of
itself impacts all of that. So it is extremely important to
look at all of the negative externalities that impact these
communities and workers.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And what barriers might prevent these
types of measures from being implemented? Is there a basis
towards risk management over reduction?
Mr. Smith. From my experience, the biggest barrier for a
lot of companies is cost. It can be costly to change a process
to make it safer. So I think encouragement from the Department
to employ practices at these facilities is helpful.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Ms. Roberts?
Ms. Roberts. I do agree with that. And we are equally
experiencing that with cost factor and now movement of
industries.
We recently learned that there are industries leaving the
Gulf Coast because of the high rates of--that are attributed to
that of the hurricanes, whether it is insurance or replacement.
And so some of these industries are now seeking to move into
what we are calling chemical valley in West Virginia and
thereby placing additional burden on the communities in West
Virginia. And so it is creating quite the conundrum for us at
this moment.
Mr. Tonko. I thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Shimkus, the subcommittee
ranking member, for 5 minutes to ask questions, please.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think we have got some agreement that long-term
reauthorization of CFATS is important. Would everybody agree
with that?
And we heard the first panel, and then this panel, we still
struggle with the difficulty between information available
versus security of that information, getting it to the proper--
the right people because, in World War II, it was loose lips
sink ships, and I think there is that concern. So it is how you
balance that for information versus basic security.
And then I think you hear from our side a concern about
ensuring that we don't duplicate other agencies who are
supposed to be doing their work, whether they are--you know, if
the EPA--if there is a concern that the EPA is not doing risk
management aspects, then we ought to kick EPA in the rear-end
and do risk management, not give to a security agency that
responsibility.
But I think we are close. I mean, I actually--these have
been good hearings.
Let me go to Mr. Whelchel first. You know, because--in
addressing this brief opening statement that I did here on this
round of questioning.
We have always had this debate on the personnel surety
programs, risk-tiering processes, and that there is a concern
that our information is not being shared. I think Mr. Smith
kind of recognized that.
Do you believe DHS needs to make changes to improve a
regulated facility's awareness of the risk factors?
Mr. Whelchel. I believe in a couple of areas, there is work
to do. So I do believe the CFATS program has struck the right
balance in looking at need-to-know and persons that are covered
under that need-to-know provision.
Chemical terrorism, vulnerability of information, their CVI
is an important component of the program. But to your point on
tiering, as an example, what moves a facility from one tier to
another once we put the information into CFATS' black box, for
lack of a better term? That is still a little bit unknown,
right.
Another thing that I think they can do more on information
sharing is how do we--whenever we submit our personal
identifying information for 12.4, our personnel surety, where
does it go, how long does it sit there prior to actually
getting bounced offer the TSDB, or terrorism screening
database? What does that process look like?
That is important for us to know because, if we are going
to limit certain actions at the facility as a result of not
having those people submitted or not having feedback from the
TSDB, then our operations might languish while we are waiting
for those processes to have an effect.
And if there is a hit on the TSDB, will we be made aware of
that? Will we be the partner at the table to help work through
that risk potential?
Mr. Shimkus. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Fridley, I am going to lump my two questions together
for the sake of time.
You are the head of the Chemical Sector Coordinating
Council. Can you kind of briefly explain, what does that mean?
And then the followup would be, how do you differentiate
between what is safety and what is security? Because that has
been part of our debate today.
Mr. Fridley. Well, first, Congressman Shimkus, I want to
take a second and thank you for your 24 years of service to the
great people of Illinois. As a constituent that lives in your
district, you will be greatly missed.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Mr. Fridley. And wish you well.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Mr. Fridley. So, to briefly kind of--I pulled out the
actual mission statement for the Sector Council, and if you
will allow me, I will read it to you.
The mission of the council is to advance the physical,
cybersecurity, emergency preparedness in the national security
sector infrastructure. The mission will be accomplished through
voluntary actions through the infrastructure owners and
operators represented in the council set forth in the
Presidential Policy Directive, PPD-21, and related authorities.
So the Chemical Sector Coordinating Council represents
about 15 associations that are voluntarily there to work with
and through, in collaboration with DHS, Coast Guard, and the
others. And we are doing this right now, as the chemical sector
that represents about 25 percent of the GDP. So we are a
massive undertaking.
But we are working across cross-sectors. We are starting to
do this even more, especially to the national critical
workgroup, to talk about some of these issues and
interdependencies during natural disasters----
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Safety versus security. So get that in.
Mr. Fridley. All right. Fantastic. Sorry about that, sir.
So safety versus security. Safety is OSHA; security is DHS.
It is very two clear lines. They are very much segmented
between the two, and I don't want to confuse the two and lump
them together.
Mr. Shimkus. My time has expired. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the Representative from Delaware,
Ms. Blunt Rochester.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, again, thank you to the panel.
I just wanted to follow up on Mr. Shimkus' line of
questioning.
First of all, I can hear from the panel and also from Mr.
Wulf that there is agreement that the CFATS program needs to
continue, needs to continue long term. And, again, this is the
perfect day to be having this hearing.
I still am struggling with this conversation about the
balance between need to know, security risk, and meaningful
engagement.
So I want to flip the table a little bit. Because as Mr.
Smith was talking, it was interesting, Ms. Schakowsky asked in
the last panel--asked Mr. Wulf about employees and do employees
know that they are working for, you know, a company. And I
understood you to say that it is--for some employees, it is
widely unknown and that more training and things need to be
done. And then as I heard Ms. Roberts talk about the fact that
it is sometimes confusing; even people who are experts don't
feel like they have the information they need. But then I also
heard Mr. Whelchel talk about the fact that there has been that
right balance struck.
So it appears to me there is sort of like government and
industry is good; it is golden. I haven't heard disagreement.
But in terms of employees and the community, I don't hear that
same thing.
So can Mr. Whelchel and Mr. Fridley talk about what you
think the community and employees do need to know, and they are
not knowing now currently. And if you two could talk about what
you think we don't need to know, we need to stay away from that
for whatever reason?
Do you get where I am going? I know you know what you need
to know. So can we start with Mr.--and we have got to make it
quick because I only have two minutes and 59 seconds.
Mr. Fridley. Yes, absolutely. Great question.
And what we do in our industry, and at least in our
facilities, is everybody is trained. Everybody is aware. There
is not a person there that is employed at our facilities that
are not made aware. And we select certain ones to be able to
participate in the development of if they have the knowledge
and, you know, the expertise to be able to assist us in those
programs.
As far as the community, we are all members of LAPCs. We
work with various agencies. We bring in those agencies. We do
drills together. We review----
Ms. Blunt Rochester. But are there things that they should
know and don't know right now?
Mr. Fridley. In my opinion, not in my experience.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. In your opinion, not in your
experience. OK.
Mr. Whelchel.
Mr. Whelchel. OK. What I will add to that is, I believe
there is a responsibility on the part of local emergency
management officials to bridge that gap, right? So they are
getting a lot of information relative to the safety risk and
then target information about any terrorism risk that might be
related to chemical facilities in their district or their
domain.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Let me stop you right there, because I
get where you are going because I come from a government
background.
So it is people are elected, people are appointed, but
sometimes the community, or even in a company, they don't get
access to the information; it just doesn't get to them.
So I am just curious if you think there are things that
people need to know on a basic level that they are not getting
information.
Mr. Whelchel. At the risk of underscoring Mr. Fridley's
point, general security awareness is a cornerstone of a good
security program. So you want to broadly put that security
awareness out into the community and to employees. So the See
Something, Say Something doesn't just go out to the citizens of
the U.S. We then target that message to our employees, and to
the extent necessary, to the citizens out in the community as
well through the emergency management program.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. And I only have a minute left. But can
I ask Ms. Roberts?
Ms. Roberts. Yes, it is a challenge for us. Because on the
local emergency planning commissions, those are great
commissions, but oftentimes there is one community
representative on that commission, and there are many
communities that could be surrounding or--or within certain
facilities.
One of the things that we do with the Environmental Justice
Health Alliance, in partnership with other entities, we
produced a report, ``Who is in Danger? Race, Poverty, and
Chemical Disasters,'' and equally we produced another report,
``Life at the Fenceline,'' and we did so with some of our
scientific and other partners because of the fact that the
communities needed to have information that they didn't have
access to.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you.
Ms. Roberts. So that is part of the challenge.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. In seven seconds, Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. I can only speak on behalf of workers to this
effect. And workers who have went through the security process
to be cleared to work in these facilities, it is my belief
there is very little they should not know. But I can tell you
there is a huge gap in what they should know and what they
don't know.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Got you. Thank you. I yield.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the Representative from Illinois,
Representative Schakowsky, for 5 minutes, please.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
I have looked at the testimony, I want you to know,
although I wasn't here in the room, and have a number of
questions that I wanted to ask.
So let me just start with this one. Hold on.
I wanted to ask Ms. Roberts, in your testimony, you
mentioned that water treatment--and you asked--here, I will
read it. The existing statute must improve in several areas. To
name a few specific examples, it should include water treatment
and marine facilities and on.
So what I wanted to ask you is if you could expand on what
you think about the way that water ought to be considered when
the investigators go out and look at the plants.
Ms. Roberts. Well, with respect to water treatment
facilities, they actually carry--they include chlorine and
other chemicals on site. And so that is the reason why we are
asking that those facilities be equally included in the CFATS
program.
Oftentimes, yet again, in environmental justice
communities, especially, where there again it is--the disparity
is race, then income, many of those communities are home to
high-risk facilities as well as water treatment facilities. And
so, therefore, there is cumulative impacts of high-risk
chemicals that are in these areas.
In addition to that, the maritime facilities, as you heard
Representative Dingell earlier speaking to the PFOA issue.
These are also challenges that our communities are confronted
with.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. Do you feel as if, in general,
the communities which you call--I think people in their
shadows, are getting the kind of stakeholder attention that
should be given when it comes to these plants and the
information that you need?
Ms. Roberts. Unfortunately, no. If the community is
involved in--what do they call it--the CAP program, the Citizen
Advisory Program, they are at the behest of the industry and
the industry sharing the information that the industry wishes
to share.
If they are on a local emergency planning commission, as I
said, equally as much, the community--there is one
representative typically on the committee. When communities are
seeking to try to find and get more information at times,
sometimes they are confronted by Homeland Security and utilize
Homeland Security laws against them as they are seeking to try
to get more information on what is being stored in and around
the facilities that are fenceline to their communities.
They are not seeking to terrorize these industries. They
are seeking information so that they can also equally better
protect themselves because many of these communities do indeed
have high rates of health challenges.
And, again, the infrastructure around their communities,
such as the roads, the housing structures, and what-have-you,
are not conducive oftentimes to the amount of pollution that
they are being----
Ms. Schakowsky. I am going to interrupt you just for a
second because I also wanted to deal with the issue of workers.
The last question that I asked of Homeland Security was the
question about, do workers even know that they are working at a
CFATS facility? And the answer was, well, they get training.
But do you feel, just as communities don't necessarily have
all the information, do workers--are you considered as
stakeholders sufficiently?
Mr. Fridley. Yes, ma'am. In my opinion, we train every
person; we educate every person that works at our facility that
what we have are security measures, you know, what we want,
what we expect if they see something suspicious, they get a
phone call, suspicious order, anything of that nature. So we
are educating those workforces to be able to, you know, to
report that properly to get that to the right agencies.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK. Thank you.
I have ten seconds. Does Steelworkers want to respond at
all to that?
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Ms. Schakowsky.
I can tell you, in our experience, most of our members do
not know that they work at CFATS facility until after an issue
with the program arises.
Just as a very quick example--and I can followup with
specifics--recently there was a Hill staffer visit to a CFATS
covered facility. And on their visit, the local union president
was unaware of the program or that the facility was covered by
the program.
Ms. Schakowsky. And that is a problem, right?
Mr. Smith. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Schakowsky. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the Representative from Florida,
who just got back, Representative Soto, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you all for coming today.
We had Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary Wulf in before,
and we were talking about some of the lessons from 9/11 and the
terrorist attacks--obviously, this is the 18th remembrance of
that--and that we formed the Department of Homeland Security to
be sort of the coordinator of all of these other agencies.
So the big question that we ended up talking about was how
so many other first responders and other workers worked at
Ground Zero and weren't told that the air was poisonous.
Obviously, we had to create the 9/11 Fund afterwards and just
amended it to help out--I represent an area with a lot of NYPD
retirees who worked and were there at the time, including some
of my current staff.
So a big issue for me and for everyone on the panel--and it
would be great to hear from each of you--what role should the
Department of Homeland Security play in making sure, as in
subsection F of this legislation, that we are sharing more info
with State and local emergency officials?
And let's start with--well, we will go down the list from--
starting with you, Mr. Fridley, and continue on.
Mr. Fridley. Thank you for the question.
And we actually work very well with a lot of the emergency
responders, specifically in your State. We did a large full-
scale exercise at a joint terrorism task group, DHS, TSA, FBI,
bomb and arson. It was a live drill that we actually invited a
Congressional Member to that event to witness the interagency
working together.
So we do a lot of those things. But to your question on the
air quality, that would be more from an EPA standpoint. We
would deal with DHS and those other agencies from a security
standpoint and let the other agencies handle those points that
you pointed out early on your thing.
But we do a lot of outreach. We bring them on our site; we
let them play on our site because we have the live--you know,
the processes that they can't simulate somewhere else. So we do
a lot of that outreach.
Mr. Soto. Thank you.
Mr. Whelchel.
Mr. Whelchel. Yes, just to add to that a bit. And thank you
for the question.
One thing I will point out is, when you look at the cadre
of folks that we have inside our company that we rely on for
emergency response, whether they are in the emergency services
and security function or they are operators that come to the
incident to help respond, many of those folks are themselves
volunteer fire service individuals in the community, reserve
deputies in law enforcement, emergency medical technicians, or
paramedics. And that is one of the powers that we harness by
being able to look at our employee base as members of the
community as well.
So there is a very strong focus on the emergency responder
and what they bring, whenever they increase the risk to
themselves, to help respond to an incident. So we wrap around
that any and all measures that need to be taken to protect
them, to equip them, to train them, recognizing the fact that
they are taking additional risk beyond what the average
employee does.
So that is one component, I think, is important to keep in
mind.
Mr. Soto. Thank you.
Ms. Roberts, how critical is it to get out to the community
and to our first responders the health issues?
Ms. Roberts. It is exceptionally important. And not only
first responders, but as you said, that of healthcare workers
and others to be together in the community, to have a complete
understanding of the landscape of communities.
One that I can think about right now is the Manchester
community of Houston, Texas, where you can't get--as well as
the Mossville community in Louisiana. You cannot get in and out
of those community without going over a railroad track. So, if
indeed there is an incident, you can actually die on the other
side waiting for a railroad track--for a railcar to be removed.
So these are the types of things.
In addition to that, the volunteer firefighters, as much as
we love them, are not fully and adequately trained to really
respond to these situations. And a case in point where--
unfortunately the Congresswoman from Delaware had to leave--
where the Croda plant actually shut down. It was ethylene oxide
facility, and the community folks had no idea what was going
on. And this was the weekend of Thanksgiving, one of the
highest traveled times going back and forth across the Delaware
Memorial Bridge. Each side of the bridge had to be shut down
for six and one half hours.
And so the communities had no idea what was going on, and
indeed, as well as some of the local volunteer firefighters. So
these are the things that must be shored up, these gaps. We
must have that kind of communication.
Mr. Soto. Because my time is limited, Mr. Smith, how
important is it for United Steel Workers to be informed right
away about health issues, particularly with Homeland being one
of the first on the scene?
Mr. Smith. I can tell you after spending years working in a
chemical facility on an emergency response team and as a first
responder in a municipal police department, that information
sharing is both critical and deficient. There is a big gap
between those who are formulating that emergency response plan
and those who are executing the emergency response plan. And I
would like to see the Department work to bridge that gap with
the critical information sharing.
Mr. Soto. Just to end--and thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
your flexibility.
I recognize that Homeland Security would work along with
EPA, and this would be one of their fundamental issues. But
they are there to coordinate the overall response to a
terrorism event, and so they would be the first ones on the
ground well before the EPA would ever get there.
When we are talking about day two or three after an event,
if there are carcinogens in the air, in the water, it is
absolutely still the Department of Homeland Security's
responsibility, as the coordinator of all of these other
agencies, to make sure that our workers in our local
communities and our first responders and other local
governments are made aware of these things and correct those.
Thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California,
Representative Ruiz, for 5 minutes, please.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to continue my line of questioning from the
previous panel.
And for this panel, I would like to talk to--or ask Ms.
Fridley a question.
We know that threats to the security of chemical plants
come in different forms, physical in nature, terrorist threats,
theft, leaks, whatnot. And I want to bring up the threat of
cybersecurity hacks.
So we heard earlier that the potential worst-case scenario,
as described by Mr. Wulf, is a cybersecurity attack that, due
to the production line, could actually create a scenario where
chemicals could be released, just through by somebody in a
computer halfway across the globe.
So I want to talk to you about what your assessment of the
cybersecurity threats could be in plants, in your plant, for
example. And can you give me an example of what you do to
address cybersecurity issues.
Mr. Fridley. Thank you for the question.
To your point and exactly what was described is something
that we actually took as a threat and we eliminated.
We have no industrial control----
Mr. Ruiz. When you took as a threat, is that because it was
mandatory for you to assess that, or you did it on your own?
Mr. Fridley. It was a joint effort between DHS and our
company to be able to look at the specific threats.
Mr. Ruiz. It was a joint effort. But is it through policy
that you were forced to do it, or did you guys kind of say,
``Hey, this is a good idea''?
Mr. Fridley. Through the assessment, when we were doing our
site security plans----
Mr. Ruiz. OK. That is part of your 18th point, yes.
Mr. Fridley. Yes, we identified that as a risk.
So a couple of those things, we eliminated that. We also
eliminated anything that----
Mr. Ruiz. When you say ``eliminated,'' what did you do?
Mr. Fridley. We had broken that gap between--we have
nothing on a computer system that controls any process any
longer.
Mr. Ruiz. OK.
Mr. Fridley. So that was one of the big gaps that we
identified. We eliminated it. So that way now our biggest
threat right now is probably a suspicious order coming in. So
we spend a lot of time training our----
Mr. Ruiz. Yes. And who do you employ to help you with
your--your cybersecurity systems? Do you contract out?
Mr. Fridley. No, sir.
Mr. Ruiz. Is it in-house?
Mr. Fridley. It is all in-house, and they work----
Mr. Ruiz. Is it difficult to find cybersecurity experts in
your area?
Mr. Fridley. We are lucky enough to have----
Mr. Ruiz. A good area?
Mr. Fridley [continuing]. Some very, very good people. And
they work with the US-CERT on anything, malware, alerts, and
different things that come up.
Mr. Ruiz. OK. Thank you.
Now, I want to talk with Ms. Roberts. Mr. Wulf said that
the agency consults with neighboring communities regarding
safety and other areas of consideration of that. And we know
that the vast majority of these plants are near minority,
underserved, and poor communities and that leaks can be
catastrophic, depending on the amount of leak and what
chemicals. And I know that you are with the national
coordinator of the Environmental Justice Health Alliance.
Do you think the Department of Homeland Security should
consult with the environmental justice communities or
stakeholders before planning, during planning, after an event,
to protect chemical facilities against terrorist attacks? And
do they do it?
Ms. Roberts. We believe that they should before, during,
and after, yes.
Mr. Ruiz. And do they do it?
Ms. Roberts. Do they do it? It depends. Unfortunately, we
have just not seen them in our communities, on the communities
we serve. Unfortunately, we see them after the fact.
Mr. Ruiz. So you were saying how in every community, they
address the first responders or specific people with titles.
And I think that is important, obviously.
But, oftentimes, those individuals are headquartered not in
those communities, especially in rural counties. And so they
are headquartered out in the big cities and not there. And so
the actual local residents who will be primarily affected by it
don't get consulted. Is that what I am hearing from you, like
those environmental or organizations within the communities?
Ms. Roberts. Yes. It is oftentimes after the fact. One
thing that did happen under the previous administration,
communities were indeed engaged. We were starting to try to
engage in a process.
Unfortunately, under this administration, it has not been
the case.
Mr. Ruiz. I have about a few seconds left.
I just want to mention that I introduced a bill, H. R.
3923, the Environmental Justice Act of 2019, which requires
agencies to consider the environmental justice implications of
their programs, policies, and activities, such as the Chemical
Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards Program, helping ensure that
we protect our communities in vulnerable populations and that
there is meaningful consultations before decisions are made and
even mitigation measures and cleanup measures as well. Because
no community should--there should be no decision about an issue
that will affect the health and well-being of a community
without the community's input.
Ms. Roberts. That is correct. And thankfully our
communities were engaged in the drafting of that bill and so to
try to make sure that they were protected by putting that
language into that bill. So there was consultation at that
point.
Mr. Ruiz. Absolutely. We made sure of that. Thank you.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the very patient Representative
from Colorado, Representative DeGette, for 5 minutes, please.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank the panel for coming. I watched your
testimony in my office, so I have been looking at everything
everybody said.
And as I said to Mr. Wulf before, Denver, which is my
hometown, is not usually considered a hotspot of chemical
industry activity, but we have over two dozen facilities that
manufacture, process, or use enough hazardous chemicals that
they are required to develop risk management plans under the
Clean Air Act.
A lot of those facilities are concentrated near the
neighborhoods of Elyria-Swansea and Globeville in north Denver,
right next to a big industrial area of Commerce City. These are
lower income communities with predominantly Hispanic
households.
And the same communities that bear a disproportionate share
of the risk of terrorist attacks on chemical facilities also
bear a disproportionate share of the pollution that they
produce. I think Ms. Roberts can totally agree with that.
And so like Mr. Ruiz and others, I really think that, as
well as the safety issue, we are addressing an environmental
justice issue here today.
So I wanted to ask you, Ms. Roberts, given the
vulnerability of what you call these fenceline communities, how
important would you say it is for the neighbors to know about
what is going on at these close-by chemical plants?
Ms. Roberts. It is exceptionally important because, with
the slightest incident, if there was a release or what-have-
you, that magic fence that the communities are told, you know,
that will protect them, the magic fence----
Ms. DeGette. Right.
Ms. Roberts [continuing]. It will not hold that incident.
So, once there is a release, it begins to move. And
depending upon the wind velocity and what-have-you, that is how
fast or how slow it can move.
Ms. DeGette. Right. And, you know, in these communities I
just mentioned, you are right. They are right along the border
with this industrial area. And they are residential
communities. So, you know, they don't--the chemicals don't just
stop at the city and county of Denver.
Is there something that community engagement can do to
encourage a neighboring plant to reduce its vulnerability to
attack? And what role does public scrutiny play in that?
Ms. Roberts. There is a lot that community engagement can
do, because communities do hold solutions. And there are
practical solutions that can be incorporated to make sure that
the safety of the community, as well as the worker, and, in
addition, the bottom line that many of these industries are
really concerned about will all be factored in.
So it is extremely, extremely important for the health and
well-being of that neighboring community.
Ms. DeGette. So, you know, this was one of the things that
I was talking about with Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary
Wulf, is, one of the things that chemical plants can try to do
is to reduce the amounts of explosive or toxic chemicals on-
site where it is feasible.
Would you agree with that, Ms. Roberts?
Ms. Roberts. Absolutely.
Ms. DeGette. And, Mr. Fridley, what is your view on that?
If it is feasible, wouldn't the best result be to reduce those
on-site chemicals?
Mr. Fridley. Yes, from a security standpoint, we are always
looking to reduce our threat and whatnot.
But from the EPA standpoint, what you were going with in
your first line, we do a lot of different reports. We do the
EPA 304, 311, 312, 313, TRI, RNP that you did, CERCLA. So we do
a lot of the reporting out so that we are communicating out to
those folks or to anybody, for that matter, what the hazards
and what the risks are.
Ms. DeGette. But what they need to know is what is there
and what they can do.
Now, Mr. Whelchel, I wanted to ask you the same thing.
Would you agree that, if feasible, one of the best ways to
reduce the risk is to remove unnecessary chemicals and
hazardous substances?
Mr. Whelchel. Thank you for the question. And yes.
And we have actually seen this in practice. So I relayed
earlier, during a CFATS inspection, it was communicated from
the inspector that there was a potential for us to reduce
either the concentration or the quantity of the chemicals that
we had on-site. And the business took a look at that and
immediately had a high interest in reformulating our processes
to be able to do so and then replicated that same process in
nonregulated facilities.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Mr. Whelchel. So we absolutely value the ability to reduce
our risk.
Ms. DeGette. Great.
Mr. Smith, what is your view of that?
Mr. Smith. I would agree with the rest of the panel. If you
can reduce a risk for the facility and the worker, I think it
makes things safer and more secure.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thanks again for having
this hearing. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. You are welcome.
And the gentlelady yields back.
That, I believe, concludes all who were looking to ask
questions of our second panel. And I thank all of our witnesses
again for joining us at today's hearing.
I remind Members that, pursuant to committee rules, they
have ten business days by which to submit additional questions
for the record to be answered by our witnesses. And then I ask
that each witness respond promptly to any such questions that
you may receive.
[The information follows:]
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Chairman, before you do that, may I ask
for a moment for personal privilege?
Mr. Tonko. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. I want to recognize my pastor, who just came
into the back of the room. He is here to give the invocation,
or the prayer, for tomorrow's session. And other than my wife,
if you want to know who keeps me on the straight and narrow, it
is Pastor Wright.
So thank you for letting me introduce him.
Mr. Tonko. Well, thank you.
And thank you, Pastor, for joining us. And thank you for
leading the ranking member in the right way.
Mr. Shimkus. Amen.
Mr. Tonko. We much appreciate it.
So I do request unanimous consent to enter a list of
documents into the record. They include a letter from a
coalition of organizations providing recommendations for the
CFATS reauthorization, a letter from the National Association
of SARA Title III Program Officials, a letter from the National
Association of Manufacturers, and a letter from the Fertilizer
Institute and the Agricultural Retailers Association.
Without objection, so ordered. So they are entered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Tonko. With that, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:11 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
