- CLEARING THE AIR: LEGISLATION TO PROMOTE CARBON CAPTURE, UTILIZATION, AND STORAGE

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CLEARING THE AIR: LEGISLATION TO PROMOTE
CARBON CAPTURE, UTILIZATION, AND STORAGE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 6, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-97

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

50-302 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman

BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              GREG WALDEN, Oregon
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York             FRED UPTON, Michigan
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           PETE OLSON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California           DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico            H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PAUL TONKO, New York                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York, Vice     BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chair                            BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa                 LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts                    MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California            RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California                TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DARREN SOTO, Florida
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
------

Professional Staff

JEFFREY C. CARROLL, Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Deputy Staff Director
MIKE BLOOMQUIST, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change

PAUL TONKO, New York
Chairman

YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York           JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
SCOTT H. PETERS, California            Ranking Member
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California    CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware       BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
DARREN SOTO, Florida                 BILLY LONG, Missouri
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              BILL FLORES, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
JERRY McNERNEY, California           JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California, Vice Chair    GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    11

Witnesses

Mikael Sasha Mackler, Director of the Energy Project Bipartisan
Policy Center..................................................    13
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Answers to submitted questions...............................   140
John Noel, Senior Climate Campaigner With Greenpeace USA; Jason
Begger, Executive Director of the Wyoming Infrastructure
Authority......................................................    21
Prepared statement...........................................    23
Jason Begger, Executive Director of the Wyoming Infrastructure
Authority......................................................    28
Prepared statement...........................................    30
Answers to submitted questions...............................   142
Laurel Harmon, Ph,D., Vice President of Lanzatech, INC...........    34
Prepared statement...........................................    36
Lee Anderson, Government Affairs Director of the Utility Workers
Union of America, AFL-CIO......................................    43
Prepared statement...........................................    45

Submitted Material

H.R. 1166, the USE IT Act of 2019................................    76
Letter of February 5, 2019, from Andrew Grinberg National
Campaigns Special Projects Manager Clean Water Action to Mr.
Tonko, and Mr. Shimkus, submitted by Mr. Tonko.................   107
Letter of February 5, 2020, from Sean O'Neill Senior Vice-
President, Government Affairs Portland Cement Association, to
Mr. Tonko and Mr. Shimkus, submitted by Mr. Tonko..............   110
Letter of February 6, 2020, from Claude Letourneau, CEO, Svante
to Mr. Tonko, and Mr. Shimkus, submitted by Mr. Tonko..........   112
Letter of February 4, 2020, from James D. Ogsbury, Executive
Director, the Western Governors Association, to Mr. Tonko and
Mr. Shimkus, submitted by Mr. Tonko............................   115
Letter of February 5, 2020, by Our Children's Trust, to Mr. Tonko
and Mr. Shimkus, submitted by Mr. Tonko \1\
Letter of August 20, 2019, from Carbon Capture Coalition,nto Mr.
Smith, et al., submitted by Mr. Tonko..........................   126

----------
\1\ Letter has been retained in committee files and also is
available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF18/20200206/
110482/HHRG-116-IF18-20200206-SD007.pdf.
Letter of February 27, 2019, from Jesse Walls, Senior Director of
Government Affairs, National Audubon Society, to Mr. Barrasso
and Mr. Carper, submitted by Mr. Tonko.........................   131
Letter of February 27, 2019, from Lonnie R. Stephenson,
President, International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, to
Mr. Barrasso and Mr. Carper, submitted by Mr. Tonko............   132
Letter of February 26, 2019, from Jason Albritton, Director of
Climate and Energy Policy, the Nature Conservancy, to Mr.
Barrasso and Mr. Carper, submitted by Mr. Tonko................   134
Letter of April 9, 2019, from Hal Quinn, National Mining
Association, to Mr. Barrasso, submitted by Mr. Tonko...........   135
Letter of February 27, 2019, from Neil L. Bradley, Executive Vice
President and Chief Policy Officer, U.S. Chamber of Commerce,
to the Senate members, submitted by Mr. Tonko..................   136
Report from World Resources Institute ``CarbonShot: Federal
Policy Options for Carbon Removal in the United States'',
submitted by Mr. Tonko \2\
Memo of March 20, 2018, from the Congressional Research Service
regarding CCUS projects and CO
2
pipelines as covered
projects under FAST 41 guidance, to Mr. Goldner, submitted by
Mr. Tonko......................................................   137

----------
\2\ Report has been retained in committee files and also is
available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF18/20200206/
110482/HHRG-116-IF18-20200206-SD015.pdf.

CLEARING THE AIR: LEGISLATION TO PROMOTE
CARBON CAPTURE, UTILIZATION, AND STORAGE

----------

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 6, 2020

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
the John Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon.
Paul Tonko (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Tonko, Peters, Barragan,
Blunt Rochester, Soto, DeGette, Schakowsky, Matsui, McNerney,
Ruiz, Pallone (ex officio), Shimkus (subcommittee ranking
member), Rodgers, McKinley, Johnson, Long, Mullin, Carter,
Duncan, and Walden (ex officio).
Staff present: Jeffrey C. Carroll, Staff Director; Adam
Fischer, Policy Analyst; Jean Fruci, Energy and Environment
Policy Advisor; Waverly Gordon, Deputy Chief Counsel; Caitlin
Haberman, Professional Staff Member; Rick Kessler, Senior
Advisor and Staff Directory, Energy and Environment; Brendan
Larkin, Policy Coordinator; Dustin Maghamfar, Air and Climate
Counsel; Nikki Roy, Policy Coordinator; Mike Bloomquist,
Minority Staff Director; Peter Kielty, Minority General
Counsel; Ryan Long, Minority Deputy Staff Director; Mary
Martin, Minority Chief Counsel, Energy and Environment and
Climate Change; Brannon Rains, Minority Legislative Clerk; and
Peter Spencer, Minority Senior Professional Staff Member,
Environment and Climate Change.
Mr. Tonko. Good morning, everyone. The Subcommittee on
Environment and Climate Change will now come to order.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes for the purpose of an
opening statement but before we get started, I want to announce
that Jason Albritton from the Nature Conservancy, who was a
scheduled witness, will not be able to join us for today's
hearing. We were told that his wife went into labor this
morning, and we are wishing them a speedy and safe delivery,
and we will include his statement for the record.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

And let me please have the witnesses come to the table,
please.
OK, we will applaud the new delivery.
Thank you, everyone.
This morning, this subcommittee will examine H.R. 1166, the
USE IT Act, which was introduced by Representatives Peters,
McKinley, and Veasey last year.
There is a wide range of views on carbon capture on this
subcommittee and I ask my colleagues to set aside any feelings
you might have about carbon capture in the power sector for the
next few hours.
If of you believe, as I do, that we need to achieve net
zero emissions in the next 30 years or sooner, that means we
need to develop solutions for difficult to decarbonize sectors
and processes, along with deploying many more sources of
negative emissions.
And if you believe, as I do, that we need major
infrastructure investments as part of our climate response,
then we will need low emissions in cement, steel, and other
industrial products. In some cases, carbon capture is simply
the best and most viable option for parts of the industrial
sector.
The USE IT Act looks beyond traditional carbon capture. The
bill amends the Clean Air Act to authorize a competitive prize
for--of $35 million for direct air capture, or DAC, and $50
million for CO
2
utilization R&D.
Title 2 clarifies CO
2
pipelines as being
eligible covered projects under the FAST Act. Estimates suggest
that 5 and 15 gigatons of CO
2
emissions will need to
be removed globally every year by 2050 to stay below 1.5
degrees Celsius of warming and we will need to achieve net
negative emissions later in this century.
To date, we have offered minimal Federal R&D funding for
negative emissions technologies, despite recent recommendations
from the National Academies for a large and sustained
commitment.
Let's be clear. Carbon removal is not a substitute for
major and rapid emissions reductions but technological and
natural solutions for carbon removal that stores CO
2

in plants, soils, oceans, geological formations, and products
will be an important strategy in a comprehensive climate
response.
Direct air capture is among the most exciting of these
technological solutions. DAC has flexibility in where it can be
sited and can even co-locate with a sequestration or
utilization site to ensure DAC capacity is available at the
scale necessary later in this century.
The Rhodium Group recently estimated that 9 million tons of
removal capacity will need to be in operation in the year 2030.
We are a long way from that target today and there are big
hurdles to get this technology to scale. There is a need for
low emissions, electrical and thermal energy, and viable
storage options. And cost remains the biggest challenge, but
the experience of the past decade with renewables, lithium-ion
batteries, and other technology shows that R&D investments,
coupled with smart deployment policies, can drastically reduce
these costs. We are on the cusp of major breakthroughs but
innovation requires a holistic approach. R&D for technology
development is part of the equation but deployment incentives
like the 45Q tax credit in California's Low Carbon Fuel
Standard are important to monetize negative emissions
practices. A Federal carbon pricing program could be structured
with this in mind as well. Federal support can also help
develop markets for carbon utilization, including fuels,
chemicals, cement, and carbon fibers. This is one of the goals
of the buy clean proposal in our clean future draft.
While I support many of the concepts in this bill, I
believe there are ways to improve it. Mr. Shimkus can attest
that I am not usually one to deny new authorities to EPA but,
in this case, I believe the Department of Energy is best suited
to lead Federal CCUS R&D efforts. That is not to say EPA and
other agencies will not have important roles to play, including
monitoring and verification of storage sites to ensure carbon
is staying permanently sequestered.
I am also interested in how the Federal Government can help
standardize and verify the greenhouse gas life cycle assessment
for utilization and sequestration practices. This could help
foster a common understanding of the net impacts of different
technologies and methods.
Finally, the largest current market for CO
2

utilization is enhanced oil recovery. This is concerning, as we
need to be moving away from the use of petroleum. This makes it
all the more important and urgent that we develop those new
markets for alternative uses.
I look forward to today's discussion and I hope we can
examine some of these potential issues and work together with
the bill's sponsors moving forward.
With that, the Chair now recognizes Mr. Shimkus, our
ranking member of the Subcommittee on Environment and Climate
Change for 5 minutes, please, for his opening statement.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I start with
my 5 minutes, I would like to ask unanimous consent to brag for
a minute on my son.
Mr. Tonko. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. My son has just left the Peace Corps. He is
working his way back to the United States. I had a book made
that, when I visited him in Tanzania over Christmas, and I want
my colleagues to see and share. I am going to take it home
after this week. So if they are looking through a photo album,
a real small one, no disrespect to the panel. It is just that I
want them to see what my son did and I am very proud of him.
So----
Mr. Tonko. Well, proud dad, we wish your son well and a
safe return. And thank you for sharing that. We appreciate his
service.
Mr. Shimkus. And my Democratic friends can see it also, if
they would like.
Mr. Tonko. Well, thank you for sharing that in a bipartisan
way.
Mr. Shimkus. In a bipartisan way.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonko follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Paul Tonko

This morning the Subcommittee will examine H.R. 1166, the
USE IT Act, which was introduced by Representatives Peters,
McKinley, and Veasey last year.
There are a wide range of views on carbon capture on this
Subcommittee. I ask my colleagues to set aside any feelings you
might have about carbon capture in the power sector for the
next few hours.
Because if you believe, as I do, that we need to achieve
net-zero emissions in the next 30 years- or sooner- that means
we need to develop solutions for difficult to decarbonize
sectors and processes, along with deploying many more sources
of negative emissions.
And if you believe, as I do, that we need major
infrastructure investments as part of our climate response,
then we will need low-emissions cement, steel, and other
industrial products.
In some cases, carbon capture is simply the best and most
viable option for parts of the industrial sector.The USE IT Act
looks beyond traditional carbon capture.
The bill amends the Clean Air Act to authorize a
competitive prize of $35 million for Direct Air Capture, or DAC
("dack"), and $50 million for CO
2
utilization R&D.
Title II clarifies CO
2
pipelines as being eligible
covered projects under the FAST Act.
Estimates suggest between 5 and 15 gigatons of
CO
2
emissions will need to be removed globally every
year by 2050 to stay below 1.5 degrees Celsius of warming, and
we will need to achieve net-negative emissions later in the
century.
To date, we have offered minimal federal R&D funding for
negative emissions technologies, despite recent recommendations
from the National Academies for a large and sustained
commitment.
Let's be clear, carbon removal is not a substitute for
major and rapid emissions reductions.
But technological and natural solutions for carbon removal
that stores CO
2
in plants, soils, oceans, geological
formations, and products will be an important strategy in a
comprehensive climate response.
Direct Air Capture is among the most exciting of these
technological solutions. DAC has flexibility in where it can be
sited and can even co-located with a sequestration or
utilization site.
To ensure DAC capacity is available at the scale necessary
later in the century, the Rhodium Group recently estimated that
9 million tons of removal capacity will need to be in operation
in 2030.
We are a long way from that target today, and there are big
hurdles to get this technology to scale.
There is a need for low-emissions electrical and thermal
energy and viable storage options. And cost remains the biggest
challenge.
But the experience in the past decade with renewables,
lithium-ion batteries, and other technologies shows that R&D
investments, coupled with smart deployment policies, can
drastically reduce these costs.
We are the cusp of major breakthroughs, but innovation
requires a holistic approach. R&D for technology development is
part of the equation, but deployment incentives, like the 45Q
tax credit and California's Low Carbon Fuel Standard, are
important to monetize negative emissions practices.
A federal carbon pricing program could be structured with
this in mind as well.
Federal support can also help develop markets for carbon
utilization, including fuels, chemicals, cement, and carbon
fibers. This is one of the goals of the Buy Clean proposal in
the CLEAN Future draft.
While I support many of the concepts in this bill, I
believe there are ways to improve it.
Mr. Shimkus can attest that I am not usually one to deny
new authorities to EPA, but in this case, I believe the
Department of Energy is best suited to lead federal CCUS R&D
efforts.
That is not to say EPA and other agencies will not have
important roles to play, including monitoring and verification
of storage sites to ensure carbon is staying permanently
sequestered.
I am also interested in how the Federal Government can help
standardize and verify the GHG lifecycle assessment for
utilization and sequestration practices. This could help foster
a common understanding of the net-impacts of different
technologies and methods.
Finally, the largest current market for CO
2

utilization is enhanced oil recovery. This is concerning as we
need to be moving away from the use of petroleum. This makes it
all the more important and urgent that we develop those new
markets for alternative uses.
I look forward to today's discussion. I hope we can examine
some of these potential issues and work together with the
bill's sponsors moving forward.

Mr. Tonko. OK, the Chair now recognizes the proud dad for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Carbon capture utilization and storage, or CCUS has been an
important feature of Federal clean energy research and
development policy for over 15 years. In fact, the DOE has been
researching Decatur, Illinois, an ADM site. At least a decade,
they have been doing research there.
This support has been driven by the plain fact that fossil
energy, coal, oil, and natural gas, are and will remain central
to our nation's economy for decades to come. Even accounting
for accelerating growth of renewables, fossil energies will
continue to fuel the majority of our nation's electricity
production, our transportation, and remain absolutely essential
in a wide range of industrial processes well into the mid-
century and beyond, as last week's annual energy outlook shows.
And fossil energy will remain dominant throughout the
developing world, as those nations grow, prosper, and seek the
tremendous benefits of affordable energy, and industrial
materials, and mobility, as we have discussed in previous
hearings. Given this fact, policies that seek to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions in a way that is economically
beneficial must build upon our existing energy supply,
infrastructure, and industrial systems. This is where CCUS can
serve an essential role.
While there continue to be technical and economic
challenges, we are fortunate that innovation and successful
demonstrations inlarge-scale industrial capture and advances in
the demonstration of power sector carbon capture have shown the
viability of these technologies. In addition, given the
economic value of carbon dioxide for enhanced oil recovery,
there is growing demand for infrastructure in the energy
sector, particularly pipeline infrastructure that can take
CO
2
that has been captured and sequester it, and put
it to beneficial use, which brings us to the topic of today's
hearing.
H.R. 1166, or the USE IT Act introduced by Mr. Peters and
Mr. McKinley, takes useful steps to accelerate the development
and deployment of CCUS projects, including expressly direct air
capture projects, and to help ensure more efficient timely
permitting on CO
2
pipeline infrastructure.
The bill focuses on EPA's existing nonregulatory authority
under the Clean Air Act to develop and support a 10-year
program to award funds for direct air capture research and to
develop the Federal expertise on this front with a Direct
Capture Technology Advisory Board.
The bill also directs EPA to provide, in what will be a
close collaboration with the Department of Energy, technical
and additional financial support for carbon utilization
technologies. And consistent with the agency's existing
authorities, it directs the agency to report on risks and
benefits associated with carbon storage in deep saline
formations.
The assistance reporting and Federal collaboration that
would grow out of this portion of the bill would help
accelerate CCUS technologies, but it would be critical to
enable the infrastructure for these technologies, which is why
permitting provisions of the bill are so important. These
provisions clarify current law by making it explicit that CCUS
projects, including direct air capture projects, which we will
hear about today, and carbon dioxide pipelines, can be
considered, quote, unquote, covered projects under Title 41 of
the FAST Act. These provisions enhance coordination of
permitting decisions with a goal of more rapid buildout of
infrastructure.
Today, we will hear from several witnesses who can speak to
climate policy, the innovation, and infrastructure benefits of
the USE IT Act.
I would like to welcome the two witnesses in particular.
Jason Burger from--Begger from Wyoming Infrastructure Authority
offers a useful perspective on the energy-rich state that is
seeking to develop energy resources and pipeline infrastructure
with new cleaner technologies. And that actually, would be very
applicable to southern Illinois with our margin oil wells and
our coal formations.
And Lee Anderson of the Utility Workers Union of America
can help remind us that behind our energy and electricity
resources are American workers and their families who can be
the first to bear the harsh economic impacts of expensive
regulatory policies we would keep in mind, along with the
American consumer, as we develop climate policies.
Mr. Chairman, as you know, this is a thoughtful, widely
supported bill. It is the kind of bipartisan legislation that
we know we can enact in law and make meaningful changes to our
climate policies.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the time and
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. John Shimkus

Carbon capture, utilization, and storage or CCUS has been
an important feature of federal clean energy R&D and policy
support for over 15 years.
This support has been driven by the plain fact that fossil
energy-coal, oil, and natural gas-is and will remain central to
the nation's economy for decades to come.
Even accounting for accelerating growth of renewables,
fossil energy will continue to fuel the majority of our
nation's electricity production, our transportation, and remain
absolutely essential in a wide array of industrial processes
well into the mid-century and beyond, as last week's Annual
Energy Outlook shows.
And fossil energy will remain dominant throughout the
developing world as those nations grow, prosper, and seek the
tremendous benefits of affordable energy and industrial
materials, and mobility, as we've discussed in previous
hearings.
Given this fact, policies that seek to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions in a way that is economically beneficial must
build upon our existing energy supply, infrastructure and
industrial systems. This is where CCUS can serve an essential
role.
While there continue to be technical and economic
challenges, we are fortunate that innovations and successful
demonstrations in large scale industrial carbon capture, and
advances in the demonstration of power-sector carbon capture
have shown the viability of these technologies.
In addition, giving the economic value of carbon dioxide
for enhanced oil recovery, there is growing demand for
infrastructure in the energy sector-particularly pipeline
infrastructure that can take CO
2
that has been
captured and sequester it or put it to beneficial use. Which
brings us to the topic of today's hearing.
HR 1166 or the USE It Act, introduced by Mr. Peters and Mr.
McKinley, takes useful steps to (a) accelerate development and
deployment of CCUS projects-including especially direct air
capture projects-and (b) to help ensure more efficient, timely
permitting on the CO
2
pipeline infrastructure.
The bill focuses on EPA's existing non-regulatory authority
under the Clean Air Act to develop and support a ten-year
program to award funds for direct air capture research and to
develop the federal expertise on this front with a Direct Air
Capture Technology Advisory Board.
The bill also directs EPA to provide-in what will be close
collaboration with the Department of Energy-technical and
additional financial support for carbon utilization
technologies. And, consistent with the agency's existing
authorities, it directs the agency to report on risks and
benefits associated with carbon storage in deep saline
formations.
The assistance, reporting, and federal collaboration that
would grow out of this portion of the bill should help
accelerate CCUS technologies. But it will be critical to enable
the infrastructure for these technologies, which is why the
permitting provisions of the bill are so important.
These provisions clarify current law by making explicit
that CCUS projects-including direct air capture projects, which
we will hear about today--and carbon dioxide pipelines can be
considered ``covered projects'' under Title 41 of the FAST Act.
These provisions enhance coordination of permitting decisions
with the goal of more rapid build out of infrastructure.
Today we will hear from several witnesses who can speak to
the climate policy, the innovation, and the infrastructure
benefits of the USE It Act.
I'd like to welcome two witnesses in particular: Jason
Begger of the Wyoming Infrastructure Authority offers the
useful perspective of an energy rich state that is seeking to
develop its energy resources and pipeline infrastructure, with
new, cleaner technologies.And Lee Anderson, of the Utility
Workers Union of the American, can help remind us that, behind
our energy and electricity resources are American workers and
their families, who can be the first to bear the harsh economic
impacts of expensive regulatory policies. We should keep them
in mind, along with the American consumer as we develop climate
policies.
Mr. Chairman, as you know, this is a thoughtful, widely
supported bill. It is the kind of broad bi-partisan legislation
that we know we can enact in law and make meaningful changes to
our climate policies.
We have already missed opportunities to enact versions of
the legislation. I am encouraged that the Majority wants to
move this bill and will work with you to ensure that happens
successfully.

Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Pallone, chairman
of the full committee, for 5 minutes for his opening statement,
please.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

TheChairman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The pictures in that book with your son are beautiful. You
took the pictures? Wow, they are really nice.
Mr. Shimkus. Shocking, yes?
TheChairman. No, no, it is really--it is nice.
I am pleased to be here this morning to discuss H.R. 1166,
the Utilizing Significant Emissions with Innovative
Technologies Act. This is a bipartisan bill introduced by
Representatives Peters, McKinley, and Veasey. It is designed to
advance carbon capture storage and utilization, important
components of combating the climate crisis, as this committee
works to reach a hundred percent clean economy.
In earlier hearings on the climate crisis, we consistently
heard that we must develop and deploy technologies to capture
and store carbon to prevent it from further elevating
greenhouse gas pollution. And earlier this week, a group of
carbon capture experts said that we may need as many as 2,000
carbon capture facilities by 2040 to reach the mid-century
goals laid out in the Paris Agreement.
Clearly, we must find ways to remove carbon from waste
streams and from the atmosphere and store it permanently and
safely. We also need to develop new processes to convert carbon
waste streams into durable products. Unfortunately, steel,
cement, and other industrial manufacturing activities will
likely continue to require fossil fuels and, therefore, for
these industries, carbon capture and sequestration are
essential. They are needed to achieve the deep greenhouse gas
pollution reductions that science says are required.
So there is a lot we must do to achieve these goals. We
have to bring the cost of carbon capture down. We have to
support research and development of new carbon-based products,
and we must gain experience with carbon storage that is
verified by monitoring and reporting programs to ensure carbon
is being stored permanently and safely. And we also need
policies that mandate the control of carbon pollution directly
or indirectly.
The bill H.R. 1166 addresses some of these important goals
and I commend the bill's sponsors for their efforts. At the
same time, I believe the bill could be strengthened to more
effectively reduce emissions.
First, I believe that the Department of Energy, which has
pursued research, development, and demonstration of carbon
capture and sequestration for many years, should play a larger
role.
Second, while enhanced oil recovery is still the most
profitable use for captured carbon, we will not make real
progress in reducing climate pollution unless there is
significant net storage associated with it.
And I am concerned, or I should say; third I am concerned
that the bill focuses too heavily on streamlining pipeline
construction. I would like to see it provide a lot more
direction on medium- to long-term planning for a time when
enhanced oil recovery will not be the dominant use of captured
carbon.
I also want to work with the sponsors to ensure the bill
does more to ensure that captured carbon is safely and
permanently sequestered. I have concerns about the EPA's track
record of enforcing the requirements for companies claiming the
sovereign sequestration tax credit. We must also strengthen
EPA's underground injection control program to ensure that it
protects underground sources of drinking water. This is
particularly important as climate change stresses those sources
in new ways.
H.R. 1166 makes a significant down payment on crucial
innovation in carbon dioxide removal and CCS technologies. And
that is important. I also think we must do far more to
effectively tackle the climbing prices.
And I commend the bill's sponsors for their leadership on
this issue. I hope we can continue to work together to
strengthen it and gain additional support from members on both
sides.
We have excellent witnesses today. I am looking forward to
their testimony but I want to yield my remaining time to
Representative Peters, who is the sponsor of the bill.
Mr. Peters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am pleased
to be here today to talk about the USE IT Act, which we proudly
introduced with Representatives McKinley, Veasey, Schweikert,
and Bustos, and Senators Whitehouse and Barrasso in the Senate.
Although the global carbon budget projected U.S. emissions
to fall 1.7 percent in 2019, we are still running a huge
emissions deficit by any accounting standards. And to reach net
zero by 2050, scientists tell us that emissions must fall by
about eight percent every year over the next decade.
The Democrats on this committee have released draft
legislation proposing how to close the emissions gap by
investing in clean energy and efficiency, retrofitting
buildings, decarbonizing cement, steel, and plastics,
increasing public transportation, and even planning--reducing
deforestation, even planting new trees to increase carbon
storage.
In the words of Chairman Tonko, our committee has, quote,
harvested the low-hanging fruit, energy efficiency,
conservation weatherization research, and grid modernization
but we have to be more ambitious, as I think the chairman
explained.
Experts before this committee have testified that we can't
reach net zero by 2050, unless we figure out a way to
decarbonize cement, steel, and plastics in the industrial
sector, and aviation, and shipping in the transportation
sector.
Today we are going to hear why USE IT is as important to a
small company like LanzaTech, a bio startup--a biotech startup
figuring out how to scale up technologies that convert
CO
2
into fuel and other valuable projects, as it is
to the State of Wyoming's infrastructure authority, which has
been working with DOE for years to develop large scale
integrated CCS projects. USE IT is a standalone bill but it is
a vital complement to this committee's climate priorities and I
look forward to the testimony today. I thank the witnesses and
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

I'm pleased to be here this morning to discuss H.R. 1166,
the Utilizing Significant Emissions with Innovative
Technologies Act. This is a bipartisan bill introduced by
Representatives Peters, McKinley and Veasey. It is designed to
advance carbon capture, storage and utilization--important
components of combatting the climate crisis as this committee
works to reach a 100 percent clean economy.
In our earlier hearings on the climate crisis we
consistently heard that we must develop and deploy technologies
to capture and store carbon to prevent it from further
elevating greenhouse gas pollution. Earlier this week, a group
of carbon capture experts said that we may need as many as
2,000 carbon capture facilities by 2040 to reach the mid-
century goals laid out in the Paris Agreement.
Clearly, we must find ways to remove carbon from waste
streams and from the atmosphere and store it permanently and
safely. We also need to develop new processes to convert carbon
waste streams into durable products. Unfortunately, steel,
cement and other industrial manufacturing activities will
likely continue to require fossil fuels, and therefore, for
these industries, carbon capture and sequestration are
essential. They are needed to achieve the deep greenhouse gas
pollution reductions that science says is required.
There is a lot we must do to achieve these goals. We must
bring the costs of carbon capture down. We must support
research and development of new carbon-based products. And, we
must gain experience with carbon storage that is verified by
monitoring and reporting programs to ensure carbon is being
stored permanently and safely. We also need policies that
mandate the control of carbon pollution directly or indirectly.
H.R. 1166 addresses some of these important goals, and I
commend the bill's sponsors for their efforts. At the same
time, I believe the bill could be strengthened to more
effectively reduce emissions.
First, I believe that the Department of Energy, which has
pursued research, development and demonstration of carbon
capture and sequestration (CCS) for many years, should play a
larger role.
Second, while enhanced oil recovery is still the most
profitable use for captured carbon, we will not make real
progress in reducing climate pollution unless there is
significant net storage associated with it.
Third, the bill also focuses heavily on streamlining
pipeline construction. I would like to see it provide more
direction on medium to long-term planning for a time when
enhanced oil recovery will not be the dominant use of captured
carbon.
I also want to work with the sponsors to ensure the bill
does more to ensure that captured carbon is safely and
permanently sequestered. I have concerns about the
Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) track record of
enforcing the requirements for companies claiming the carbon
sequestration tax credit. We must also strengthen EPA's
Underground Injection Control Program to ensure that it
protects underground sources of drinking water. This is,
particularly important as climate change stresses those sources
in new ways.
H.R. 1166 makes a significant down payment on crucial
innovation in carbon dioxide removal and CCS technologies -and
that's very important. I also think we must do far more to
effectively tackle the climate crisis. I commend the bill
sponsors for their leadership on this issue. I hope we can
continue to work together to strengthen it and gain additional
support from members on both sides of the aisle.
We have an excellent panel of witnesses here today. I look
forward to hearing their testimony and recommendations for
improving this legislation.

Thank you, I yield my remaining time to Rep. Peters, the
sponsor of the bill.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Representative Walden, ranking member of the full
committee for 5 minutes for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. It is Thursday. It
is OK.
H.R. 1166, the USE IT Act, sponsored by Mr. Peters and Mr.
McKinley, is a practical, it is a widely supported, and it is a
bipartisan piece of climate legislation. Versions of this
legislation were passed out of the Senate last year. We
included it in the Republican 12 and 20 packages, 12 bipartisan
bills with the USE IT Act at the top we can enact into law. It
is a bill that we know can make a meaningful difference for our
economy and for addressing climate risks.
The USE IT Act provides the Environmental Protection Agency
direction under existing authorities and in coordination with
the Department of Energy to foster innovations in carbon
capture technologies and improve scientific understanding of
carbon sequestration. The bill addresses permitting delays and
it will ensure more timely deployment of these technologies and
pipeline infrastructure essential to these innovative
technologies to succeed economically.
This important bill is not complicated. It authorizes
targeted financial support and it will generate useful
information to assess technological deployment. Furthermore, it
builds upon the bipartisan work of past Congresses, like
reforms to our tax code to encourage more investment in carbon
capture and storage.
There will be additional practical and achievable steps the
administration and Congress will have to take to clear paths
for these innovative technologies to assist with cleaner energy
systems, but this is exactly how we implement workable climate
policies.
And what results can we expect to see from implementing
workable climate policies? Well, a recent report from the
National Petroleum Council on carbon capture technologies
points out that, over the next two decades, global GDP is
expected to double. With this tremendous growth in prosperity,
billions of people will be lifted out of poverty and the
increases in prosperity will be enabled by a 25 percent, a 30
percent increase in energy demands. So energy demand is going
to go up 25 to 30 percent, as a result of growth in the
worldwide economy.
This demand, as we have examined in past hearings, will
depend upon affordable, reliable energy and this is a growth
that will drive the bulk of future greenhouse gas emissions in
the world going forward. So by developing American energy
resources, by exploring the fruits of our energy revolution, by
developing advanced technologies like CCUS and perfecting their
deployment, we can enjoy the economic and environmental
benefits of exporting our innovations to these developing
nations. Practical policies that promote competitive
development of our own resources, not through top-down
regulation and taxation but through American ingenuity and
innovation is how we can best address global emissions.
Our witnesses this morning will be able to talk about the
importance of these bills for expanding our existing resources
and infrastructure. It is a good start, Mr. Chairman, and I
look forward to continuing to work with you to move this
legislation forward.
And let me say I agree with the majority. We need climate
action. That is why we cannot let another opportunity slip by.
You see we have already missed two opportunities to get the USE
IT Act enacted.
There was a three-corners agreement on a version of this
legislation in the Defense Authorization Act. We were at the
table to negotiate but, unfortunately, the majority pulled the
plug.
There was another opportunity in the year-end spending
bill. Unfortunately, the majority again said no.
So, let's not let another opportunity slip by and I hope we
can look at other practical measures that we can enact into
law. There are other bipartisan measures we can and should
move.
Just last week, we held an informative hearing on wildfires
and I appreciate the committee doing that, the upshot of which
was there was wide agreement that implementing active forest
management will help reduce risks of fire and increase
opportunities for resilient, sustainable forests. And by the
way, healthy green forests sequester carbon. There is a bill
for that and there is a bill to restore burned forests to plant
trees to increase carbon sinks and provide for a healthier
economy as well.
So there are more bills like this to consider, Mr.
Chairman, where I think we can find common ground. I am hopeful
we can start working on the measures we agree upon and get them
into law. These are the types of concrete legislative steps we
can take right now to make progress.
And so, I do look forward to working with you, Mr.
Chairman, and I yield back a full minute and seven seconds.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Greg Walden

H.R. 1166, the USE IT Act, sponsored by Mr. Peters and Mr.
McKinley is a practical, widely supported, bipartisan bill.
Versions of this legislation were passed out of the Senate last
year and we included it in our 12 in '20 package. Twelve
bipartisan bills--with the USE IT Act at the top--that we can
enact into law. It is the kind of bill we know can make a
meaningful difference for our economy and for addressing
climate risks.
The USE IT Act provides the Environmental Protection Agency
direction, under existing authorities and in coordination with
the Department of Energy, to foster innovations in carbon
capture technologies and improve scientific understanding of
carbon sequestration.
The bill addresses permitting delays and it will ensure
more timely deployment of these technologies and pipeline
infrastructure-essential for these innovative technologies to
succeed economically.
This important bill is not complicated. It authorizes
targeted financial support and it will generate useful
information to assist technological deployment. Furthermore, it
builds upon the bipartisan work of past Congresses, like
reforms to our tax code to encourage more investment in carbon
capture and storage.
There will be additional practical and achievable steps the
Administration and Congress will have to take to clear the path
for these innovative technologies, to assist with cleaner
energy systems. But this is exactly how we implement workable
climate policies.
And what results can we expect to see from implementing
workable climate policies?
A recent report from the National Petroleum Council on
carbon capture technologies points out that, over the next two
decades, global GDP is expected to double. With this tremendous
growth in prosperity, billions of people will be lifted out of
poverty. And the increase in prosperity will be enabled by a
25% to 30% increase in energy demand.
This demand, as we've examined in past hearings, will
depend on affordable, reliable energy - and this is the growth
that will drive the bulk of future greenhouse gas emissions in
the world.
By developing our American energy resources, by exporting
the fruits of our energy revolution, by developing advanced
technologies like CCUS and perfecting their deployment, we can
enjoy the economic and environmental benefits of exporting our
innovations to these developing nations.
Practical policies that promote competitive development of
our own resources, not through top-down regulation and
taxation, but through American ingenuity and innovation is how
we can best address global emissions.
Our witnesses this morning will be able to talk about the
importance of bills like this, for expanding our existing
resources and infrastructure. This is a good start, Mr.
Chairman. I look forward to working with you to move this
legislation.
And, let me say, I agree with the majority - we need
climate action. That's why we cannot let another opportunity
slip by. You see, we've already missed two opportunities to get
the USE IT Act enacted; there was a three corners agreement on
a version of this legislation in the Defense Authorization Act.
We were at the table to negotiate, but the Majority pulled the
plug. There was another opportunity in the year end spending
deal, but the Majority again said no.
We should not let more opportunities slip by.
And I hope we can look at other practical measures that we
can enact into law. There are other bi-partisan measures we can
move.
Just last week we held an informative hearing on wildfires,
the upshot of which was that there was wide agreement that
implementing active forest management will reduce fire risks
and increase the opportunity for more resilient, sustainable
forests; there's a bill for that. There's a bill to restore
burned forests, to plant trees to increase carbon sinks and
provide for a healthier economy.
There are many more bills like this to consider. So, I am
hopeful we can start working on the measures we can agree upon.
These are the types of concrete legislative steps we can take--
right now--to make progress. I am looking forward to working
with you.

Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair would like to remind Members that, pursuant to
committee rules, all Members written opening statements shall
be made part of the record.
We now introduce the witnesses for today's hearing. And
again, thank you, one and all, for joining us and sharing your
thoughts and solutions with us.
First, we begin with Mr. Sasha Mackler, Director of the
Energy Project Bipartisan Policy Center; next, we have Mr. John
Noel, Senior Climate Campaigner with Greenpeace USA; then, Mr.
Jason Begger, Executive Director of the Wyoming Infrastructure
Authority; then, Dr. Laurel Harmon, Vice President of
LanzaTech, Inc.; and finally, Mr. Lee Anderson, Government
Affairs Director of the Utility Workers Union of America, AFL-
CIO.
Before we begin, I would like to explain the lighting
system. In front of you are a series of lights. The light will
initially be green. The light will turn yellow when you have 1-
minute remaining. Please begin to wrap up your testimony at
that point. The light will turn red when your time expires.
At this time, the Chair now recognizes Mr. Mackler for 5
minutes, please, to provide your opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF MIKAEL SASHA MACKLER, DIRECTOR OF THE ENERGY
PROJECT BIPARTISAN POLICY CENTER; JOHN NOEL, SENIOR CLIMATE
CAMPAIGNER WITH GREENPEACE USA; JASON BEGGER, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF THE WYOMING INFRASTRUCTURE AUTHORITY; LAUREL
HARMON, PhD., VICE PRESIDENT OF LANZATECH, INC.; AND LEE
ANDERSON, GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS DIRECTOR OF THE UTILITY WORKERS
UNION OF AMERICA, AFL-CIO

STATEMENT OF MIKAEL SASHA MACKLER

Mr. Mackler. Thanks and good morning. As you said, I am
Sasha Mackler and I direct the Energy Project at the Bipartisan
Policy Center.
I am delighted to be here this morning on behalf of the BPC
to express support for the USE IT Act. BPC believes that the
only way to confront the climate challenge is to dramatically
accelerate the development and deployment of carbon-free energy
systems that are cost-competitive with traditional options and
the USE IT Act is a critical step and a bipartisan step in this
direction for carbon capture.
I should also note at the outset that in addition to my
work on Energy Policy at the BPC, I spent a number of years
recently working in the private sector as a developer of carbon
capture projects. Through this experience, I can offer a
firsthand account of the challenges facing CCUS development and
I can attest to the need for more targeted Federal support, if
we are serious about bringing carbon capture into the
marketplace in a meaningful timeframe.
BPC is enthusiastic to support the USE IT Act. It focuses
on a set of technologies that will be critical to achieving our
twin goals of mitigating climate change and keeping America's
economy strong for this century and beyond.
My testimony this morning will focus on four main points:
first, the importance of innovation; second, the critical role
that carbon capture utilization and storage must play in
decarbonizing our energy system; third, the unique role that
direct air capture, or DAC, could play in managing climate
risks; and finally, the significance of utilization in the
trajectory of scaling carbon capture systems.
At the outset, I think it is useful to step back and remind
ourselves of the role of technology innovation and how it has
always played a key role the success of our nation. The Federal
Government's willingness to invest in key technologies at key
junctures from the space race to the IT revolution has been
crucial to navigating past eras of economic transformation.
Today, we face another such transformation and it is every bit
as challenging as the ones that defined previous eras, the
transformation to a net zero economy by mid-century.
And time is not on our side. We need to reduce global
emissions to net zero by 2050. That is only three short decades
from now. To achieve our climate goals, we need more and better
tools than we have now and that is where carbon capture comes
in.
We need these technologies because we simply don't have
non-fossil fuel alternatives for all the energy-using sectors
of our economy, including applications such as long-haul air
travel or some industrial processes.
How can carbon capture help? Carbon capture from industrial
sources offers a way to capture CO
2
from smokestacks
and prevent it from going into the atmosphere. Another class of
carbon capture technologies, often called direct air capture or
DAC, offers a way to remove CO
2
from the ambient
air.
And DAC is worth focusing on for a minute because it has
gotten less attention in the past but that is changing really
quickly, as many are increasingly seeing the advantages of
adding DAC to our climate toolkit. The key virtue of DAC is
that it can be used to remove CO
2
already in the
atmosphere and if we can make work at reasonable cost, it will
give us a tool for reversing past emissions and, in effect,
canceling out new emissions that have no practical way to be
avoided.
But the only way that DAC will be ready to play a
significant role is if the Government helps to jumpstart it.
USE IT does this by creating incentives for technology
development and by enabling permitting improvements for
projects and their supporting infrastructure. So this is the
feature of the legislation that we are particularly
enthusiastic about.
Another feature of the USE IT Act I want to draw attention
to is its focus on CO
2
utilization. This is critical
because it can help make the economics of DAC or carbon capture
work in the near-term. Potential uses for CO
2
are
actually not too hard to think up. CO
2
can be used
as a feedstock for cement or synthetic fuels but the biggest
immediate market for large quantities of CO
2
today
is in the oil industry for enhanced oil recovery.
On balance, we at BPC have concluded that carbon capture
with enhanced oil recovery is worth pursuing, both because it
offers immediate benefits in terms of reducing the net
emissions associated with oil production and because of the
synergies it affords in terms of engaging a major industrial
partner, accessing potentially large sources of private capital
for technology development and infrastructure buildout, and
developing the needed regulatory frameworks for carbon storage.
And we are not alone in reaching this conclusion. A number of
prominent environmentalists also agree.
So in closing, I want to thank the subcommittee again for
this opportunity to testify and explain some of the reasons why
we at the BPC support the USE IT Act. Technology innovation has
always been America's superpower and it remains our best bet
today.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mackler follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much.
Now, we recognize Mr. Noel. You are recognized for 5
minutes, please.

STATEMENT OF JOHN NOEL

Mr. Noel. Thank you. Chairman Tonko, Ranking Member
Shimkus, members of the committee, thank you for inviting me to
testify today. It is an honor.
My name is John Noel and I am a senior climate campaigner
at Greenpeace USA.
We are not opposed to the provisions in the USE IT Act that
support carbon utilization research. And of course, science and
technology are going to play a major role in addressing the
climate crisis but we do need a vision for carbon removal that
is fully decoupled from oil production.
The amount of carbon we have to potentially remove is
entirely up to us and what we do right now this decade. The oil
and gas growth paradigm makes this difficult and that is what I
am here to add context to about today and why we are skeptical
of any policy that would strengthen the oil industry in the
name of climate action. We see addressing the climate crisis
and growing the fossil fuel industry is mutually exclusive.
We cannot escape the fact that absolute demand for and
production of fossil fuels must decline rapidly. This necessary
decline in oil production calls into question the wisdom of
incentivizing enhanced oil recovery. As written, the USE IT Act
does not provide any guardrails to ensure that it will not lead
to decades of increased oil production. If it is, indeed, an
onramp to a broader decarbonization agenda, where is the
requisite off ramp for fossil fuels?
Proponents reported that the EOR industry could triple in
size by 2030, with 375 million barrels of additional annual
production. This would likely only occur under scenarios where
the U.S. production continues to expand in the coming decade,
rather than declining at a pace consistent with the 1.5
scenarios.
Proponents are also clear that the long-term growth for the
industry is constrained by a lack of access to consistent
sources of CO
2
and pipelines are needed to expand.
Companies see the future that a subsidized EOR industry could
unlock and the resource estimates we are talking about here are
breathtaking in the context of an unfolding climate crisis.
Advanced Resources International says there are 284 billion
barrels of additional oil that are technically favorable to
CO
2
injection but the industry intends to step
beyond just aging conventional oil fields and apply the
technology to unconventional resources, as I talk more about in
my written testimony. The expansion into unconventional
resources complicates the oil industry's carbon storage
narrative, as storage in unconventional resources is not well
understood. We also note that CO
2
EOR operations are
in addition to the rest of the industry's growing production
pie. Nowhere in this discussion is there commitment to a
managed phaseout of production in line with climate science. It
is net expansion.
Part of the justification used for EOR and incentives
created by the USE IT Act is that these same productive oil
formations could someday be converted to long-term storage. A
2010 DOE paper determined that it does not make sense as a
mitigation tool to construct pipelines to oil fields to expand
EOR without first establishing that suitable long-term storage
capacity exists. This is not happening, as I talk more about in
my written testimony.
IEA goes further and says we need a, quote, paradigm shift
in regulations from the way EOR is currently practiced. I do
not see the oil industry welcoming a paradigm shift in
regulation. At this very moment, oil interests are working to
undermine the existing secure geologic storage regulations
under Section 45Q. This is a tax credit as part of the system
of incentives designed to drive new carbon capture investment.
Senator Menendez recently sent a letter to the IRS
Inspector General calling for an investigation into section
45Q, quote: publicly available data suggests that the vast
majority of 45Q tax credits claimed have come absent the
required the monitoring, reporting, and verification systems
that ensure the safe disposal of captured carbon, in clear
contravention of current law and guidance. End quote.
This is the type of the regulatory framework and associated
tax incentives that this legislation is born into and we think
that it ensures that the industry will pocket these subsidies,
continue on its current course of full-throttle expansion, and
fight any additional policies to reduce our dependence on oil.
The industry's campaign to undermine true climate solutions in
order to maintain demand is real and well-documented. EOR
cannot be siloed off from the rest of a company's portfolio or
business strategy. Climate science and carbon math are not
complete without an honest analysis of political power.
Thank you for your consideration of these risks.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Noel follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much, Mr. Noel.
Mr. Begger, you are now recognized for 5 minutes, please.

STATEMENT OF JASON BEGGER

Mr. Begger. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and members of
the subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to speak with
you today.
My name is Jason Begger, and I am the Executive Director of
the Wyoming Infrastructure Authority. The WIA is tasked with
promoting and assisting the development of energy
infrastructure in deploying technology. We are focused on
solutions.
Our largest current project is the Wyoming Integrated Test
Center, which is a public-private partnership between the State
of Wyoming, Basin Electric Power Cooperative, Tri-State
Transmission and Generation Association, and the National Rural
Electric Cooperatives Association. The ITC is a post-combustion
research facility located at Basin Electric's Dry Fork Power
Station near Gillette, Wyoming. It is the largest facility of
its kind in the U.S., providing much-needed scaleup space to
learn--to better learn how to reduce the costs and find new
methods of capture in managing CO
2
afterwards.
At the top of our utilization efforts is a partnership with
the NRG COSIA Carbon XPRIZE, which will award $20 million in
prizes to teams that are best able to convert CO
2

into other valuable products, such as carbon nanotubes,
methanol, building materials, polymers, and plastics. Wyoming
is also developing a project with Japan and Columbia University
to convert CO
2
into calcium carbonate.
While developing high-tech products capture the
imagination, the reality is we will require a wide array of
options, including enhanced oil recovery and geologic
sequestration. EOR is an attractive early option, due to the
fact that it produces revenue and can help with the economics
until capture costs are reduced in future years.
On the utilization side, the market for carbon nanotubes is
small, whereas, concrete is immense but a lower value product.
Determining how to best manage carbon is a large puzzle of
factors, including geology, markets for products, and pipeline
infrastructure. If the U.S. is going to permanently sequester
CO
2
, the country will need a massive expansion of
pipelines to carry the carbon from places it is produced to the
places it can be used.
For example, there is an extraordinary amount of
CO
2
produced by Midwestern ethanol facilities.
However, they are located hundreds of miles from places with
the right geology for permanent storage for EOR and no pipeline
exists in the Midwest. The current CO
2
pipeline
network is about 5,000 miles of fragmented lines, compared to
the current natural gas pipeline network, which is 60 times
larger, about 300,000 miles. We will need a comparable network
of CO
2
pipelines to move carbon from sources to
sinks.
Further complicating pipeline buildout is many of the
places with the best geology have a Federal lands nexus, which
triggers National Environmental Policy Act reviews. A typical
project with mixed Federal, State, and privately-owned lands
may require upwards of 30 reviews, permits, and approvals from
various regulatory bodies. If it crosses multiple states, this
number increases accordingly.
NEPA analyses were historically completed in relatively
short timeframes. Unfortunately, they have evolved in such a
way that they may take upwards of a decade and tens of millions
of dollars to complete. The NEPA analysis and permitting for a
wind farm in Wyoming and accompanying multi-State transmission
line has cost over $200 million and has taken ten years.
In Wyoming, a right-of-way application for a 200-mile
CO
2
pipeline project was submitted in February 2013.
Six years later, in February of 2019, they finally received the
Record-of-Decision from the Bureau of Land Management. Delays
such as these affect the economics and viability of projects,
not to mention the lost years of carbon reductions.
In an attempt to expedite the development of pipeline
infrastructure, Wyoming launched the Wyoming Pipeline Corridor
Initiative. This effort has identified the areas best suited to
site projects, ideally near existing infrastructure and away
from environmentally sensitive areas and critical wildlife
habitats. In December 2019, the BLM closed a comment period on
the proposal. We hope this initiative can shave years off the
permitting process.
Oftentimes, we focus on the various pieces of carbon
management and do not consider the entire system and necessary
links to make it a reality. H.R. 1166 is very important to that
effort, as it provides both critical fundings for the
utilization of technologies and a mechanism to accelerate the
construction of the CO
2
pipeline infrastructure that
will be necessary.
I appreciate the opportunity to speak with you today and
will gladly answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Begger follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Begger.
Dr. Harmon, you are now recognized for 5 minutes, please.
Your mike, please.

STATEMENT OF LAUREL HARMON, PhD.

Dr. Harmon. I just wanted to thank you, Chairman, Ranking
Member, and members of the committee. On behalf of LanzaTech,
for whom I am the Vice President of Government Relations, I am
here to share our story of carbon capture and utilization to, I
hope, explain to you that this is, in fact important, real, and
accessible today and, at the same time, share, through our
experience, why the research and development provisions in CCU
that are in the USE IT Act are so important to advance the
technology.
Carbon capture and utilization is an approach which will
actually take carbon, which currently looks like an
environmental liability, and turns it into an economic
opportunity, creating jobs and creating new sustainable
products.
LanzaTech was actually founded with the vision that carbon
needs to be treated as a resource and that we need to find ways
to reuse all carbon that has already served a function and turn
it into products which then can supplement, replace those
products which we currently rely on from petroleum and other
virgin fossil sources. In particular, as we look ahead to a
decarbonized world, we will need carbon-dense fuels for
aviation. We will continue to need materials from--that are
carbon-based materials.
So we are a biotech company. We are located in Skokie,
Illinois, where we have about 130 people in Representative
Schakowsky's district. We certainly appreciate the support we
have gotten over the years. We are privately held. We have
raised over $340 million of capital from diverse global
investors, all of whom see the value of CCU.
And in particular, I would like to emphasize that we are a
technology----
Mr. Tonko. Dr. Harmon, I hate to interrupt you. Can you
move the mike just a bit----
Dr. Harmon. Certainly.
Mr. Tonko [continue]. Because it is not recording on--OK.
Thank you.
Dr. Harmon. Is that better?
We, as a technology-licensed----
Mr. Shimkus. But you need to mention Schakowsky's name one
more time so it really gets out there.
Dr. Harmon. OK, I will say that very loudly.
So as a technology-licensor, the capital that we have
raised has all been for the purposes of technology development
and the technology is now being implemented throughout the
world.
Our focus is on industrial carbon capture and utilization
and our first target is in the steel sector. Our technology
uses an ancient biological pathway in which microbes actually
consume CO
2
instead of sugars in a fermentation that
then produces ethanol, produces other chemicals, and we have
platforms and partnerships to take our fermentation products
and turn them into aviation fuel, into chemicals, and into,
ultimately, textiles and other types of durable goods.
An important element, if we are looking at steel emissions,
is that the steel sector produces emissions that are very
highly concentrated in carbon monoxide. And in fact, carbon
monoxide is the primary thing which our fermentation uses as
its feedstock. And, therefore, it is very important, when we
think about utilization at large and, in fact, for USE IT, that
the utilization provisions extend not only to CO
2

but to carbon monoxide, in the form of carbon oxides, as
expressed in 45Q.
I would like to share that our technology is gas
fermentation technology, which I have written about more in the
written testimony, is, in fact operating commercially, directly
producing ethanol from steel mill emissions. And we have taken
the ethanol produced from steel mill emissions and produced jet
fuel, which has been used in both a transpacific and a
transatlantic flight.
When we think about ethanol as a platform, it is suitable
as a pathway to plastics, to the types of fuels that I
mentioned but, in addition, technology such as ours can
directly produce chemical intermediates that end up on
coatings, in plastics, in jackets that people wear, or in yoga
pants.
And so in closing, I would like to emphasize that the
journey from an idea and a new technology to a commercial plant
operating in the real world has taken 14 years and significant
investment. And therefore, the investment in R&D represented by
USE IT is extremely important to advance this industry.
So thank you, and I appreciate the opportunity, and look
forward to any questions. [The prepared statement of Dr. Harmon
follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you so much, Dr. Harmon.
And now, Mr. Anderson, you are recognized for 5 minutes,
please.

STATEMENT OF LEE ANDERSON

Mr. Anderson. Thank you, Chairman Tonko, Ranking Member
Shimkus, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. My name
is Lee Anderson and I am the Government Affairs Director for
the Utility Workers Union of America.
The Utility Workers Union represents around 50,000 workers
in the electric, gas, nuclear, and water utility sectors. It is
a truism, at this point, that the manner in which the world
generates electricity is evolving rapidly. The Utility Workers
recognize that this change is being driven by economics, by the
recognition that global climate change is happening, and that
it is the result of manmade carbon emissions.
That point is clear. The need to manage carbon emissions at
scale globally is urgent. We must decarbonize our economy;
however, we must do so in a manner that does not crash local
and regional economies. To date, however, change has been
occurring randomly, even chaotically, in the absence of a
comprehensive plan for how to curb emissions without disrupting
our economy.
The closure of a power plant means the loss of many
hundreds of jobs for working people directly employed in the
operation and maintenance of these large facilities. As these
plants are often situated in areas that make them the best
source of high-quality employment for many miles around, the
challenges these workers often face in seeking new equivalent
employment can range from difficult to nearly insurmountable.
This is why we will continue to fight for the survival of all
of our facilities, the employment of workers, and the stability
of their communities wherever we see hope for the future,
particularly through the use of science.
Technology enabling the decarbonization of power plants
holds the potential to change the economics of a facility,
enabling it to compete with other generation options and the
opportunity for these workforces to make their contribution in
the fight against global climate change, all while preserving
the culture and social fabric of families, communities, and way
of life that, once lost, can never be replaced. This is the
simple reason why we support the USE IT Act.
Policy choices, or the lack thereof, have very real human
consequences. Using public policy to advance research and
development on carbon capture technology will make it easier
and cheaper to build these systems at scale. Moving the science
through successive generations, driving down costs, innovating
ever-better approaches to the problem of carbon emissions, all
this adds up to a greater ability to operate power plants as
cleanly and efficiently as possible and retain them for what
they are--critical infrastructure, providing an essential
public service and anchor institutions that underpin the lives
of workers, their families, and their communities.
Indeed, the follow-on effects to communities, with the loss
of many thousands of jobs indirectly supported by these plants,
the shuttering of small businesses dependent on the middle-
class workers in the power sector as their customers, as well
as the impact on town and county budgets after the loss of
significant portions of their annual tax revenues due to the
closer of these large plants, have all too often added up to a
landscape of cultural and personal destruction.
For our members, then, the best outcome will always be to
keep their families and communities intact but this outcome
requires retaining the economic anchors that make that
possible. When facilities close, very soon families disperse,
towns haul out, and what is left behind are empty desks in the
schools, empty pews in the churches, and empty coffers in local
government budgets.
Although we also call on policy leaders to develop a system
that addresses the needs of workers and communities in the
aftermath of plant closures, the reality is that this remains
almost entirely in the realm of the hypothetical, one that is
meaningless for those who have already lost their jobs, and for
those who will continue to do so, unless we can harness
technology to retain the assets that make these jobs possible
in the first place.
Without this ability, workers with few or no easy
alternatives will continue to be left behind. Personal
calamity, whether due to divorce, bankruptcy, substance abuse,
or simply the Diaspora of families and the economic, social,
and physical collapse of communities, will continue to occur
time and again as deindustrialization continues to play out
across the U.S.
In summary then, we believe the USE IT Act will promote the
use of technology that can create a cleaner environment, create
and retain family-supporting and community-supporting jobs, and
preserve American communities anchored by the energy industry.
Thank you for the opportunity to be a part of today's
proceedings. I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Anderson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Anderson.
We will now move to member questions.
Before we do that, however, our technical team has asked
that our guests move the microphones directly front and center,
so that the recording is as crisp as it can be. So, I thank you
for that.
I will now start the member questions by recognizing myself
for 5 minutes and, Mr. Mackler, let's begin with you.
Last year the Bipartisan Policy Center worked with the
Energy Futures Initiative looking at Federal R&D investments in
carbon removal. Do you believe getting these innovative new
technologies commercialized at scale requires significantly
greater Federal support?
Mr. Mackler. I think the short answer to that is yes. I
think direct air capture, in terms of a Federal priority for
research funding, is only just emerging now as a high-level
issue. And for that reason, we actually, at the BPC, launched
last year a Direct Air Capture Advisory Council to really help
to make the case for a stronger, more ambitious innovation
program focused on industrial direct air capture technologies.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And EFI also published a report,
Clearing the Air, that provides a potential multiagency roadmap
for Federal spending. Are you familiar with that report?
Mr. Mackler. I am.
Mr. Tonko. That report makes the case that many agencies
should have a role in carbon removal policy, which I agree
with, but EFI has suggested that DOE could play a leading role
in carbon removal technology R&D and suggests they should
receive the most funding.
Do you believe, based on its previous CCS work, DOE has the
technical expertise to lead a negative emissions technologies
research agenda?
Mr. Mackler. I do agree with that.
Mr. Tonko. And Dr. Harmon, how has LanzaTech partnered with
DOE on R&D projects in the past and have they contributed to
your ongoing utilization efforts?
Dr. Harmon. Absolutely. We have worked with the Department
of Energy on all aspects of our technology. That includes
support from RPE as to develop the technology by which our gas
fermentation fundamentally operates, our bioreactor technology.
We have worked with the Department of Energy for
development of pathways within our microbes to produce
products. We have, through that type of support, demonstrated
over 50 direct fermentation products, many of which are direct
substitutes then for chemical intermediates.
And a very major piece of work, which has extended since
2012, is the development of the pathway from ethanol to
aviation fuel, for which the front end is the ethanol from CCU.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much.
And so DOE has existing relationships with many of the
stakeholders and technical expertise on CCUS, but I don't want
to suggest EPA shouldn't play any role.
Mr. Mackler, I think it was clear from your testimony that
BPC cares about achieving emissions reduction goals and that
negative emissions be properly recognized. For the credibility
and, potentially, compensation of these projects, whether they
are technological or natural, how important is it to have an
accurate and verified account of how much carbon is removed?
Mr. Mackler. I mean this is central to the rationale for
supporting the technologies, in particular, supporting the
utilization of CO
2
as part of a climate strategy
that really needs to be based on sound science, on deep
analysis, and on very strong regulatory frameworks that can
ensure the CO
2
is removed and permanently
sequestered.
So this is it is a critical piece of the overall rationale.
Mr. Tonko. And I know there are a couple of different
methods for nature-based projects, for greenhouse gas life
cycle assessments, but should more work be done to standardize
the accounting and verify the impacts of negative emissions
technologies?
Mr. Mackler. Yes, I think that is right. I mean we need to
make a distinction between removal technologies that
permanently take CO
2
out of the carbon cycle, which
is what direct air capture technology would do if you were to
remove the CO
2
and inject it underground, compared
to natural solutions, which really they remove CO
2

but they are not permanently removed because they can always--
there is a flux between the biological carbon cycle and the
full carbon cycle.
But the short answer is more analysis is really needed to
understand the specifics of the carbon balance of various
approaches. But we know, from a general standpoint, that the
benefits are there but, if we are going to quantify them, we
should probably get a little more precise on how we measure and
certify the storage.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Mr. Noel, you suggest safeguards to this bill. Could that
include ensuring that carbon removal is validated and storage
sites are better monitored and regulated?
Mr. Noel. It should but that is not what is happening right
now and there is a lot of work to do to get there.
Mr. Tonko. What types of requirements do you envision from
EPA regarding the monitoring of regulation of sequestration?
Mr. Noel. I would say there needs to be an update to the
UIC regulations that govern enhanced oil recovery. Right now,
companies don't have to report the amount of CO
2

that is actually sequestered or come up with a monitoring plan.
The companies just report the amount of CO
2
they
receive.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
With that, we will now move to Mr. Shimkus, the
subcommittee ranking member, to question for 5 minutes, please.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to change
up my order a little bit.
I want to start with Mr. Anderson because your people are
my people. I really appreciate your testimony. I mention those
concerns almost every hearing that I have. Sometimes my
facilities are operated by the Boilermakers.
So we just had an announced closure, fortunately, none in
my district, but announced closures of Canton, Coffeen, Havana,
and Hennepin. Now, those communities don't speak out as to they
are not a Chicago. They are not a New York. They are not an L.
A. So these are the small rural communities that you mentioned.
Can you briefly just talk about what, in a small community,
the loss of 50 employees in a power plant? Again, I think you
mentioned wages. You mentioned tax base. You mentioned--just go
over that because it does have real world impact in many of our
congressional districts around the country.
Mr. Anderson. Absolutely. Thank you very much for that
question, sir.
You really can't overstate the effects. And these are, as
you say, the sort of places that are the definition of the kind
of places that get overlooked and left behind.
As it happens, our most recent example was in Ohio, two
power plants that closed at the same time in one county right
along the Ohio River. It is not an overstatement, it is
literally the case that the tax revenue from those power plants
was 75 percent of the town and county budgets and that paid for
schools, fire stations, police. It paid for everything. And
this was about two years ago and the immediate effect was many
of those things started to close, or downsize, or they no
longer do that anymore.
The people tried to sell their houses as fast as they can
before they lose all of their value. Trying to find other
alternatives elsewhere in the country, sometimes they do;
sometimes they don't.
But even if individuals are able to sort something out for
themselves and find a job in Dayton, or in another State, or
whatever, what they leave behind is what I was talking about,
an emptied out community that is no longer the same or they
won't see their families for more than once or twice a year
because now they live hundreds of miles apart.
It seems like a small thing when we are talking about
economics but, as a human thing, it is a very big deal.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, I appreciate that. And just following up,
so a lot of us, when we are visited by folks and people talk
about jobs and economic development, then there is a
multiplication factor of three. You know for every one job here
you are going to have the convenience mart. You are going to
have the grocery store. You are going to have this.
So I guess what I am hearing is that there is not a
multiplying, it is a division aspect, where you are going to
start losing the convenience store. You are going to start
losing the gas station. You are going to start losing the
grocery store, and the local theater, and the like.
Is that what you have observed?
Mr. Anderson. Absolutely. When that was happening and we
were trying to find options for those power plants at the time,
some of our strongest allies were Chamber of Commerce people,
business leaders, and people who knew exactly what was going to
happen to the business community in those towns because they
were completely dependent on the people who lived there and
worked there for business.
So politically, our allies were up and down the spectrum
because we all saw the same thing coming.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, thank you for speaking out. I do it. I am
a politician, so I am not really trusted all the time but you
are supporting the men and women--the working men and women, I
do appreciate the testimony and thanks for coming here.
Mr. Begger, you say that enhanced oil recovery, EOR, is an
attractive early option for CCUS development. Can you elaborate
what you mean by that?
Mr. Begger. Mr. Chair and Mr. Shimkus, it is one of the
few, I guess you would call, commercially-deployable revenue
streams for carbon management right at this time. You know I
think we all are looking for geologic storage, carbon products,
those types of things, but technologies get cheaper over time.
You know if you look to say, for example, the Petra Nova Plant
in Texas, they feel like the lessons learned from just building
that first one, they could build the second one 30 percent
cheaper and just hope that you will see those incremental cost
reductions with every generation and every one that is built.
And so we feel like EOR is currently viable today. And as
we do more and more of those things, it will bring the cost
down to make other pathways economic.
Mr. Shimkus. So this helps drive down the economies of
scale for deployment----
Mr. Begger. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus [continue]. Because there is a revenue stream
that helps offset, whether it is a tax credit or direct Federal
funding for these projects.
And Mr. Noel, I don't have time to ask a question but I
appreciate your testimony. I appreciate it was delivered in the
manner in which you did. Hopefully, we can find a method to get
this forward.
And I do appreciate the sponsors of this legislation, Mr.
Peters and Mr. McKinley, for moving this forward.
And with that, I yield back my time.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Peters for 5
minutes, please.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today we have the
opportunity to discuss climate legislation with a real shot at
becoming law. USE IT passed the Senate Committee on Environment
and Public Works by unanimous consent last year. That includes
Senators Barrasso, Bernie Sanders, and Ed Markey. So that is a
pretty good breadth of support.
And I am sorry that the Nature Conservancy representative
couldn't be here. So that is good news/bad news because a baby
is a nice event but, clearly, it would have been better if it
was tomorrow but we can't plan that out. That is nature, I
guess.
So what the bill does is it provides Federal research
support of a suite of CCUS technologies, including $35 million
to provide competitive grants for technologies that can cost-
effectively remove carbon dioxide out of the air through direct
air capture and $50 million to support research and
technologies for commercial uses of captured carbon dioxide.
Second, it codifies an existing interpretation that comes
from the Obama administration that CO
2
pipelines and
CCUS infrastructure projects could be considered covered
projects under FAST-41, if there also Federal actions under the
jurisdiction of Federal agencies. It does not weaken NEPA.
And I think people have discussed a lot of the need for
developing these kinds of carbon capture facilities. There are
only two commercial direct air capture projects now. The
largest is a plant in Alabama that only captures 4,000 tons per
year and one active CCUS project capturing CO
2
for
permanent storage in the saline reservoir and that plan is
based in Illinois. We need to accelerate this and this is our
opportunity to do that.
I just want to address briefly the EOR issue, the enhanced
oil recovery. No one is claiming that linking EOR to captured
CO
2
is a panacea. Clearly in the long run, we have a
lot of techniques we would like to do to phase out the use of
fossil fuels. Among those might be pricing carbon and providing
incentives.
But I would just note that we have, many of us in this
committee have signed a letter to preserve the CAFE standards,
which are intended to ensure that cars, as they come off the
production line, are more efficient, they use less gas. But we
have implicitly acknowledged by doing that that we are going to
have gas cars for a while. Even if today we decided that every
car would be electric, it would take about 25 years for the
fleet to turn over.
So, in the meantime, the capturing of CO
2
for
EOR in the near-term can reduce the carbon footprint of that
oil and gas we will be using. So that is all to the good. It is
not a panacea. It is not where we want to end but it is a good
place to start.
Now I want to begin by asking Mr. Mackler about this, the
concern about streamlined CO
2
permitting. And there
is a concern that that would lead to an increase in oil
production that would derail our climate goals but according to
the Clean Air Task Force, if the U.S. EOR expanded to its
maximum potential, this was all done with CO
2
from
direct air capture, the atmospheric benefit would be
substantial.
Do you agree with that?
Mr. Mackler. Yes, I do agree that in the limit, if we are
talking about in the limit here, if direct air capture were
deployed to its full potential to meet demands for EOR, there
would very likely be a substantial climate benefit because if
direct air capture technologies were married with the best
resources for producing oil and storing CO
2
, you
could conceive of a project that was actually producing net
carbon neutral oil. And so if that was your goal, it could be
achieved through direct air capture.
And it is our view at the Bipartisan Policy Center that
when it comes to climate risks, the real problem is carbon and
CO
2
, and not necessarily fossil fuels. We need to be
looking at the carbon accounting.
Mr. Peters. Right. And so the notion is that in the short-
term, at least while we are using fossil fuels, we would like
the lowest carbon output as possible, correct?
Mr. Mackler. That is right. There is a net benefit from
using captured CO
2
to produce the oil. So, we should
be doing that as we transition to a lower carbon economy.
Mr. Peters. And in the long run, we are not getting away,
necessarily, from transitioning to a lower carbon economy.
Mr. Mackler. Right.
Mr. Peters. But we are also potentially developing
technologies that could draw carbon out of the atmosphere and
really do what the IPCC said we had to do, the United Nations.
Mr. Mackler. That is exactly right. You are buying down the
cost of developing and stealing these technologies and, at the
same time, leveraging those economics to build out an
infrastructure, CO
2
pipelines. Most importantly,
that can then be used later just for storage.
Mr. Peters. OK, thank you so much.
My time has expired. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Walden, full
committee ranking member, for 5 minutes, please.
Mr. Walden. Well good morning, Mr. Chairman, again, and
thanks to our witnesses. You have done a great job educating us
on some of these matters.
I wondered--I have been reading this report out of MIT
about engineers there who have designed an ability to remove
carbon dioxide from the air using, basically, batteries that
attract. Are you familiar with that, Mr. Mackler?
Mr. Mackler. Not in great technical detail but I am aware
of the research.
Mr. Walden. And so, as the report goes, they can get down
to the 400 parts per million in the atmosphere, remove that
carbon, and requires really no new fuels. It is the effect of
the battery charging and discharging, and the air would just
flow through, and they can capture the carbon and release it.
And Dr. Harmon, I am curious. Is that the kind of work you
are engaged in in your company to remove carbon?
Dr. Harmon. So we are removing carbon directly from
industrial emissions. These are emissions that contain a lot of
CO, which is toxic and must be combusted. And so, in a sense,
you can think of it as a pre-combustion approach.
And our particular technology is biological. So we are
using a biological process----
Mr. Walden. Got it.
Dr. Harmon [continue]. To capture that carbon and transform
it into another output.
Mr. Walden. All right. I----
Dr. Harmon. I would say--I just was going to say that the
products of direct air capture, in whatever technology is
representative, also can become feed for our fermentation and
we work with partners and other methods to do that.
Mr. Walden. OK.
Mr. Walden. So I mean my approach to this is innovation is
going to be the way out of this. We have to set the right sort
of incentive system, and we will have debates about what that
is, but our great innovators at MIT and elsewhere are really on
the forefront of this. And the consumer can win, the American
consumer can win because we can develop this technology here
and actually achieve the goals that the IPCC and others say we
have to achieve going forward.
A lot of us believe this USE IT legislation, coupled with
the 45Q tax credit, provides a nice companionship going
forward.
And Mr. Begger, I wanted to ask you about the Department of
Treasury. They still have to issue the guidelines, as I
understand it, for those applicable applications for the
credits but, in the meantime, they are offering a potentially
good incentive for private sector investment. Is that right?
Mr. Begger. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Walden, that is correct. We
are still waiting on the IRS to issue that guidance.
Mr. Walden. Yes, we have been pushing them, too.
So 45Q is an important reform for the development of the
industry. Can you explain how the USE IT Act fits in here,
because we think there is a marriage to be had, and what
benefits would it supply to the development of CCUS and the
related infrastructure?
Mr. Begger. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Walden, you know these first
few projects are going to be, I guess the pathway to making
them economically viable is going to require sort of layering a
number of different benefits, you know whether it is the tax
credit, a DOE grant, a State grant, private investment. You
know when you look at early technologies, you do need that sort
of layering to get the first ones built, to bring those costs
down. And then, hopefully at some point, they are just able to
stand on their own two feet.
Mr. Walden. I want to make a comment about your comments
about NEPA because I'm, too, actually, from a western State. I
kid my friend from Ohio or Wyoming that she is from one of
those big rectangular eastern States because Oregon is actually
out west. But we face the same sort of issues with public
lands. Trying to get anything done there can take a decade and
then you litigate. And we know if we are going to actually deal
with this crisis at hand, we have got to move faster than a
decade or more to be able to build the facilities, build the
pipelines, build the power lines to get a grid that works to
factor in the renewables and everything else.
And so I am intrigued by that and I am pleased by the
administration's movement forward on NEPA reform, the first
major reform since 1978 when the rules were first adopted. To
try and just streamline the process, go back to the original
intent.
I want to also recognize that the study released by the
Department of Energy's National Energy Technology Laboratory in
September, which found that Russian natural gas exported to
Europe has a lifecycle greenhouse gas emission profile that is
41 percent--41 percent higher than U.S. gas exported to Europe.
And for natural gas sent to China, the Russian gas is 47
percent higher in total life cycle.
So do you think it makes sense for the U.S. to send cleaner
gas to those areas?
Mr. Begger. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Walden, you are absolutely
correct. My organization, we conducted a study about five years
ago about coal exports to Asia.
Mr. Walden. Cleaner coal?
Mr. Begger. When you look at the tier 2 engines that we use
in our mining equipment, the just the cleaner, safer, more
productive operations that we have across the fossil energy
industry in the United States, there is a lower carbon
footprint to export U.S. commodities around the world.
Mr. Walden. All right, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks
again to our witnesses. I look forward to continuing to work
with all of you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Soto for 5 minutes,
please.
Mr. Soto. Thank you so much.
First of all, I wanted to ask both Mr. Mackler and Mr. Noel
about sort of the net reduction that could potentially happen
or not happen when we are talking about using direct air
capture for advanced oil recovery. Could it lead to a reduction
either now or in the near future?
It would be great to hear from both of you.
Mr. Mackler. Sure, I would be happy to respond to that.
The short answer is yes. There will be a climate benefit
from using captured CO
2
, particularly atmospheric
CO
2
for the production of oil. The precise carbon
benefit depends on several factors--what the oil field looks
like, for example, how much CO
2
is needed to be
injected per barrel of oil that is produced. What is the
particular direct air capture technology? What kind of energy
source does that system use and where is that energy sourced
from?
So there is a range of expected benefits, which is why that
we are sort of talking in generalities here. So more work needs
to be done on how we calculate those life cycle benefits.
But the ability to store that CO
2
permanently
underground as part of this EOR process is very well-understood
and the regulatory frameworks are in place.
Mr. Soto. OK, Mr. Noel.
Mr. Noel. Yes, I mean it all depends on the assumptions
embedded in those analyses and different players are going to
have different motivations to come up with those assumptions.
We do think there is a better way to tackle climate change,
rather than sucking carbon pollution out of the ambient
atmosphere. The original carbon sequestration is to leave it in
the ground.
Mr. Soto. Thanks for that.
And I was intrigued about using the CO
2
to
develop construction materials, cement, concrete, and other
construction materials, where we advanced the Moving Forward
Infrastructure package just last week, a $319 billion highway
investment that would expand research and innovation. Part of
that is innovative materials that last longer and that reduce
carbon pollution.
So it would be great to hear from Mr. Anderson and Dr.
Harmon on the--would it be helpful for jobs, Mr. Anderson?
And Dr. Harmon, would it be something feasible to be able
to really utilize cement from carbon capture to do a major
infrastructure rebuild of America?
We will start with you, Mr. Anderson.
Mr. Anderson. The short answer is yes, absolutely, it would
be good for jobs.
I mean in the first place, all of these systems have to be
built and my brothers and sisters in the building trades unions
love to build things. That is an enormous amount of work that
would have to be done.
In the second place, once it is up and running, then there
are other people, like the folks in my union, who will operate
and maintain those systems and who will operate and maintain
the things on either end of the pipeline, things that are
making the CO
2
in the places where the sinks are.
Those are jobs that we get to keep.
Yes, that will create and retain jobs is literally true.
Mr. Soto. And Dr. Harmon, based upon your manufacturing
experience, do you think we could get there, sooner rather than
later, to help create cement, concrete, and other construction
materials from condensed CO
2
?
Dr. Harmon. Absolutely. I will say that that is not a part
of our particular business.
Mr. Soto. I understand.
Dr. Harmon. But we work with other companies that are very
far along in that that are producing materials today. It is an
extremely viable and high-volume, high-opportunity pathway and
one which, in each instance, will create those manufacturing
jobs and in sectors, not just the utilization sector but in
manufacturing areas that badly need them.
Mr. Soto. Thank you.
And Mr. Beggar, are you seeing that among Wyoming's
infrastructure utilizing CO
2
to create building
materials just yet; if not, will we see it on the horizon?
Mr. Begger. Mr. Chairman, Congressman, Wyoming right now
our focus has really just been on providing the platform to
develop these technologies, recognizing that where particular
things are deployed is really dependent on a lot of different
factors.
You know, for example, we have great rock quarries out
west. So a synthetic material is not going to be probably as
economic as the natural one. But for example, our relationship
with Japan, that after Fukushima they are doing away with their
nuclear, they don't have great land mass and things for
renewables, they are doubling down on coal but their western
society, their modern society wants low carbon technologies.
And so we are working with them on a utilization technology
that would use concrete because they have a huge market for
that.
Mr. Soto. Thank you and I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative McKinley for 5
minutes, please.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing on our bill.
American innovation in carbon capture technology and
utilization will--the premise I am working under, will lead to
reduced carbon emissions, not only in America but, more
importantly, around the globe, especially in China and India.
Because if you go back to the MIT report, where they say unless
growing emissions from the rest of the world are addressed,
there still will be global catastrophe. That is why the global
carbon capture program is so vital.
For years, our office has led the efforts to advance
innovation, increasing fossil fuel research funding, and
implementing 45Q. As the lead co-sponsor of the USE IT Act, I
am proud to work for the past three years with Scott Peters on
this effort.
The USE IT Act had broad support from bipartisan members of
the Congress, as well as a host of industry, labor, and
environmental stakeholders and the Senate has already advanced
it twice in '18 and '19. Consequently, I was disappointed that
last year we missed the opportunity to sign this bill into law
when it was a part of the defense bill. So I am hoping, rather
than throw up roadblocks, the majority will continue working
with us and pass this bill as a standalone legislation.
Look, let's be honest here with all of this. If America
doesn't lead the way on carbon capture technology, who will? Do
we really think China, and India, and the rest of the world are
going to do that? They have shown no commitment to be able to
do that. So for us to maintain our mantle of leadership on
energy, this bill will help.
Please direct my question to Mr. Anderson, if I could,
please. The primary objective of the USE IT Act is to use R&D
funding to spur development and deployment of carbon capture
utilization and storage projects. Let's go back over it. I want
to make sure that people really hear what will be the impact of
that on the jobs and various utility workers.
Mr. Anderson. Well, I can use an example right there in
your district, Congressman. We have two coal-fired power plants
in your district. The Harrison plant is one example. I am sure
you are very familiar with that facility, and the number of
people who work there, and what else is around there, which is
not a lot. If a plant like that goes down, the alternative is
basically to leave. And good luck finding another opportunity
somewhere else, especially if you are a 50-something boiler
mechanic.
Mr. McKinley. I know in Pleasants County, it was over 30
percent of the budget for that county, the tax revenue. That is
going to affect schools, fire departments, first responders,
all of that is going to be. So it is important for us to
continue this, continue this effort to try to reduce the
emissions and I think we can do this with innovation.
Dr. Harmon, if I could to you, just how big a barrier is
the lack of infrastructure in developing carbon capture and
storage projects?
Dr. Harmon. So I would say it depends upon the application.
As utilization technologies scale, infrastructure will be
extremely important to collect large volumes of feedstock and
enable large-scale utilization applications, which then drive
down costs. Luckily today, we can at least get started with co-
located facilities but being able to bring large volumes to
sites where either the chemical facilities are available, where
hydrogen is available, where renewable power is available, all
of that will be extremely valuable in scaling up and promoting
utilization.
Mr. McKinley. Let me stay with you on a little bit and try
to paint a picture here.
If we do this retrofitting of our power plants, and maybe
Mr. Anderson this goes to you as well, if we retrofit our power
plants to remove, if we implement a carbon capture program, we
are already capturing and storing the fly ash, the coal ash,
residual, we are taking care of that. What is the motivation,
then? Why are we so--if we are on that cusp of being able to
accomplish this, what is the cusp then to continue closing down
our coal- and gas-fired power plants across America if we are
capturing all the emissions and especially given the impact it
has on our communities, for our schools, our first responders,
and the like? If we do this, wouldn't that address this problem
we are trying to focus?
Dr. Harmon. So I am not an expert in capture from power
facilities because we specialize in industrial facilities.
What I can say is that, to the extent that we can create
value from emissions, such as from the power sector and from
the industrial sector, we are not only keeping plants open but
we are adding those jobs that are associated with utilization
and with infrastructure development and, therefore, there is a
multiplicative effect when we look at opportunities to use
carbon that is otherwise going to waste.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you.
My time has expired. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Schakowsky for 5
minutes, please.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you so much.
You know we absolutely all have to have a sense of urgency.
The science is so clear that the climate crisis is an
existential one for us. And if we are to save our planet for
our children and grandchildren, we have to accept that
challenge right now.
So to ensure temperatures don't rise above two degrees
Celsius and to avoid climate change's worst consequences, I
think we do need to go beyond reducing emissions. Rapidly
transitioning from fossil fuels, building nature-based
infrastructures, and I think carbon capture are all necessary.
We simply can't afford to pursue one solution at a time. We
also can't afford to focus too much on mitigation, while
ignoring the real problem of being the world's largest emitters
of greenhouse gases, historically.
Still, carbon capture can be part of the solution, I think.
So Mr. Mackler, in your opinion, would the USE IT Act
detract from or discourage the use of other strategies like
nature-based solutions?
Mr. Mackler. Thanks for that question. I don't think it
would detract from nature-based solutions because I think that
that is a completely different area when it comes to policy,
and when it comes to policy needs, and funding needs.
When we are talking about industrial direct air capture,
this is a technological approach that really needs an injection
of capital to foster technological innovations in the chemical
processes, in the industrial processes needed to capture the
CO
2
.
The nature-based solutions are very important but it is
sort of a different arena, I think, from this.
And so both are needed and they are complementary, not
competing.
Ms. Schakowsky. So you think it is important to pursue
multiple climate solutions alongside carbon capture technology?
Mr. Mackler. Definitely. We are in all of the above, you
know low-carbon energy--we taken all of the above low-carbon
energy perspective.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thanks.
And I am glad that companies like LanzaTech, which, as Dr.
Harmon said, is in my district. I am very proud of that. And I
appreciate your finding innovative solutions to address the
climate crisis.
So, Dr. Harmon, how can creative approaches to utilization
reduce emissions and repurposing CO
2
benefit the
ways in which--in your opinion, how does utilization need to
be--to be limited regarding enhanced oil--no--is that right? Do
I want those? Yes, OK.
Talk to me about Lanza.
Dr. Harmon. Well, to your first question: How can
utilization contribute to our climate objectives at large? As I
said earlier, we all understand implicitly that we need carbon
in our future. We will need aviation fuel. We will need
plastics. And yet, the carbon that is being emitted today that
we see as a liability from a climate perspective is actually
the building block that we need.
So utilization in the form of products that substitute for
those that we would get from petroleum or from natural gas in
fact do a dual value. On the one hand, they are producing new
low-carbon alternatives and they are reducing the emissions,
the atmospheric emissions. And this is all done in the context
of actually creating value and creating money. None of our
partners are doing it for charity or to meet regulatory
demands. They are doing it because they can make money from
emissions.
Ms. Schakowsky. And I appreciate the list of different
kinds of products that can be produced that you included.
I wanted to also ask Mr. Noel: Do you think that we can
have some guardrails? Do you think we need to limit the use of
capturing carbon for enhanced oil recovery?
Mr. Noel. Absolutely. EOR operations, as I said in my
testimony, are part of an expansion strategy. It can't be
siloed off from the rest of a company's portfolio.
Ms. Schakowsky. So it is not an all or nothing thing. We
can put some guardrails, some limitations on the kind of work
that we do.
Mr. Noel. The way that carbon capture is currently
practiced is all the carbon capture in this country is sold
back to the oil companies should not inspire public confidence.
Ms. Schakowsky. I appreciate that.
I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlewoman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Long for 5 minutes,
please.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
being here today.
Mr. Begger, do you live in Casper or where do you live?
Mr. Begger. I live in Cheyenne.
Mr. Long. Oh, you do? Good. Good.
Mr. Begger. But I have lived in Casper and I spend a lot of
time in Gillette.
Mr. Long. Yes, my wife is from Cheyenne. So that is why I
was asking. She grew up there. So, yes.
We have been talking about carbon capture for before there
was any functioning facilities. So for years, we have been
talking about carbon capture on this committee. And we have
people come in all the time from our district and we will have
meetings in our office. And when we are in a committee hearing
like this, sometimes I will come down here, which just happened
to me a few minutes ago. I went out and had a meeting in the
side office over here with some folks from our district and
they are working on a project trying to get it out of the EPA.
And it has been ready to go for 8 or 9 years now, trying to get
it out of--so with that in mind, I have a question about
bureaucratic red tape.
Does that stand in the way of innovating new technologies
that can expand American energy and manufacturing jobs, while
we do see harmful emissions?
Mr. Begger. Mr. Chairman, I think where this program would
best be fitted, you know it is a policy decision for Congress.
I do think that the regulators and the EPA have a role to play
in making sure that the policies set forth align with the
technological reality. And so you know I have great confidence
in EPA--or excuse me--in Department of Energy, and their team,
and what they are able to do but you know I think there is a
role for EPA to play as well.
Mr. Long. You think what?
Mr. Begger. There is a role for EPA to play as well in
understanding things. But you are right, one of the biggest
challenges that we have is bureaucracy and red tape. I mean I
spoke about NEPA and some of those processes. And the last
thing that we need to do is head down a pathway where we are
not able to actually get things built and get things done
because of bureaucracy.
Mr. Long. OK, thank you. Like I said, I just walked out of
a meeting behind the TV monitor right there in the next room,
where they have been waiting for an answer from EPA. As I say,
they have had it ready for 8 or 9 years now.
Mr. Mackler, I am going to go to you next. How important is
deploying carbon capture technologies to help promote
affordable and reliable energy production, while putting the
U.S. on a path towards meeting domestic climate objectives?
Mr. Mackler. Well, we think carbon capture is essential to
decarbonization of the energy system at least cost. And there
has been an analysis conducted that suggests if carbon capture
is not part of the toolkit going forward, the cost of hitting
or achieving our climate goals could double.
So it is really important for a variety of reasons. Because
we need a big toolkit, we need as many solutions on the table
as possible. And frankly, there are not alternatives to some of
the energy consuming parts of our economy today, so carbon
capture. There are not alternatives to fossil combustion in
some of these parts of our economy and carbon capture is really
the only pathway forward for some of these places.
Mr. Long. OK, I am going to stick with you, Mr. Mackler.
Even as coal production in the United States declines, we
know that fossil fuel, as being a cheap and reliable source of
energy, will continue to be used in the U.S. power sector. Even
more developing countries, like China and India, will continue
to rely heavily on fossil fuels as they look to grow their
economies.
How does the U.S. stand to benefit from being at the
forefront of the carbon capture implementation, particularly as
it relates to global climate policies?
Mr. Mackler. That is a great question and I think it is
important to note that we have seen enormous advances in
renewable energy over the last 15 to 20 years. The prices of
solar and wind have decreased dramatically and they have
deployed very successfully in the U.S. and around the world. It
is a great success story.
But if you look at how that is fitting into the global
energy picture, it is mostly a case of those technologies
meeting new demand. And so the use of fossil fuels continues to
increase, even as we are deploying these other technologies.
So we are going to need carbon capture to start to get at
the existing infrastructure and energy chains that we use
today. And if the U.S., with all of its innovative commercial
expertise, and its innovation systems, and all the companies
working on these technologies gets out in front in developing
these next generation carbon capture technologies, it is an
enormous market for our U.S. companies to export to globally.
Mr. Long. OK, thank you.
And Mr. Anderson, how would the increased use of carbon
capture technology, both here and around the world, impact jobs
here in America?
Mr. Anderson. Well I think there is really three pieces to
it. One, to start with, is the manufacturing. It all has to be
made. It would be wonderful to make all of that equipment here
in America. The second thing is that it all has to be built. It
all has to be constructed by somebody. And the third thing is
that then it has to be operated and maintained.
That whole chain is thousands upon thousands of jobs that
we could have all over the country.
Mr. Long. OK, thank you.
And Mr. Begger, just to wrap up my earlier comment--I don't
know how long you have lived in Cheyenne, but my wife and I--
everybody want to know how I met someone from Cheyenne. But we
met at the Tollerton School of Ballet in Cheyenne, Wyoming.
I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. Well, we thank you for that information.
The gentleman yields back.
And now the Chair recognizes Representative Matsui for 5
minutes, please.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I thank
the witnesses for being here today.
As we look at the technologies and the solutions currently
available to us, it has become quite clear that carbon
reduction strategies are not enough. It is critical that we
begin laying the groundwork for robust deployment negative
emission technologies to remove carbon dioxide from the air and
sequester it. This is likely the only way we can possibly hope
to achieve the emissions reductions needed to prevent
catastrophic climate change.
We know there are natural sequestration efforts like
afforestation and reforestation uptake, and storage by
agricultural soils, and biomass energy with carbon capture and
storage.
Mr. Mackler, are these natural sequestration efforts
sufficient to keep limit warming of our planet at 1.5 degrees
Celsius? And a yes or no is all I need here.
Mr. Mackler. They are not sufficient. They are important
but not sufficient.
Ms. Matsui. All right. Do you think that there is currently
an adequate investment at the Federal level for carbon capture
research and development? Yes or no?
Mr. Mackler. No.
Ms. Matsui. What kinds of improvements in CCUS technology
can we expect from the improvements--from investments made
under H.R. 1166?
Mr. Mackler. I think we can expect to see improvements in
the technologies around direct air capture. That would probably
be the primary benefit.
Ms. Matsui. OK, thank you.
Some of my colleagues and one of the witnesses on the panel
had raised concerns about the potential support that this bill
provides for increased investments in oil development. At a
time when we are doing everything we can to ramp up investments
in renewable and clean energy technologies and transition away
from fossil energy, we should not be subsidizing or supporting
new investments in construction of fossil fuel development.
I would like to ask each of the witnesses: Do you believe
that, in its current form, H.R. 1166 could lead to increased
investments in oil development? Just a yes or no, starting with
Mr. Mackler.
Mr. Mackler. I do believe it could lead to increased
investments in oil and gas development, yes.
Ms. Matsui. Mr. Noel?
Mr. Noel. Yes.
Ms. Matsui. Mr. Begger?
Mr. Begger. Yes.
Ms. Matsui. Dr. Harmon?
Dr. Harmon. Yes.
Ms. Matsui. Mr. Anderson?
Mr. Anderson. Yes.
Ms. Matsui. Mr. Noel, you referenced a 2010 DOE study that
states that CO
2
pipeline to oil fields looking to
expand EOR operations should not be constructed without
establishing that large, additional, suitable storage capacity
exists in the area that can handle storage over the long-term.
Does H.R. 1166 contain any provisions that would ensure
this? Yes or no?
Mr. Noel. No.
Ms. Matsui. Are there ways this bill can be improved and
strengthened to ensure that sequestration is done safely and at
significant scale, while minimizing other environmental risk?
Mr. Noel. There are ways on multiple fronts to strengthen
this bill.
Ms. Matsui. Can you please provide an example of potential
improvements?
Mr. Noel. Sure. Explicitly exclude enhanced oil recovery
from the research provisions. Also, explicitly state that the
pipelines should not be sent to EOR regions to produce oil----
Ms. Matsui. OK.
Mr. Noel [continue]. Among other things, which I can submit
for the record.
Ms. Matsui. OK, thank you.
As you probably are aware, in 2018, the State of California
amended its Low Carbon Fuel Standard to enable CCS projects
that reduce emissions associated with a production of transport
fuels sold in California and projects that directly capture
carbon dioxide to generate LCFS credits. This qualification for
credits came with a few stipulations, including a requirement
that operators of CCS projects monitor the site for at least
100 years post-injection.
Mr. Mackler or Mr. Noel, do you think a monitoring
requirement like this would strengthen the integrity of carbon
capture projects?
Mr. Mackler. Yes, I do.
Ms. Matsui. Mr. Noel?
Mr. Noel. Sure.
Ms. Matsui. So do you think the 100-year timeline is
appropriate? Either--Mr. Mackler.
Mr. Mackler. Well, I think it is very rigorous. You know
whether or not it is the right number I think is an open
question but it is certainly a very rigorous approach.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Mr. Noel?
Mr. Noel. Agreed. And what happens on the 101st year?
Ms. Matsui. OK. I don't have much time but there seems to
be a broad agreement in this room that CCUS has an important
part to play in achieving our carbon reduction goals but some
here are more supportive of EOR than others. I believe we
should be focused on other means of sequestration, such as
long-term geologic storage.
Mr. Mackler, in what ways has the U.S. demonstrated or
deployed carbon dioxide sequestration and utilization, other
than EOR? And I realize I am going over time but quickly, can
you?
Mr. Mackler. Well, we share your view that, in the long-
term, geologic saline storage should be the priority for most
of the CO
2
that we capture. The U.S. Department of
Energy has had a very sweeping research program on saline for
many years now and so we have demonstrated global leadership
there.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much. I am signaled that I have
run out of time.
I yield back. Thank you very much.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Carter for 5
minutes, please.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank all of you
for being here. Obviously, it is extremely important.
I continue to say that innovation is going to be the key
for us. And when you say innovation, a lot of people think,
when you are talking about the climate, that we are talking
about renewable fuels, and we are, but this is also innovation.
This is extremely, extremely important.
I want to start with you, Dr. Harmon. LanzaTech has a plant
near my district in Soperton, Georgia, right outside my
district. And whereas I have not had the opportunity to visit
it yet, I do plan on doing that and want to go by and see
exactly what you are doing. And from what I understand, it is a
very large operation and we appreciate your investment in our
area.
Tell me, obviously, it looks like you see a viable
opportunity here to create these products from waste gases.
What kinds of industrial gases and waste submissions are you
utilizing here?
Dr. Harmon. So our first commercial plant is directly
converting steel mill emissions into ethanol. We have projects
in development around the world, actually, which use refinery
gasses, ferroalloy gases, which are similar to steel-making
gases. These are gasses that are rich in carbon monoxide,
carbon dioxide, and hydrogen, depending upon the source.
Mr. Carter. Do you know, do you see other kinds of gasses
like this being able to be utilized?
Dr. Harmon. There are other industrial sectors for which
the technology is also applicable. Calcium carbide would be
one. There are emissions in the chemical sector as well. It is
quite a very broad opportunity.
Mr. Carter. You mention in your testimony about gas
fermentation and the use of carbon dioxide to develop
beneficial products such as this. What do you see as the future
of that?
Dr. Harmon. So just to be clear, the gas fermentation
relies not just on carbon dioxide but on carbon monoxide. We
see this as very broadly deployable, even in the U.S. Taking
strictly the gases from industry that area accessible to us
today, we could build 33 plants, based just on 60 percent of
that gas.
Mr. Carter. Wow.
Dr. Harmon. And each of those plants would create probably
a thousand jobs during construction, maybe 240 during
operation, and that takes into account the multipliers that
were referenced earlier.
But these are substantial operations in areas that need
that kind of----
Mr. Carter. And see, this is the point I try to make. I
look at this as being a tremendous opportunity for us. You are
talking about creating jobs right here. A tremendous
opportunity.
One last thing, Dr. Harmon. You mentioned how Federal
research had actually assisted and help kickstart this type of
technology. Could you just expound upon that for just a second?
Dr. Harmon. Certainly. If we talk about our site in
Georgia, for example, there we have, in fact, a pilot operation
that is demonstrating our next generation bioreactor technology
and that technology originated at small scale, with support
from RPE. And with support from RPE, we were then able to scale
that up to a larger what we call a field pilot.
At the very moment, sticking with Georgia, we are in fact
designing a 10 million gallon per year facility to produce jet
and diesel fuel from ethanol that is brought from all parts of
the U.S. And that is, it is a pre-commercial demonstration but,
in fact, it will be commercially viable.
And if you are aware of the scale of some of the renewable
fuel and sustainable aviation fuel initiatives, this is a
substantial opportunity that can be replicated everywhere, and
that technology was developed and scaled up with support from
the Department of Energy's Bioenergy Technologies Office.
Mr. Carter. So Government created the environment for you
to succeed in. That is the point we have been trying to make.
Thank you for verifying that.
Very quickly, Mr. Begger, I wanted to ask you. You
mentioned the XPRIZE Foundation. Can you just tell me about
that, explain that to me?
Mr. Begger. Sure. Mr. Chairman, Representative, XPRIZE
Foundation is sort of a philanthropical foundation that has
offered a lot of engineering competition prizes over about the
last 20 years. Probably the one that they are most well-known
for is SpaceX; that started out of an XPRIZE competition.
And so they have done a lot around public health, and
water, these sorts of things, but they have one now that is
really focused on carbon utilization. So three or four years
ago, I think there was 47 teams from seven or eight different
countries that put forth proposals to best pull CO
2

out of a power plant stream and convert it into some other
marketable product.
Mr. Carter. Right. Right. Just another example of how the
private sector is helping us in this goal that we all share in.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative McNerney for 5
minutes, please.
Mr. McNerney. I thank the chairman. I thank the witnesses
for your testimony; it was informative and useful. I appreciate
it.
Especially, Mr. Anderson, I agree with your testimony and I
wholeheartedly agree that we need to find a way to positively
utilize the human resources and capital currently employed in
the fossil fuel industry. Hopefully, Federal regulation will
help in that regard, including the USE IT Act.
Mr. Mackler, is there an accurate cost model for direct air
capture, say in dollars per ton, or something like that?
Mr. Mackler. Well because this is such a nascent field,
with many different technology strands and sort of pathways
being developed in real time, some of them privately developed
so it is hard to look under the hood and see what they cost, we
don't have great insight into what the costs are.
There have been some studies that have been put out that
suggest costs could be as high as $600 per ton, but that is
really seen as very much on the high end, and as low as
potentially $100 to $200 per ton within sight, and potentially
less than that at some point in the future.
Mr. McNerney. Where do we need to be, dollars per ton?
Mr. Mackler. Well, it depends on the business model, and it
depends on you know what the climate goals are, but I think if
we are in the range of $100 per ton, we are going to see
significant deployment of direct air capture.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Dr. Harmon, a similar question in terms of carbon usage:
How far are we from competitive uses of carbon usage and what
are the biggest cost production obstacles?
Dr. Harmon. So the distinction in this case is that we are,
in fact, producing a product that goes into the market. So the
ethanol that is being produced from steel mill emissions is
being sold as a gasoline blending component and that is a
profitable operation.
There are high-value products in the chemical sector that
create really significant value but in any and every instance,
those partners, industrial partners that we work with, are
motivated by actually a positive economic return. They evaluate
these investments in the same way that they would evaluate any
other.
Mr. McNerney. We need large-scale commercial applications.
Dr. Harmon. We need to move to large-scale. As I mentioned,
it took us 14 years to get to this point. Any of the new
technologies, and there is a whole portfolio that is emerging
across the innovation world, they will all need to move to
scale. They need that type of support.
Mr. McNerney. Right.
Well, Mr. Mackler, what additional forms of policy do you
see--this was already asked of Mr. Noel--do you see needed in
addition to the USE IT Act?
Mr. Noel. For carbon capture in particular?
Mr. McNerney. Carbon capture.
Mr. Noel. Well I think the USE IT Act does some very
important things in terms of investing in direct air capture
and in helping to facilitate the construction of
infrastructure.
The most important policy for driving large-scale carbon
capture and direct air capture into the marketplace would be a
market for low-carbon energy, whether that takes the form of a
clean energy standard, of a carbon price, or procurement
policies that could actually provide the developers of the
technologies and the projects a means to recoup their
investment, that is the most important policy.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Begger, while enhanced oil recovery is currently one of
the primary applications for utilizing captured carbon dioxide,
its usefulness is expected to diminish as we transition away
from reliance on fossil fuels.
In your testimony, you noted the role of carbon control
technologies beyond EOR. Please describe some of the more
interesting projects that your State is funding for utilizing
captured carbon beyond EOR.
Mr. Begger. Mr. Chairman, Congressman, there really is a
suite of different technologies. Sometimes I think we tend to
gravitate towards the carbon fibers and these high-tech sort of
things and there certainly are opportunities there because, at
the end of the day, this is just chemistry. We are taking
CO
2
, you know one atom of carbon, two atoms of
oxygen, and converting it into something else.
Mr. McNerney. We have to do it economically, right? I
mean----
Mr. Begger. We have to do it economically and so you know
it is a very strong chemical bond that needs to be broken. And
so what are the economics to take that energy and put--and
convert it into something else?
I think sometimes, too, we try to demonize the particular
carbon source when, in reality, we need to be focused on carbon
itself. It shouldn't matter if it comes from EOR, or coal, or
natural gas, or ethanol. It is what are doing? Are we capturing
the carbon and utilizing it or permanently sequestering it in a
place where we can't use it?
So you know there are things like cryogenic carbon capture
that could be used. There are things--membrane, solvents,
absorbents. You know while we can't forget about the carbon
capture piece--you have to capture it first--and then you know
what you do with it. There is far more carbon out there than
just EOR can support, or products, or geologic sequestration.
So it is going to have--it is fitting those puzzle pieces
together.
Mr. McNerney. Thanks.
Mr. Chairman, thanks for your indulgence. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. You are welcome. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Johnson for 5
minutes, please.
Mr. Johnson. Well thank you, Chairman Tonko, and Ranking
Member Shimkus for this hearing today because I think it is an
important one. I want to thank our witnesses for being with us
talk about a path forward on carbon capture technology.
You know whatever your opinion is on carbon emissions, it
is good to see a number of us on both sides of the aisle taking
a look at this thing and saying hey, how do we get some use out
of it you know. We don't all have the same scientific
background but we have been working on it now for a number of
years and I am looking forward to seeing, through this
legislation that we are looking at, how we can make this work.
I want to start out by mentioning and springing off of
something my colleague, Mr. Carter from Georgia, said. You know
what is going to really address the climate concerns across the
globe is innovation. That is what is going to solve the
problem--market-driven solutions and discoveries like carbon
capture and others. Yes, there is a place for alternative
fuels, and biofuels, and wind, and solar, and absolutely we
should let the market drive innovation on those and use them as
they fit into our energy profile but we are not going to solve
the climate concerns with government mandates. We are just not
going to do that. It is going to be smart folks like you guys
and others that come up with solutions that solve the problem.
So let me start with Mr. Mackler, if I could, and Mr.
Begger, you can chime in here, too. Last Congress, I co-
sponsored, along with several of my colleagues, the legislation
to reform the 45Q tax credit enacted as a part of the 2018
Omnibus, which was intended to incentivize the acceleration of
new technologies to capture and store carbon for practical use.
While I understand that a number of carbon capture projects
have been announced since those changes, I am told the IRS is
sort of slow-walking, taking their time on making a number of
clarifications for credits or for companies wishing to claim
this tax credit.
So first, I would like to ask: How important has the
Section 45Q tax credit been in some of the recent project
announcements across the country, Mr. Mackler and Mr. Begger,
if you would?
Mr. Mackler. It has been central. It is the most important
policy we have in place today for carbon capture.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Beggar.
Mr. Begger. I agree. You know there have been a lot of
people who are using I guess those dollar figures for that tax
credit to at least do some early back-of-the-envelope
calculations on what projects would look but, ultimately, until
they receive final guidance, you won't be able to pull together
a project.
Mr. Johnson. Right. OK. So here is a case where Government
policy of incentivizing innovation is producing results, rather
than mandating a solution, giving the innovators an opportunity
to work the problem.
And so if we can get some certainty with the IRS and
guidance, which we know would minimize some ambiguity for
businesses looking to invest in carbon capture technology, what
effect would that have going forward, Mr. Mackler and Mr.
Begger, again?
Mr. Mackler. I think it would kickstart the commercial
industry in a way we haven't seen yet. So it would be very
catalytic. Of course, you know some of it depends on the
details around what the IRS specifies in terms of how to
implement the tax credit. So, that needs to come out quickly so
we can take advantage of the credit because the window of
opportunity is closing because there is a sunset on the tax
credit and so we are losing time. But if enough time remains or
if the credit is extended, it could be very catalytic.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Begger, do you agree?
Mr. Begger. I agree. I think the carrot of a tax credit has
done far more to advance commercialization than any regulation,
or threat of a carbon tax, or anything has ever done.
Mr. Johnson. I like your term, Mr. Mackler, it would
kickstart it. You know it wasn't until the Wright brothers
solved the problem with powered flight that it kicked into high
gear the aviation industry. You know I mean we have got many,
many examples like that and this is just another one.
We need to give the innovators an opportunity to innovate.
That is what we need to be doing.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Blunt Rochester for
5 minutes, please.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Shimkus. Thank you also the panelists.
We are in a climate emergency. We are seeing the impacts
from climate change in our communities every day. We are
getting grave warnings from scientists and economists about our
future, if we fail to address climate change. So, we must act.
Not only do our children and grandchildren depend on it for
their futures, we all depend on it right now. That means that
we must use every tool available to us to try to avoid the
worst impacts from climate change. Numerous witnesses have
testified that carbon capture and sequestration will be an
important and even required tool, as we work to drastically
reduce emissions.
I agree that carbon capture has a critical role to play in
developing climate solutions, which is why I look forward to
working with my colleagues on this legislation, but we must
ensure that we get this policy right so that we can deploy this
technology while also protecting our communities and our
health.
Mr. Noel, in your testimony, you mentioned that, following
enhanced oil recovery, carbon dioxide is stored underground.
Are there environmental impacts to injecting carbon dioxide
into the ground and, specifically, does it pose risks to
drinking water sources?
Mr. Noel. Sure, there are a whole unique set of risks that
injecting continuous CO
2
under the ground at high
pressures present to underground sources of drinking water. And
we do not think the regulations on EOR, as currently practiced,
are anywhere near where they need to be.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you.
And Mr. Mackler, as you know, throughout this Congress,
this subcommittee has held a series of hearings on the
challenges stemming from the climate crisis, as well as the
solutions needed to address it. In your testimony, you
discussed the need to bring a diverse set of solutions that
will work comprehensively across economic sectors.
Can you elaborate on this and how this legislation will add
to the suite of policy options to tackle the climate crisis?
Mr. Mackler. Sure, I would be happy to.
Yes, so we have reviewed the analysis that has been done on
how we can most cost-effectively decarbonize the U.S. and the
global energy system. And it is very clear that the broader the
toolkit of solutions, the more likelihood that we are going to
actually achieve our climate goals, and especially achieve them
at the lowest cost.
And so historically here in the United States, we have
invested an enormous amount of resources quite successfully in
bringing down the cost of wind and solar. And that is a major
success story. We need to now do the similar thing for other
energy technologies to ensure we are positioning ourselves for
success. And the USE IT Act can be a part of a strategy for
bringing forward carbon capture.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Mr. Mackler, do you believe that this
bill can be improved in ways that bolster public health
protections, while maintaining its fundamental purpose to
support CCUS deployment?
Mr. Mackler. Yes, it could probably be improved in some
ways.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Do you have any suggestions?
Mr. Mackler. Well, I haven't given a lot of thought to that
part of this bill but I am sure there are ways that this could
be done. I would be happy to submit that for the record later.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. That would be awesome.
Do you believe that these priorities--those priorities are
compatible or are they mutually exclusive?
Mr. Mackler. They are very compatible. I mean we have been
injecting CO
2
into the subsurface through the
enhanced oil recovery industry for more than 50 years. And so
we can go and look, and see what impact that has had on the
local environment, and I think we can demonstrate very clearly
it has been minimal.
And so those parts of the challenges, to the extent that
they remain, can be managed.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. And Mr. Anderson, in your testimony,
you discussed how deploying carbon capture technology can
impact your workers and communities.
Can you elaborate on how this legislation would create
jobs?
Mr. Anderson. Well, as I mentioned earlier, there are three
main components to it. All of the technology has to be made
somewhere. It has to be manufactured. I think, personally, that
we should make that domestically in America and export it
abroad, as well as here.
Second of all, it all has to be constructed. Whatever the
CO
2
source, there is no need to, as my colleague
said, demonize any particular CO
2
source. They all
need it and all of these systems would to be built for that.
That is thousands of jobs.
And then once they are in place, they have to be
maintained, repaired, operated. That never ends. That is an
unending source of jobs, literally.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you. I want to just close out by
saying I believe it is not an all or nothing, and that we can't
just do something today and not do something for tomorrow, or
not do something for tomorrow and not do something right now,
and that is why this legislation is important. But we also have
to take into account the health outcomes as well. And so we
look forward to working with you, Mr. Peters and Mr. McKinley,
thank you, on this legislation.
Thank you so much and I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlewoman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Barragan for 5
minutes, please.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you. Thank you for having this
conversation. The climate crisis does require urgent action and
we need to consider all options.
I think that there are merits to carbon capture technology
for preventing greenhouse gas emissions. I am a little
concerned about some of the unintended consequences that can
arise from it.
Mr. Noel, one of the most significant reasons for
environmental injustice in low-income communities and
communities of color is their close proximity to fossil-fueled
power plants and industrial facilities, such as coal.
In a carbon-constrained future, could carbon capture and
storage keep a facility open longer in a disadvantaged
community and would there still be the emission of pollutants,
such as sulfur dioxide particulate matter and mercury, into the
community?
Mr. Noel. Yes, and it is one of the reasons Greenpeace does
not support carbon capture in fossil fuel plants. Existing
fossil fuel plants should be phased out.
And I also say that there is no consensus, in our view, on
these technologies without representation of communities who
live on the front line, who have to live next to extraction
projects that would be prolonged as a result of deploying these
technologies.
Ms. Barragan. So it would take us longer to get away from
the reliance on fossil fuels. Would that be accurate in what
you are saying?
Mr. Noel. Yes.
Ms. Barragan. Mr. Mackler, one of the main uses for
captured CO
2
is enhanced oil recovery, which makes
it easier to extract oil from oil wells. My district has a lot
of urban oil drilling. You can drive around my district and you
can actually see it right in people's backyards, right next to
where kids play on soccer fields, and you can also see our kids
walk around with inhalers around their necks.
So I have been fighting for closure of some urban oil
wells, not understanding why we need them in people's backyards
and next to parks where our kids play.
Could the oil industry use this enhanced oil recovery to
extend the life of these wells?
Mr. Mackler. Well that is a very good question. And the one
thing to keep in mind when it comes to CO
2
injection
for enhanced oil recovery is it can't be used in every
reservoir. There are only certain reservoirs that are amenable
to CO
2
injection for enhanced oil recovery. So I
can't speak specifically, for example, around the production
that is happening in your district and to whether or not they
would be extended in their life by the injection of
CO
2
.
Ms. Barragan. What about urban drilling, in general?
Mr. Mackler. I don't think that carbon capture or EOR would
have any special impact on urban drilling, in general.
Ms. Barragan. And so following up on that question, does
the streamlined permitting in the bill reduce the level of
public input and environmental protections for establishing
carbon capture in enhanced oil recovery?
Mr. Mackler. Well it is really, you know those provisions
that help to streamline the permitting of infrastructure do
not--are not designed to circumvent the environmental review
process. They are really designed to help accelerate and better
coordinate environmental review and permitting of certain
projects.
So I think that, in general, you know one should not look
at that provision as sort of a workaround of environmental
permitting.
Ms. Barragan. Mr. Noel, do you have anything you want to
add?
Mr. Noel. Yes, I would say the whole point of EOR is to
extend the life of oil fields. It is right on DOE's website. It
is in all the oil industry's literature.
I was at a briefing yesterday with an oil company who said
you could almost apply EOR to every oil reservoir in the world,
if they perfect this technology.
So if they get--continue to get Federal, State support and
incentives, we are talking an insane amount of oil on deck.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you.
Mr. Noel, how does the current cost of carbon capture and
storage, as a climate solution, compare to the cost to reduce
emissions through other means, like solar, wind, geothermal,
and energy efficiency investments?
Mr. Noel. It is probably the most expensive way to do it
right now in the near-term. Energy efficiency seems to be the
cheapest.
Ms. Barragan. Right. Thank you to our panelists.
I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlewoman yields back.
I believe that completes the list of members choosing to
ask questions of our panelists, and we thank you all for
appearing here today and for your help, too, in bringing us
together.
So I do have a request for unanimous consent to enter the
following into the record: a letter from Clean Water Action; a
letter from the Portland Cement Association; a letter from
Sfonte (phonetic); a letter from the Western Governors
Association; a letter from Our Children's Trust; a report from
World Resources Institute entitled CarbonShot: Federal Policy
Options for Carbon Removal in the United States; a memo from
the Congressional Research Service regarding CCUS projects and
CO
2
pipelines as covered projects under FAST 41
guidance; and then finally six letters of support from various
groups that were sent to the Senate in 2019.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Tonko. And I again thank all of our witnesses for
joining us for today's hearing.
Mr. Anderson, thank you. I know you did some reach out with
the subcommittee and thank you for that.
Mr. Anderson. Thank you.
Mr. Tonko. And I remind Members that, pursuant to committee
rules, they have ten business days by which to submit
additional questions for the record to be answered by our
witnesses. I would only ask that each witness respond promptly
to any such questions that you may receive.
And at this time, this subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:09 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
