- THE FISCAL YEAR 2021 HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES BUDGET AND OVERSIGHT OF THE CORONAVIRUS OUTBREAK

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FISCAL YEAR 2021 HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES BUDGET AND OVERSIGHT OF
THE CORONAVIRUS OUTBREAK

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 26, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-103

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
52-377PDF           WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              GREG WALDEN, Oregon
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York             FRED UPTON, Michigan
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           PETE OLSON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California           DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BEN RAY LujanN, New Mexico           H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PAUL TONKO, New York                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York, Vice     BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chair                            BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa                 LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts                    MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California            RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California                TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DARREN SOTO, Florida
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
------

Professional Staff

JEFFREY C. CARROLL, Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Deputy Staff Director
MIKE BLOOMQUIST, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Health

ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Chairwoman
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina,     Ranking Member
Vice Chair                       FRED UPTON, Michigan
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
BEN RAY LujanN, New Mexico           GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILLY LONG, Missouri
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
Massachusetts                    SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
TONY CARDENAS, California            MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California                EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     7
Prepared Statement...........................................     8
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11

Witnesses

Alex Azar, Secretary, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.......................................................    12
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Answers to submitted questions \1\
Anthony S. Fauci, Director, National Institute for Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health \2\
Stephen M. Hahn, M. D., Commissioner, Food and Drugs and Drug
Administration \2\
Robert Kadlec, M. D., Assistant Director, US Department of Health
and Human Services \2\
Robert R. Redfield, Director, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention \2\

Submitted Material

Article of January 2020, ``Lack of new antibiotics threatens
global efforts to contain drug-resistant infections'' submitted
by Mr. Shimkus.................................................    96
Chart ``FY 2020,'' submitted by Ms. Dingell......................    99
Report of November 2019, ``Ending the Cycle of Crisis and
Complacency in U.S. Global Health Security,'' submitted by Ms.
Brooks \3\
Letter of June 13, 2018, to Mr. Azar and Ms. Verma, from four
House Committees to HHS and CMS regarding the case Texas v.
United States, submitted by Mr. Pallone........................   101
Letter of December 7, 2018, to Mr. Azar and Ms. Verma, from four
House Committees to HHS and CMS regarding the case Texas v.
United States, submitted by Mr. Pallone........................   106
Letter of April 8, 2019, to Mr. Azar and Ms. Verma, from five
House Committees to HHS and CMS regarding the case Texas v.
United States, submitted by Mr. Pallone........................   108

----------
\1\ Mr. Azar did not answer submitted questions for the record by
the time of publication.
\2\ The witnesses did not answer the submitted questions for the
record by the time of publication.
\3\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF14/
20200226/110589/HHRG-116-IF14-20200226-SD003.pdf.
Letter of February 18, 2020, to Mr Pallone, et al., from Sarah
Arbes, Acting Assistant Secretary for Legislation, HHS,
submitted by Mr. Pallone.......................................   113
Article of October 25, 2019, ``Trump campaign urges White House
to soften proposed flavored vape ban,'' by Michael Scherer et
al., Washington Post, submitted by Ms. Eshoo...................   116
Letter of October 29, 2019, to Mr. Azar, HHS, from Mr. Pallone
and Mr. Wyden, from two Congressional Committees, submitted by
Mr. Pallone....................................................   126
Letter of June 27, 2019, letter from the Energy and Commerce
Committee examining HHS's administration of the Medicaid
program, submitted by Ms. Eshoo................................   129
Letter of February 26, 2020, to Ms. Eshoo and Mr. Burgess, by
Jane M. Adams, Vice President, Federal Affairs, Johnson &
Johnson, submitted by Ms. Eshoo................................   134
Statement of February 26, 2020, from American Society for
Microbiology, submitted by Ms. Eshoo...........................   135
Article of February 20, 2020, BioCentury entitled, ``Biopharma
industry, academics push back against demands for price
controls on COVID-19 countermeasures,'' by Steve Usdin,
submitted by Ms. Eshoo.........................................   137
Article of January 30, 2020, Wall Street Journal entitled,
``Pharma to the Rescue,'' by the Editorial Board, submitted by
Ms Eshoo.......................................................   139

THE FISCAL YEAR 2021 HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES BUDGET AND OVERSIGHT OF
THE CORONAVIRUS OUTBREAK

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 26, 2020

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 1:00 p.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo (chairwoman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Eshoo, Engel, Matsui, Sarbanes,
Lujan, Schrader, Kennedy, Cardenas, Welch, Ruiz, Dingell,
Kuster, Kelly, Barragan, Blunt Rochester, Pallone (ex officio),
Burgess, Upton, Shimkus, Guthrie, Griffith, Bilirakis, Long,
Bucshon, Brooks, Hudson, Carter, Gianforte, and Walden (ex
officio).
Also present: Representatives DeGette and Schakowsky.
Staff present: Joe Banez, Professional Staff Member; Kevin
Barstow, Chief Oversight Counsel; Jacquelyn Bolen, Counsel;
Jeffrey C. Carroll, Staff Director; Kimberly Espinosa,
Professional Staff Member; Waverly Gordon, Deputy Chief
Counsel; Tiffany Guarascio, Deputy Staff Director; Stephen
Holland, Health Counsel; Zach Kahan, Outreach and Member
Service Coordinator; Saha Khaterzai, Professional Staff Member;
Chris Knauer, Oversight Staff Director; Una Lee, Chief Health
Counsel; Kevin McAloon, Professional Staff Member; Aisling
McDonough, Policy Coordinator; Meghan Mullon, Policy Analyst;
Alivia Roberts, Press Assistant; Tim Robinson, Chief Counsel;
Kimberlee Trzeciak, Chief Health Advisor; Rick Van Buren,
Health Counsel; C. J. Young, Press Secretary; Nolan Ahern,
Minority Professional Staff, Health; Jennifer Barblan, Minority
Chief Counsel, Oversight and Investigations; S. K. Bowen,
Minority Press Secretary; William Clutterbuck, Minority Staff
Assistant; Jordan Davis, Minority Senior Advisor; Caleb Graff,
Minority Professional Staff Member, Health; Tyler Greenberg,
Minority Staff Assistant; Brittany Havens, Minority
Professional Staff, Oversight and Investigations; Peter Kielty,
Minority General Counsel; Ryan Long, Minority Deputy Staff
Director; Kate O'Connor, Minority Chief Counsel, Communication
and Technology; James Paluskiewicz, Minority Chief Counsel,
Health; Kristin Seum, Minority Counsel, Health; Kristen
Shatynsky, Minority Professional Staff Member, Health; and Alan
Slobodin, Minority Chief Investigative Counsel, Oversight and
Investigations.
Ms. Eshoo. The Subcommittee on Health will now come to
order.
I just want all members to know that our witnesses today
have to leave at 5:00 p.m. So the questions for the first panel
on the HHS budget with the Secretary and welcome, Mr.
Secretary--are going to be limited to four minutes. In the
second panel, on the coronavirus response, those questions will
be limited to 5 minutes, which is the usual case, but only ten
members are going to be able to ask questions during that
round. So I will have to be strict with the gavel since the
witnesses have a tight timeframe, and I know that you will all
cooperate with that.
And so let us begin.
Welcome, Mr. Secretary. We are glad that you are here. We
have a lot to take up, and every bit of it is, obviously,
serious.
The Chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes for her
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

And let me begin with this, Mr. Secretary: I think that
confusion is the enemy of preparedness. Confusion is the enemy
of preparedness. I believe that the administration's lack of
coordination for the coronavirus response is on full display.
We all know that. Markets are reacting, I think, at least in
some part, to the lack of trusted information, amongst many
other factors.
Our government, across the government, has to speak with
credibility and authority. Instead, it is like a Greek chorus
chanting on the side of the stage. We have one saying one
thing, the President saying something else, and that adds to
the confusion.
I think that there are key questions that need to be
addressed for the American people: What is the plan, the
overall plan; should this virus infect Americans in high
numbers?
What is the plan for increasing diagnostic capacity, and
what is the target number for that? Dysfunctional tests, we all
know, have limited our ability to diagnose the virus, and the
small number, it could be said, of U.S. cases may reflect
limited testing and not the virus's spread. But it is up to our
professionals to put out with clarity that kind of information.
What is the plan for protecting our healthcare workers that
are on the front lines of this? What is the plan to increase
hospital capacity?
Now, in my view, the United States of America has the
premier professional public health professionals in the world--
in the world--our scientists, our doctors, and those that are
heading up the agencies, those that are part of the agencies. I
think the problem rests more with administration people, one
saying one thing, others saying something else.
I think that the briefings that are done for the Congress,
if I might suggest, should be open to the public. There is no
reason to have secrets about this. And I say that because it
raises the element of fear with people. ``There is something
going on behind closed doors that they are not telling us.''
And it is a time for us, if I might use the expression, to
give them an inoculation of confidence. And certainly the virus
triggers fear, and I think the antidote for this is truth and
transparency, including informing the American people of a
coordinated, fully-funded government plan to keep us safe.
These are not things they can do for themselves. We are the
ones. You are certainly in the driver's seat on this. And I
think that the funding request--and later in my questions, I
will ask you about that--is wholly inadequate.
Now, before requesting the emergency funding, the
President's budget contained dangerous cuts that weaken our
public health frontline response, gut the healthcare safety
net, and end programs focusing on increasing our healthcare
workforce.
So we are driving in the wrong direction. It is as if there
is a fire and the fire engine is going down the wrong end of
the road instead of to the fire. We need these resources in
order to care for the American people.
As the author of the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness
Act, I know that the best way to fight outbreaks is by
preparing and investing in advance, not by rushing after a
pandemic hits.
And while the virus is spreading, the President's budget
cuts almost $700 million from the CDC, $430 million from the
national institute focused on infectious diseases, $3 billion
from the government's global health program. This is a jaw-
dropping $1.6 trillion cut from the very Federal programs that
cover one in three Americans. This doesn't make any sense.
And the President's budget virtually ends the workforce
development programs that trained more than a half a million
clinicians each year. I see them every week in my congressional
district at Stanford Medical Center and Lucile Packard
Children's Hospital.
So the budget weakens our public health safety net and it
hurts our country's resiliency. The CDC, NIH--all of these
agencies cannot run on fumes--cannot run on fumes. And it is
not even a Tesla if it doesn't have a battery that is going to
last.
And if Americans are uninsured or underinsured, they are
not going to seek care, and that will contribute to the spread
of the disease.
So I don't know what is--the President often has promised
``beautiful'' healthcare. I don't find beauty in what I just
said, and I am sorry that this is a part of it.
So, with that, I will have questions, and thank you again
for being here.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Eshoo follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Anna G. Eshoo

Confusion is the enemy of preparedness.
The Administration's lack of coordination for the
coronavirus response is on full display and the markets are
reacting to the lack of trusted information, amongst many
factors.
Our government must speak with credibility and authority.

That means answering key questions for the American
public:

What is the plan should this virus infect Americans
in high numbers?
What is the plan for increasing diagnostic capacity and
what is the target number? Dysfunctional tests have limited our
ability to diagnosis the virus. The small number of U.S. cases
may reflect limited testing, not the virus's spread.

What is the plan for protecting our healthcare
workers?

What is the plan to increase hospital capacity?
The virus triggers fear and I think the antidote for this
is truth and transparency, including informing the American
people of a coordinated, fully-funded government plan to keep
us safe.
Instead of taking this situation seriously, the President
has sent Congress a coronavirus funding request that is
inadequate for this emergency.
And before requesting the emergency funding, the
President's budget contain dangerous cuts that weakens our
public health frontline response, guts the healthcare safety
net, and ends programs focused on increasing our healthcare
workforce.
As the author of the Pandemic and All Hazards Preparedness
Act, I know that the best way to fight outbreaks is by
preparing and investing in advance, not by rushing after a
pandemic hits.
While the virus is spreading, the President's budget cuts
almost $700 million from the CDC, $430 million from the
National Institute focused on infectious diseases, $3 billion
from the government's global health program . . . and a
jawdropping $1.6 trillion from the federal programs that cover
one in three Americans.
And the President's budget virtually ends the workforce
development programs that train more than half a million
clinicians each year.
The President's budget weakens our public health safety
net, hurting our country's resiliency. If Americans are
uninsured or underinsured, then they won't seek care and will
contribute to the spread of the disease.
The President has often promised ``beautiful'' healthcare,
but his HHS budget shows an ugly truth.
The people of our country need a swift advancement of a
strong, strategic funding package that addresses the scale and
seriousness of this public health crisis.

The Chair now recognizes Mr. Burgess, the ranking member of
our subcommittee, for his 5 minutes for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. And I thank the Chair.
Thank you, Secretary, for being here. Always great to see
you in our committee. I hope the feeling is mutual; you always
are grateful to be here at our committee.
I just have to say, Madam Chair, that two weeks ago I was
criticized rather severely for even suggesting that we needed a
coronavirus hearing. The work we were doing that day, which was
a bill that was never going to become law, was so important
that we didn't need to do that hearing. We did need to do that
hearing. I am grateful we are having it today. I am grateful we
have the Secretary.
Now, this hearing is also being coincidently run with the
President's budget proposal for fiscal year 2021. And that is a
lot of stuff to cover in one hearing, but I guess we will do
our best, Mr. Secretary.
So let me just say, I do appreciate the administration's
commitment to healthcare. I appreciate the commitment to
lowering healthcare costs and reducing the complexity of the
system so that patients can more easily access their care.
One thing the administration and, Mr. Secretary,
particularly you led on was advancing kidney health for
Americans. That trend continues in the Health and Human
Services budget proposal and the support for H.R. 5534, the
Comprehensive Immunosuppressive Drug Coverage for Kidney
Transplant Patients Act.
As you know, Mr. Secretary, this bill would extend Medicare
coverage of immunosuppressive drugs past the current 36-month
limit. A patient with a kidney transplant needs to take
immunosuppressives or their body will ultimately reject the
graft, causing the patient to return for dialysis treatment.
A kidney transplant is indeed an investment in the future
of that recipient patient, and this bill will help protect that
investment. I have worked on this policy for a decade, and I am
thankful it has been highlighted as a priority by the
administration. It is time for Congress to finally pass this
commonsense legislation.
The budget also continues the work of the SUPPORT Act, one
of the major pieces of legislation passed in the last Congress,
by making clear that the opiate epidemic and programs in the
oversight investigation--and making sure that the opiate
epidemic and response programs are indeed a priority.
In our Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee, we have
heard from various States about the efforts they are making to
help those with substance use disorder. Funding for these State
opiate response grants is imperative to allow States to find
the innovative ways to combat this crisis.
I also appreciate the fact that the administration included
Hyde Amendment pro-life protections in all proposed funding
language. It is important to ensure that Federal funds are not
used to perform abortions. And I hope as this subcommittee
moves forward with reauthorizations and the Appropriations
Committee puts together the bills for fiscal year 2021, they
will maintain those protections.
Other important programs and policies are receiving
increased funding, including: the Maternal and Child Health
Block Grant, the Health Resources and Services Administration's
Maternal Health in America initiative, and the 340B drug
pricing program. Funding increases for the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention's influenza program are particularly
important as we now face this worldwide coronavirus outbreak.
Which brings me to the novel coronavirus. And it has
infected over 80,000 individuals worldwide, and proven to be
more deadly than SARS. I appreciate the Trump administration's
vigilance and rapid response efforts.
Mr. Secretary, let me just say, I was so heartened--I think
it was four Fridays ago when you came on the air and said there
was a limit to people being able to come into this country from
China. And I thought it was important that the administration
say that.
And I believe that is one of the central things--my thesis
is that is one of the central things that has provided us at
least a little breathing room as this virus erupts around the
world. We are, fortunately, not as affected as some other
countries. Now it is incumbent upon us to make sure that we
utilize that time wisely.
Certainly, the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act,
which was worked on by this subcommittee in the last Congress
and finally passed at the beginning of this Congress--important
piece of legislation. I would have liked for us to have done
real-time hearings updating, are we doing what was intended
with that bill? Is the stockpile responding appropriately to
the authorizations that we made?
And this is the type of information--rather then the
political rhetoric back and forth that we have heard, this is
the type of information that I think would be helpful and,
indeed, reassuring to the American people.
You can't ignore the fact of what has happened to the
markets. Today we are grateful that they have seemed to have
rebounded a little bit. But, look, we all know China has not
been forthcoming with information, and it is that uncertainty--
that uncertainty--that I believe it is one of the negative
forces driving the market.
Mr. Secretary, I appreciate you being here today. We will
have multiple questions for you. I certainly look forward to
your testimony.
Thank you. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Michael C. Burgess

Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to thank Secretary Azar for
being here today to discuss President Trump's Budget Proposal
for fiscal year 2021 and the 2019 novel coronavirus, or COVID-
19, outbreak.
I appreciate the Trump Administration's commitment to
healthcare, especially lowering healthcare costs and the
reducing the complexity of the healthcare system so that
patients can more easily access care. One thing the
Administration, particularly you, Secretary Azar, has led on is
advancing kidney health for Americans. That trend continues in
the Health and Human Services Budget Proposal's support for
H.R. 5534, the Comprehensive Immunosuppressive Drug Coverage
for Kidney Transplant Patients Act of 2019.
This bill would extend Medicare coverage of
immunosuppressive drugs past the current 36-month limit for
kidney patients who do not obtain other health coverage.
A patient with a kidney transplant must take their
immunosuppressive drugs or their body will ultimately reject
the kidney causing the patient to return to dialysis treatment.
A kidney transplant is an investment into the future of the
recipient patient. This bill will protect that investment. I
have worked on this policy for nearly a decade, and I am
thankful that this has been highlighted as a priority by the
Administration. This Congress is the time to finally pass this
common-sense legislation.
This budget also continues the work of the SUPPORT Act, by
making clear that the opioid epidemic and response programs are
a priority.
In the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee we heard
from various states about the efforts they are making to help
those with substance use disorder. Funding for these State
Opioid Response Grants is imperative to allow states to find
innovative ways to combat the opioid crisis.
I also appreciate that the Administration included Hyde
Amendment and pro-life protections in all proposed funding
language. It is important to ensure that federal funds are not
used to perform abortions, and I hope that as this subcommittee
moves forward with reauthorizations and the Appropriations
Committee puts together the bills for fiscal year 2021, that
they will maintain those protections.
Other important programs and policies receiving increased
funding including the Maternal and Child Health Block Grant,
the Health Resources and Services Administration's Maternal
Health in America Initiative, and the 340B Drug Pricing
Program. Funding increases for the Centers for Disease Control
and Preparation's influenza program is particularly important
now as we face a worldwide coronavirus outbreak.
This novel coronavirus, named COVID-19, has infected over
75,000 individuals worldwide and has proven to be more deadly
than SARS. I appreciate the Trump Administration's vigilance
and rapid response efforts. The State Department issued a level
4 travel advisory for China and the Administration has been
appropriately restrictive in allowing non-citizens who had
traveled to China within the last 14 days from entering the
U.S. It is a relief to know that our country is taking this
outbreak very seriously and has successfully limited the number
of cases in the United States; however, with increased global
spread and community spread in countries such as Italy, COVID-
19 will become more difficult to contain.
Our agencies have worked together to protect the American
people from this outbreak and have been successful in limiting
infection of those in the U.S. This is proof that the Pandemic
and All-Hazards Preparedness and Advancing Innovation Act of
2019 is working. Thanks to the work of this subcommittee in the
last Congress and the leadership of Rep. Susan Brooks and
Chairwoman Eshoo, our public health system is working as
intended. I believe that our response efforts thus far have
shown that our public health system has adapted and improved
since the Zika and Ebola responses. Throughout those responses,
Chairman Upton ensured that we had robust hearings on those
responses to ensure proper Congressional oversight and
understanding of the situations. I hope that we will be able to
stick to that tradition and hold a standalone hearing on COVID-
19.
I do appreciate the CDC and other agencies' transparency in
providing multiple telebriefings for Congressional staff each
week so that Congress can be as informed with the most up-to-
date information as possible. I look forward to learning more
about COVID-19 and the challenges and successes of these
response efforts.
Thank you for holding this important hearing. I yield back.

Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
I want the ranking member to know the following. On January
30, I requested that, the following week, we have a hearing on
the coronavirus with the heads of the agencies. The Secretary
leaned in and said, ``I head up the effort, and I want to be
there with that team.'' And here we are today.
So this is not something, Dr. Burgess, that we have just
casually overlooked or ignored. That is far from the fact.
I now would like to recognize the chairman of the full
committee, Mr. Pallone, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone Thank you, Chairwoman Eshoo.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Today's hearing serves two critical purposes: first, we
will examine the Trump administration's proposed budget for the
Department of Health and Human Services for fiscal year 2021,
and, second, we will get a crucial update on the
administration's ongoing response to the coronavirus.
I am disappointed, though not surprised, that the Trump
administration budget proposal completely contradicts the
healthcare promises that the President repeatedly makes to the
American people.
When it comes to ensuring the American people have access
to affordable and quality healthcare, the Trump administration
has failed them, and this budget proposal continues that
record.
Two years after showering the wealthy and large
corporations with major tax breaks, the President's 2021 budget
proposal slashes $100 billion from the Affordable Care Act,
$500 billion from Medicare, and more than $900 billion from
Medicaid over the course of years. And the President also wants
to make it easier for States to take away people's coverage,
undermine their care, and cut critical benefits.
And this puts the health and well-being of tens of millions
of children, parents, pregnant women, and people with
disabilities at risk. Medicaid is a lifeline for millions of
working-class families, and it is unconscionable that the
president wants to cut it to pay for tax cuts for millionaires.
Now, these budget cuts also fly in the face of President
Trump's own words. He promised that, as President, he would not
cut Medicare or Medicaid. And he promised in his State of the
Union Address earlier this year that he would continue to
protect the more than 130 million Americans with preexisting
conditions. But, as Secretary Azar knows, this administration
is now suing in the Federal courts to strike down the ACA and
all of its consumer protections.
Overall, President Trump is proposing a 12-percent cut to
the HHS's budget, one of the largest cuts to any Federal
agency. The devastating cuts don't end at Medicare, Medicaid,
and the ACA. The President's proposal cuts the National
Institutes of Health by $3 billion and the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention by $675 million. And keep in mind that
this is the very agency that is now responding to the
coronavirus.
And I am also concerned by the proposal to move tobacco
regulation out of the FDA's authority altogether. Instead, the
administration would create a new, untested agency to oversee
tobacco products while we are in the midst of a youth tobacco
epidemic.
After years of regulatory uncertainty, the Tobacco Control
Act clearly and unambiguously ensured that FDA would regulate
tobacco products for the protection of public health, and, over
the last decade, the agency has worked to develop the
expertise, workforce, and scientific basis to effectively
regulate these products.
So I am concerned that this proposal would only serve to
further politicize tobacco regulation by stripping away FDA's
sound, scientific, and evidence-based approach and replacing it
at the whims of political appointees. And it is nothing more
than a gift, frankly, to big tobacco companies.
Now, let me just move to the second topic at hand. After we
discuss the budget, we will ask questions of the Secretary and
other top public health officials on the administration's
efforts to address the coronavirus outbreak. It is critical
that we get an update on the scale of the outbreak, its
repercussions in the U.S., and how we can work together to
ensure the safety of all Americans.
I think we have one of the strongest public health
infrastructures in the world, and it is more than capable of
coming to an effective solution. And we should be supporting
that system with all available resources.
So, again, Madam Chair, I thank you. And I think--well,
actually, I have time left, if anybody wants it, but--everybody
gets time, or should--does anybody want my time? I guess not.
All right. Thanks a lot. I yield back.

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Today's hearing serves two critical purposes. First, we
will examine the Trump Administration's proposed budget for the
Department of Health and Human Services for fiscal year 2021.
And second, we will get a critical update on the
Administration's ongoing response to the coronavirus.
I am disappointed, though not surprised, that the
Administration's budget proposal completely contradicts the
healthcare promises that President Trump repeatedly makes to
the American people.
When it comes to ensuring the American people have access
to affordable and quality healthcare, the Trump Administration
has failed them, and this budget proposal continues that sorry
record.
Two years after showering the wealthy and large
corporations with major tax breaks, the President's 2021 budget
proposal slashes $100 billon from the Affordable Care Act
(ACA), $500 billion from Medicare and more than $900 billion
from Medicaid over the course of ten years. The president also
wants to make it easier for states to take away people's
coverage, undermine their care, and cut critical benefits. This
puts the health and well-being of tens of millions of children,
parents, pregnant women, and people with disabilities at risk.
Medicaid is a lifeline for millions of working-class families,
and it's unconscionable that the president wants to cut it to
pay for tax cuts for millionaires.
These budget cuts also fly in face of President Trump's own
words--promising that, as president, he would NOT cut Medicare
or Medicaid. And promising in his State of the Union Address
earlier this year that he would continue to protect the more
than 130 million Americans with pre-existing conditions. As
Secretary Azar well knows, this Administration is now suing in
the federal courts to strike down the ACA and all of its
consumer protections.
Overall, the President is proposing a 12 percent cut to
HHS's budget--one of the largest cuts to any federal agency.
The devastating cuts don't end at Medicare, Medicaid and the
ACA, the President's proposal, cuts the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) by $3 billion, and the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) by $675 million. Keep in mind this is the
very agency that is now responding to the coronavirus.
I'm also concerned by the proposal to move tobacco
regulation out of the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA)
authority altogether. Instead, the Administration would create
a new, untested agency to oversee tobacco products while we are
in the midst of a youth tobacco epidemic. After years of
regulatory uncertainty, the Tobacco Control Act clearly and
unambiguously ensured that FDA would regulate tobacco products
for the protection of public health. Over the last decade, the
agency has worked to develop the expertise, workforce, and
scientific basis to effectively regulate these products. I'm
concerned that this proposal would only serve to further
politicize tobacco regulation by stripping away FDA's sound
scientific and evidence-based approach and replacing it at the
whims of political appointees. This is nothing more than a gift
to big tobacco companies.
Now, let me move to the second topic at hand today. After
we discuss the budget, we will ask questions of the Secretary
and other top public health officials on the Administration's
efforts to address the coronavirus outbreak. It is critical
that we get an update on the scale of the outbreak, its
repercussions in the United States, and how we can be working
together to ensure the safety of all Americans. We have one of
the strongest public health infrastructures in the world, and
it is more than capable of coming to an effective solution. We
should be supporting that system with all available resources.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Pleasure to recognize the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Walden, for his 5 minutes for his opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Madam Chair. Good afternoon.
And, Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here today. It is
not the first time we have seen you here, I think, this year
probably, but certainly, we appreciate the work you and your
team have done dealing with the coronavirus.
I think I have been in every one of the roundtables and
hearings that you and your team have provided for this
committee and other committees. Chairman Pallone and I were the
co-moderators of the first one in the Visitor Center, where
every Member of Congress was invited, and I was at the last
one, and I was at the Situation Room at the White House before
the break. And, you know, I think you all have been very
forthcoming with the facts.
And for whatever reason, we haven't had a hearing here.
Maybe we wanted to wait until this one. But I think it is
important that we hear from you and the team that you are
leading.
And I think it is important to recognize the work that Mrs.
Brooks did on reauthorizing the Pandemic and All-Hazards
Preparedness Act in the last Congress. We had big fights about
that, but thank goodness it is in place, because it is designed
to do exactly what we are encountering today: have a lead
person in the administration--that is you--that is designated
by the President, and a team ready to go.
And so I guess I have been to enough of those briefings
that I saw Members kind of yawning at some point in those,
quote/unquote, ``closed-door briefings'' because we were
hearing it for the third time.
Now, we were gone a week, and a lot has changed. And we
know what is happening in China is probably worse than we are
being told. And I think the big issues there are the supply
chain as well as public health.
We know it is spreading around the world, and we are trying
to cope. And we know, and you have warned us, and Dr. Fauci has
warned us, and others, expect it to--you know, this could well
mutate, but that doesn't mean end of world. It can well expand;
we should be ready for that. But, as Mr. Pallone said, we have
a terrific public health system here in the United States.
A lot of that is driven at the local level. And it is
important we have those communication links in place so that
when we identify something, somebody coming in through an
airport, the local health officials know about it at home and
we are able to deal with it. And I think it is good to get this
out in the public.
I would just point-out that we will hear from you and the
CDC, FDA, and ASPR and NIAID to give us an update on the
sidecar hearing. We have had now, what, 80,000 confirmed cases
worldwide, 2,700 deaths. The outbreak has become a significant
global health concern. Yesterday, Italy announced 300
individuals have been affected by the coronavirus; 11 have
died.
There is still much we do not know about the outbreak, and
so we will learn more, I guess, after this budget hearing.
But it is essential that we do everything we can and
provide you the assistance. And I know, in the meetings I have
been in with everybody else on this committee that was there to
attend, you have made it clear, if you need more money, you
will ask us, and we have made it clear, if you need more money,
tell us, and we will work with you.
Now, we will want to get the specifics, obviously, but I
know you have sent up a supplemental request for, I think, a
total of a little over $2 billion, $2.5 billion. Some of that
is reprogramming; some of it is additional money. No sooner had
that left your office than some politicians were on the air,
criticizing you for not asking for enough. And so we will be
interested to get your response to that.
I do think it is also essential to look at perspectives in
terms of what Americans are facing today with the traditional
flu and that we have probably lost, what, 10,000 or more
Americans have died from the annual flu. And we have vaccines
for that and treatments for that. And so we have to think about
that, as well, and practice good public health.
I was in Japan with a couple of other of my colleagues on
the committee, and you can't go anywhere in Japan without the
hand sanitizer being squirted in your hands. And it was a good
lesson, I think, for all of us. But we ought to be doing a
little bit more of that here and we would probably help with
the traditional seasonal flu and spread of other diseases.
And so there is a lot we can learn from you; there is a lot
we can learn from your team. And we will look forward to
hearing from you directly on that, on the record here in the
public.
So, with that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Madame Chair, thank you for holding this important hearing.
Secretary Azar, welcome back. Thank you for taking the time to
be here today and the work you and your team continue to do.
Providing funding to essential health programs has been one
of the priorities of this committee. Last year, we passed
several important bills that reauthorized research funding for
autism and the Emergency Medical Services for Children program.
We also included provisions in the end-of-the-year spending
bill that provide additional protections for CRT wheelchairs
provided to Medicare beneficiaries. These provisions--that are
now law--directly and positively impact the American people and
show we are a committee that can continue to reach bipartisan
agreements to help the public.
The President's budget continues to build on a number of
proposals that increase health access to rural communities,
combat the HIV epidemic, and provide states greater flexibility
to engage in innovative programs--such as implementation of the
Money Follows the Person demonstration, giving consumers the
choice of where they live and receive services.
As the opioid epidemic continues to claim lives and other
drug epidemics are arising, the budget also keeps vital grants
in the budget for substance use disorder treatment.
The budget also integrates proposals that members of this
committee have previously supported, such as providing lifetime
coverage for immunosuppressive drugs for kidney transplant
recipients as well as an extension of the Independence at Home
demonstration program. These are good, bipartisan proposals
that continue to build on the work this committee has done.
The budget also reiterates the President's commitment to
providing greater price transparency, so patients know the cost
of their services. Additional provisions remove regulatory
barriers that hinder the ability to have more value-based care,
such as modernizing the Stark Law and making site-neutral
payment changes so that costs can be uniform for all Medicare
beneficiaries.
It should also be noted that we are quickly approaching the
May 22nd deadline to fund community health centers and other
essential programs for the rest of the year. These are
important programs and we need to make sure they are fully
funded; it's also an opportunity to act on legislation to end
surprise medical bills - a key priority of not only this
committee, but also President Trump. Of course, the President's
budget also emphasizes the need to engage in drug pricing
reform to lower the cost of prescription drugs for consumers. I
hope that we can work on bipartisan proposals that will do so
and I continue to believe the Lower Costs, More Cures Act, that
I introduced, has a path to the President's desk. This would
provide savings to the American people, place the first out-of-
pocket cap on America's seniors' drug costs, and prioritize
innovation without sacrificing lifesaving cures--unlike Speaker
Pelosi's alternative with estimates that up to 15 or even 100
fewer cures would be developed.
After we hear from Secretary After we hear from Secretary
Azar, we're going to hear from representatives of the CDC, FDA,
NIAID, and ASPR to give us an update on the coronavirus
outbreak and responses to combat it. I thank Doctors Redfield,
Hahn, Fauci, and Kadlec for taking the time to appear before us
today. With over 80,000 confirmed cases and over 2,700 deaths,
the outbreak has become a significant global health concern.
Yesterday, Italy announced over 300 individuals had been
affected by the coronavirus and 11 had died. There is still
much we do not know about the outbreak given that public health
authorities have been given limited access to Chinese patients.
It is important to make sure that the CDC and other agencies
have the necessary funding to further research and manage this
outbreak. Earlier this week, the Administration requested
emergency funds to combat the coronavirus outbreak and I think
this Committee should do everything it can to assist public
health officials with this crisis.
I thank both panels for taking the time to appear and I
look forward to hearing from each of you.

Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
I now would like to introduce our witness for today's first
panel. One person, one person alone: the Nation's Secretary of
Health and Human Services.
Welcome to you, Secretary Azar. You certainly are familiar
with the lighting system around here, so you are now recognized
for 5 minutes for your statement to the committee. Thank you
for being here.

STATEMENT OF ALEX AZAR

Secretary Azar. Great. Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Eshoo, Chairman Pallone, Ranking Members Walden
and Burgess, thank you for inviting me to discuss the
President's budget for fiscal year 2021.
I am honored to appear before the committee for budget
testimony as the HHS Secretary for the second time, especially
after the remarkable year of results that the HHS team has
produced.
With support from this committee, this past year, we saw
the number of drug overdose deaths decline for the first time
in decades, another record year of generic drug approvals from
FDA, and historic drops in Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D,
and Affordable Care Act exchange premiums.
The President's budget aims to move toward a future where
HHS's programs work better for the people we serve, where our
human services programs put people at the center, and where
America's healthcare system is affordable, personalized, puts
patients in control, and treats them like a human being and not
like a number.
HHS has the largest discretionary budget of any nondefense
department, which means that difficult decisions must be made
to put discretionary spending on a sustainable path.
The President's budget proposes to protect what works in
our healthcare system and make it better. I will mention two
ways that we do that: first, facilitating patient-centered
markets; and, second, tackling key, impactable health
challenges.
The budget's healthcare reforms aim to put the patient at
the center. It would, for instance, eliminate cost-sharing for
colonoscopies, a lifesaving preventive service. We would reduce
patients' costs and promote competition by paying the same for
certain services regardless of the setting.
The budget endorses bipartisan, bicameral drug pricing
legislation. And I want to thank this committee for your
bipartisan work to pass legislation such as the CREATES Act to
cut patient costs and save taxpayer dollars through lower drug
prices.
The budget's reforms will improve Medicare and extend the
life of the Hospital Insurance Fund for at least 25 years.
We propose investing $116 million in HHS's initiatives to
reduce maternal mortality and morbidity. And we propose reforms
to tackle America's rural healthcare crisis, including
telehealth expansions and new flexibility for rural hospitals.
The budget increases investments to combat the opioid
epidemic, including SAMHSA's State Opioid Response Program.
This successful grant program grew out of this committee's
creation of the State Targeted Response grants in the Cures
Act, and we were pleased to work with Congress to provide
flexibility on the SOR grants for States to address stimulants
like methamphetamines.
We request $716 million for the President's initiative to
end the HIV epidemic in America by using effective, evidence-
based tools. Thanks to support from Congress, we have already
begun implementation of the initiative.
The budget reflects how seriously we take the threat of
other infectious diseases, such as the novel coronavirus, by
prioritizing the funding for CDC's infectious disease programs
and maintaining investments in hospital preparedness.
As of this morning, we still had only 14 cases of the novel
coronavirus detected in the United States involving travel to
or close contacts with travelers. Coming into this hearing, I
was informed that we have a 15th confirmed case, the
epidemiology of which we are still discerning. Three cases also
exist among Americans repatriated from Wuhan, and 42 cases
exist among American passengers repatriated from the Diamond
Princess cruise ship in Japan.
While the immediate risk to the American public remains
low, there is now community transmission in a number of
countries, including outside of Asia, which is deeply
concerning. We are working closely with State, local, and
private-sector partners to prepare for mitigating the virus's
potential spread in the United States, as we expect to see more
cases here.
On Monday, OMB sent a request to make at least $2.5 billion
in funding available for preparedness and response, including
for therapeutics, vaccines, personal protective equipment,
State and local public health department support, and
surveillance. I look forward to working closely with Congress
on that proposal.
This year's budget aims to protect and enhance Americans'
well-being and deliver Americans a more affordable,
personalized healthcare system that works better rather than
just spends more. I look forward to working with this committee
to make that commonsense goal a reality.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Azar follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mr. Azar

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
And we will now move to member questions. And I will
recognize myself for 4 minutes, which will be the limit for
questions to the Secretary.
Mr. Secretary, we know that on February 24, the Acting
Director of OMB--what was requested, the appropriation of $1.25
billion for emergency funding for the virus. Is that what you
requested of OMB?
Secretary Azar. So the actual total supplemental
authorization would be $2.5 billion. We proposed----
Ms. Eshoo. That I know, but----
Secretary Azar [continue]. Half of that to be covered----
Ms. Eshoo [continue]. The new funding is 1.25.
Secretary Azar. I do want to emphasize, as I have told the
appropriators, that was meant as a suggestion of a way to fund
half of it. But if Congress decides there are other approaches,
we are not wed to that.
Ms. Eshoo. And what exactly does that cover? And is it
anticipatory?
Now, yesterday, the CDC said we need to be prepared--
essentially, we need to be prepared for a much larger spread of
this virus in the United States. So is what has been requested
in emergency funding to cover a broader plan, or is it on the
figures that you just gave us?
Secretary Azar. So it is to cover expenses that we believe
are appropriate for 2020. So this would go through the end of
2020's fiscal year. And then we would work with appropriators
on any adjustments to 2021 appropriations in the weeks and
months ahead as we continue to learn on a daily basis about the
spread of the disease.
Core investments. First, surveillance, expanding our
surveillance system for novel----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes. I have some other questions, so----
Secretary Azar. Oh, sure. But----
Ms. Eshoo. All right.
Secretary Azar [continue]. I am happy to walk you through
the five key basic----
Ms. Eshoo. And I read the entirety of your printed
statement.
I want to turn to the status of drug pricing policy
proposals. If you could just say ``yes'' or ``no,'' it would be
great.
Have you finalized a policy ending drug rebates to
middlemen in Medicare?
Secretary Azar. We did not move finally with that rule.
Ms. Eshoo. OK.
Have you finalized a policy tying drug prices to the lower
costs, the reference pricing?
Secretary Azar. We had an advance notice of proposed
rulemaking, so that was not an actual formal proposal yet.
Ms. Eshoo. All right.
Have you finalized a proposal to make drug manufacturers
put list prices in television advertisements?
Secretary Azar. We did. And much to their shame, the pharma
industry sued. And Congress has not passed explicit
authorization for that list price requirement in the statute
that I wish they would do.
Ms. Eshoo. Are you planning to finalize or pursue any of
these policies in the near future?
Secretary Azar. We plan to finalize as soon as we can the
importation program implementing section 804 of the Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act to allow low-cost importation from Canada.
Ms. Eshoo. You know that the House passed H.R. 3. You also
know that the President said that we are going to ``negotiate,
negotiate, negotiate so hard,'' or something like that. ``We
are going to negotiate like crazy.'' Do you support direct
negotiations?
Secretary Azar. We do not support H.R. 3 because we don't
believe the negotiation framework in there is either a
negotiation or actually practical and implementable. And it
also just has no chance of passing in the Senate. The
bipartisan package of Grassley-Wyden is struggling even to get
to the floor there.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, H.R. 3 caps out-of-pocket, as you know,
prescription costs for seniors. Do you support the capping of
out-of-pocket costs for them?
Secretary Azar. We have an important opportunity here----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes or no?
Secretary Azar [continue]. Bipartisan----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes or no?
Secretary Azar [continue]. To cap out-of-pocket spending
and reduce what seniors----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes or no?
Secretary Azar [continue]. Are you paying for Part D. So,
yes, we do.
Ms. Eshoo. OK. Good.
Well, I think that I have asked all--let me just--well,
H.R. 3 also limits drug price hikes to inflation. Do you
support the inflation caps?
Secretary Azar. So that is part of the Grassley-Wyden
package also in the Senate, and we----
Ms. Eshoo. Do you support it?
Secretary Azar [continue]. Have made clear that that is a
package we can support it. It is not the only bipartisan
package, but the price inflation penalties in Part D and B are
acceptable to us as a means of getting list prices under
control.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you.
My time has expired. I now would like to recognize the
ranking member of the subcommittee for his 4 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, in December of 2018, the President signed
two important bills into law that addressed maternal health and
maternal mortality. The first bill, Representative Jaime
Herrera Beutler's Preventing Maternal Deaths Act, established a
grant program for States to establish or expand maternal
mortality review committees. The other bill, Improving Access
to Maternity Care Act, required HRSA to identify maternity care
health professional target areas.
So how have you used these bills? How is your agency
building on the success of those two laws to ensure access to
quality maternity care and prevent maternal mortality?
Secretary Azar. First, could I thank you for your
leadership on immunosuppressive drugs? I hope you saw that we
put in the budget what you have long advocated for in terms of
that coverage.
On this----
Mr. Burgess. Yes. Yes, you may say thank you. You are
welcome.
Secretary Azar. And on maternal mortality also, the work of
Congress really focusing on this critical issue. Too many women
are dying either in childbirth, preterm, at childbirth, or
postpartum. And so we have made this a serious part of the
President's agenda, with a $116 million initiative, with the
$74 million increase, that focused on improving prevention,
quality improvement, postpartum health, and improving the data
collection on that, so a four-part strategy that we look
forward to working with Congress on coming out of the budget.
Mr. Burgess. Well, I thank you for that.
You know, Republicans on this subcommittee in 2017 sent
your predecessor, Secretary Price, a letter asking for HHS to
update and release the Pandemic Flu (Influenza) Plan. And it
previously had not been updated since 2005.
Can you describe how you are using the Pandemic Influenza
Plan as a guide in preparing for your response to this current
outbreak of the coronavirus?
Secretary Azar. So, as you know, I was one of the
architects of the original pandemic plans back in the Bush
administration. That work is foundational. That is what has set
up our entire State, local, and Federal preparedness program
for any type of viral outbreak like this.
And so it is really the blueprint for how we are operating
today, including my role, leading through the Emergency Support
Function 8 under the National Response Plan, which is the
doctrine that we have had in place now for 15 years.
Mr. Burgess. Let me just say, this committee did do work on
H.R. 3 last October. There was concern from many of us that the
negative effects on innovation and development would really be
profound. And now we find ourselves confronted with this
coronavirus outbreak, where we know we need new antivirals, we
know we need new vaccines, we know we need new monoclonal
antibodies to help people who become ill.
Can you just speak to the fact of, is innovation still
important? Because we have heard several times in this
subcommittee and in the full committee that maybe innovation
wasn't so important as getting cheaper drugs into people's
hands.
Secretary Azar. Innovation is vitally important, and that
is why two of the key legs of the supplemental request are to
develop vaccines and therapeutics for this novel virus.
One of the challenges with H.R. 3 is the sheer amount of
money it would pull out of the system. And I am not a believer
that if you pull any money out of the drug industry----
Mr. Burgess. Right.
Secretary Azar [continue]. It is catastrophic or
impossible. But the sheer amount would materially impact the
bringing forward of drug therapies for Alzheimer's, for
arthritis--just go through the list of therapies that you need
to incent, or you won't get them.
Mr. Burgess. Yes. And, you know, interestingly enough, the
Alzheimer's drug that was withdrawn a year ago, I am reading,
is now getting a new look at different dosing schedules. And,
again, work like that, that is not going to happen if we don't
value innovation.
Mr. Secretary, I thank you for being here and certainly
look forward to the second part of this hearing.
I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The BARDA biodefense budget has also been cut.
Now, glad to recognize the chairman of the full committee
for his 4 minutes of questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairwoman Eshoo.
Mr. Secretary, I thank you for appearing before our
subcommittee today. But I continue to be upset by the Trump
administration's decision to ask the court to strike down the
ACA in the Republican lawsuit that is seeking to declare the
entire law invalid.
If the district court ruling is upheld, then the Trump
administration will be responsible for the largest coverage
loss in U.S. history. Over 20 million Americans would lose
their coverage, raising consumer costs and making lifesaving
healthcare unaffordable for American families. And it would
eliminate protections for preexisting conditions, adversely
impact the Medicare program, and end Medicaid expansion.
So I have sent you three letters now, including one in
April of last year, requesting any analysis, study, assessment,
or reports regarding the potential impact if the entire ACA is
found to be unconstitutional. And for almost two years now, I
have repeatedly asked for any documents relating to any
contingency plans in place in the event the ACA is found
unconstitutional.
Only last week, I received a 1- and 1.5-page response that
answers none of my questions, frankly. And the documents
produced so far to the committee answer none of these
questions.
So I would like to submit, Madam Chair, my letters and the
Department's response in the record. I would ask for unanimous
consent.
Ms. Eshoo. So ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pallone. So, really--I have 2.5 minutes here, Mr.
Secretary--I think the American people have the right to know
what the administration's contingency plans are, given the
President is asking that this entire law be declared invalid.
Maybe you just have to answer ``yes'' or ``no.'' We will see. I
only have two minutes.
Secretary, has the Department conducted an analysis to
evaluate the impact on individuals with preexisting conditions
and their access to affordable health insurance if the ACA is
found unconstitutional, yes or no?
Secretary Azar. Well, of course, it is not going to be left
just like that. We would replace it with something that would
actually deal with preexisting conditions----
Mr. Pallone. But have you done any kind of contingency
plans for what would happen if the court struck down the ACA,
yes or no?
Secretary Azar. We are always considering different
options, but it will depend on the nature of any ultimate court
decision----
Mr. Pallone. All right.
Secretary Azar [continue]. If it even agrees with striking
down all or part of the ACA.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Well, it doesn't sound like there
is such a thing.
Has the Department conducted an analysis to evaluate the
impact on premiums and access to coverage in the individual
market, particularly for individuals with preexisting
conditions, if the ACA is found unconstitutional, yes or no?
Secretary Azar. Well, it depends on what would be struck
down, whether all of it is struck down, part of it, or none of
it.
Mr. Pallone. OK.
Secretary Azar. We are years, possibly, away from a final
court decision on all of these elements.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Well, let me ask you this. Are
there any contingency plans to ensure that the 20 million
people who are covered under the ACA do not lose coverage?
Anything at all? Any contingency plans?
Secretary Azar. Well, first, we have been emphatic that we
are changing nothing about how we administer this program
during the pendency of the litigation. And at the time that
there--if there is a final court decision striking down all or
part of it, it will depend on the context of that decision and
the politics, frankly, of who is in Congress and what we can
work with to ensure the----
Mr. Pallone. Well, I am trying to----
Secretary Azar [continue]. Protection of preexisting
conditions.
Mr. Pallone. It sounds like the answer is, no; you don't
have anything yet.
I would just like a commitment from you, basically, to
respond to my request to provide any documents to the committee
that relate to contingency plans in the event that the ACA is
struck down. Can you give me that commitment?
Secretary Azar. I am sure you will understand that
deliberative processes regarding potential legislative
proposals are some of the core of the internal executive
departments' functions.
Mr. Pallone. So it sounds like the answer is no. Well, I
just think that it is unfortunate because, you know, our
oversight responsibility is to make sure that, in the event we
have this terrible situation, that there is some kind of
contingency plan. And I don't think you have it. So I don't
believe the administration has any kind of comprehensive plan
to address the fallout that will occur if this Republican suit
is successful in court.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Walden, for his 4 minutes.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Secretary, again, thanks for being here.
I want to make a couple of points.
One is, on the opening day of this Congress, I led the
effort on the House floor, now in the minority, trying to move
an effort to protect people with preexisting conditions pending
this lawsuit's decision.
Congress could act. This House could move legislation to
put into law certainty to protect people with preexisting
conditions, in addition to the laws that are already on the
books dealing with preexisting conditions. But my colleagues
have chosen not to do that.
So they could. And we would probably find common ground
here on a preexisting severability language. There is a lot
that could be done here.
Second, it was the Congressional Budget Office--
independent, nonpartisan--that said, I believe 8 to 15 new
medicines would never be invented because of H.R. 3, Speaker
Pelosi's partisan drug pricing bill. As you said, that could be
a cure for Alzheimer's. It could be a cure for the coronavirus.
We don't know.
And that is just the first ten years. The further out you
look, the more future innovation will be lost. California Life
Sciences said upwards of 85 percent of what they invest in
would go away. Eighty thousand U.S. jobs, 80,000 is what
California Life Sciences said. We would lose the R&D. We would
lose the innovation.
Now, no President that I have been around, Republican or
Democrat, has ever leaned in harder on these issues of cost of
care than President Trump. And I was with you and him when he
announced the effort to get transparency in the hospital
system. And before we got from the news conference to the Oval
Office, I believe the hospitals had sued you. Is that correct?
Secretary Azar. I believe it is, yes.
Mr. Walden. Yes.
And you talked about the drug disclosure in advertising.
And what happened there?
Secretary Azar. Rather disgustingly, the pharmaceutical
industry sued us to conceal their list prices from their
consumers.
Mr. Walden. And so then I want to talk about Medicare Part
D. We were all working together on this committee, which we
have a great reputation of doing--occasionally we fight, and
that is all right; we know it. But we were working together to
cap the out-of-pocket costs for seniors under Medicare Part D
and modernize Medicare Part D when all that, unfortunately,
came to an abrupt halt, driven, I am going to say, from the
Speaker's office. Those discussions ceased.
But we agreed that we needed to cap out-of-pocket costs. We
put that in our bill, H.R. 19. They put that in their partisan
H.R. 3. But we all agree that it is time to cap the out-of-
pocket costs for seniors in Medicare.
Does the administration support capping the out-of-pocket
costs for seniors in Medicare?
Secretary Azar. Absolutely.
Mr. Walden. Did the administration opposes H.R. 3?
Secretary Azar. We do oppose H.R. 3.
Mr. Walden. Did the administration support the concepts of
H.R. 19, our alternative?
Secretary Azar. We support the elements of it, absolutely,
including the notion of capping out-of-pockets and saving
seniors money.
Mr. Walden. One of the big issues we have dealt with here,
or tried to, is the high cost of insulin, not just for seniors
but for others. But in our alternative, H.R. 19, that was all
bipartisan legislation, we capped cost of insulin, I believe,
at $50 a month was the maximum.
Does the administration support that concept?
Secretary Azar. I believe so, yes.
Mr. Walden. So, going forward, are you hopeful that
Congress and the administration can get together on a plan the
President can sign, that can become law, that would actually
reduce the costs of pharmaceutical drugs in America without
driving innovation away?
Secretary Azar. Yes. I have said the administration is the
most flexible party here--Republicans, Democrats, Senate,
House. Get list prices under control, lower out-of-pockets, and
give the drug plans the real incentive to get drug prices down.
Mr. Walden. H.R. 19 contains about 80 or 90 percent of the
Wyden-Grassley bill. We think we are with you, we think we can
get there, if we can just put the partisan weapons away.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
And I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Pleasure to recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Engel, for his 4 minutes of questions.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Secretary Azar, the State of New York was extremely
disappointed to hear that CMS has denied the State's request
for a renewal of its Delivery System Reform Incentive Payment
Program, known as DSRIP.
When the program was first approved, CMS and HHS insisted
that New York include targets for the State's Medicaid program
that would incentivize providers to move away from fee-for-
service, toward value-based payments.
New York's healthcare community has made progress in doing
just that, receiving double-digit reductions in preventable
hospital readmissions, while saving the Federal Government
billions of dollars.
The request for additional time and continued investment of
those savings in DSRIP was to move closer to exactly what CMS
and HHS have been saying the Federal Government wants everyone
to be doing. So, in light of that, why would CMS and HHS want
to stop supporting these successful efforts to achieve the very
goals that the Trump administration has been saying that it has
for healthcare?
So will your department commit to meeting with the State of
New York to discuss how these reforms are sustained into the
future? And I would like a ``yes'' or ``no'' answer if I could
get it.
Secretary Azar. Yes. I am not familiar with that particular
program, but you are right, we do support value-based
transformation in our programs. I don't know the particulars of
why CMS has had difficulty with New York, but, yes, we will be
happy to sit with New York.
Mr. Engel. OK. And I would be happy to sit with you as
well----
Secretary Azar. Thank you.
Mr. Engel [continue]. And discuss it.
Mr. Secretary, we have mentioned it here, other members
have mentioned it here, and you know it far too well, that
Americans are suffering from the current epidemic of
skyrocketing prescription drug prices. My constituents always
tell me they are having to make unconscionable choices between
paying for food or filling a lifesaving prescription such as
insulin.
The House has taken bold, decisive action to lower drug
prices through H.R. 3, which provides a commonsense solution to
this crisis by allowing the government to negotiate drug
prices. That is a policy that the President supported as a
candidate in 2016, saying--and I quote--``When it comes time to
negotiate the cost of drugs, we are going to negotiate like
crazy,'' unquote. That is from the President.
The administration has yet to deliver any meaningful
solutions for the health crisis. In May 2018, your Department
released a blueprint to lower drug prices, but many of those
policies failed to materialize or provide minimal relief to
patients. Other ideas, such as the International Pricing Index,
have been shelved.
Despite these failures, President Trump claims to have
reduced drug prices, when, in fact, a recent report showed
that, on average, drug prices increased by over five percent at
the start of this year.
Mr. Secretary, can you commit to me today that you will
deliver on the President's promise to negotiate drug prices? I
would like a ``yes'' or ``no'' also.
Secretary Azar. So we support bicameral, bipartisan
legislation that would get through. And there are many
principles in H.R. 3 the President is supportive of, but it has
to pass both houses of Congress, and, at the moment, H.R. 3
doesn't have a chance of seeing the light of day in the Senate.
And so we need to work together to see if something can get
through both chambers.
Mr. Engel. Well, I am sure if the President asked Mitch
McConnell to put it on the agenda, he would.
Secretary Azar. I don't think so.
Mr. Engel. There are plenty of things that we have passed
in this House that, unfortunately the other body hasn't done,
and the President seems to be right along with it.
So I just think it is another example of the
administration's broken healthcare promises to the American
people. I just think that we need to get those prices of drugs
down, and we need to have not empty rhetoric but true facts.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Pleased to recognize the gentleman who was the former
chairman of the full committee, Mr. Upton of Michigan, for his
4 minutes.
Mr. Upton. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Secretary, welcome. Big time.
So, as you know, this committee, on a unanimous vote,
passed 21st Century Cures--``Cures,'' as we call it. When I was
chair, we expedited the approval of drugs and devices, and I
would suspect strongly that your testimony that we had a record
number of generic approvals is a direct result because of what
this committee did.
We also added some $45 billion in health research over a
10-year span. And, frankly, we asked the question of the
agencies, as we worked on this legislation, what is it that we
could do to help you make sure that we hit these targets of
faster approvals of drugs and devices. And so, whether it was
the FDA, the CDC, and others, the NIH obviously, they gave us
an answer, and we delivered.
And at the end of the day, for this crisis, we are going to
find a vaccine to solve coronavirus. I know that we are. And I
would like to think that what we did in this committee and then
passed on the House floor will be a direct result of that.
And, frankly, it prompts all of us, I think, to ask the
questions of what more can we do to get on a faster pace to
find that vaccine and that cure. And, in fact, as you may know,
Diana DeGette and I are again working on a 2.0 Cures bill,
where we can take these three years since President Obama
signed the bill into law and ask those questions to see what,
constructively, we can do so that all hands are on deck. And I
know--I don't have to ask you--I know that you will help us
with ideas to do that.
A question that I have is: A containment is the very first
step in responding to any outbreak of coronavirus. We have seen
that around the world now. And statements from yesterday
indicate that the CDC said it really isn't if but when it gets
to larger numbers here in the United States.
I have always believed in the adage that if you are going
to do something, you better do it right the first time because
you are not going to find a second. And you want to make sure
that--pay me now or pay me later. So we need to have the right
numbers as it relates to fighting this terrible disease.
Is the $2.5 billion, is that a floor? Is that a suggestion,
the $2.5 billion that you requested?
Secretary Azar. We have described the request as at least
$2.5 billion for 2020 money and then work on 2021 money as we
see the situation develop over the weeks and months ahead.
Mr. Upton. So I know that we are waiting to see the precise
details of where it is going. Are any of those dollars
envisioned to include the contingency of what China has done as
it relates to regional quarantines?
Secretary Azar. No, we don't envision that as a, kind of,
practical step here in the United States. As Dr. Messonnier
spoke about yesterday, in the event that we had community-level
outbreaks, which might be small, just a town, a city, if we had
that, we would take the pandemic playbook, which is community-
based mitigation steps, social distancing.
It is very rare that those types of--that ``cordon
sanitaire'' efforts around cities are effective. They usually
promote more panic and cause people to actually leave and
spread.
Now, China is a different government and culture than we
have here.
Mr. Upton. Of the 14,000 Americans that have died this flu
season, do you know what percentage of those were not
vaccinated?
Secretary Azar. I do not have the numbers. Historically,
our youth who die tend to not to have been vaccinated, which is
a real tragedy.
Mr. Upton. And last question: Has there been any query of
those 55 Americans who currently have been diagnosed with the
coronavirus--did any of them have the flu vaccine, do you know?
Was that question asked of any of the 55?
Secretary Azar. I don't know that that would have been
asked. We don't, of course, have any evidence that the flu
vaccine would have any properties related to the novel
coronavirus. But I don't know if that was asked as part of the
intake for the patients.
Mr. Upton. OK.
I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
It is a pleasure to recognize the gentlewoman from
California, Ms. Matsui, for her 4 minutes of questions.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this
important hearing.
And welcome, Mr. Secretary.
Before I get into my line of questioning, I do want to
express my deepest concerns about the Medicare, Medicaid, and
other cuts included in the budget. At a time when we are
dealing with the coronavirus outbreak, an addiction crisis, and
a lawsuit that threatens ACA protections for preexisting
conditions, the administration's cuts to critical safety-net
programs target the most vulnerable in our communities and aim
to further erode access to vital healthcare services.
We should be prioritizing primary comprehensive care,
particularly in the mentally ill and people with addiction. I
believe mental health is the area where we have an opportunity
to work together and make progress.
Mr. Secretary, I appreciate the Department's strong support
of the Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinic Medicaid
demonstration. As you know, Representative Markwayne Mullin and
I are working to further scale the program with our bipartisan
legislation, the Excellence in Mental Health and Addiction
Treatment Expansion Act.
For the eight States currently participating in the
Excellence demonstration, we have studies showing that quality
mental health services, outpatient care, and addiction
treatment provided at these facilities are saving lives and
money. People are avoiding jails and emergency rooms; instead,
getting the comprehensive care they need in their communities.
We have 11 additional States that are ready to participate
in an expanded Excellence program. Our bill has a bipartisan
group of 88 cosponsors who support this full expansion, and the
House has already voted to extend the program longer-term.
I was very pleased to see that the budget this year
explicitly endorses extending this Excellence demonstration.
And I believe we do all agree, Mr. Secretary, that adequate
Medicaid resources around substance abuse treatment are
essential to fighting the opioid and addiction epidemic.
Mr. Secretary, I have a question: Under the leadership of
Chair DeLauro, $200 million was made available to HHS in fiscal
year 2020 to help States prepare for eventual participation in
the Excellence demonstration. How does HHS plan to obligate
these resources?
Secretary Azar. First, thank you for your personal
leadership on the Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinic
issue. You are right, the data is showing really positive
results today, so thank you for that.
In terms of your work with Chairwoman DeLauro, SAMHSA is
now accepting applications from States for these grants to
increase access to and improve the quality of community mental
and substance use disorder treatment services through the
expansion of CCBHCs, and the deadline for States to apply is
March 10.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Thank you. The positive impacts of the
demonstration make it clear that there is room to improve
mental health and addiction care in this country by scaling
this program.
In California, our county hospitals, public academic
medical centers, and public children's hospitals rely upon
financial arrangements that leverage public funds and
partnerships as essential means of providing healthcare to the
most underserved communities and patient populations in the
State.
I have concerns about the administration's recent proposal
to eliminate these sources of funding, particularly supplement
payments. I worry that, if finalized, the Medicaid
accountability rule would destabilize the whole system of care
provided under Medi-Cal. Medicaid supplemental payments are an
integral component of total Medicaid reimbursement that
providers rely on for adequate reimbursement and financial
stability.
Mr. Secretary, have you weighed the restrictions on
supplemental payments against the adequacy of these base
payments? Are there plans to make any corresponding adjustments
to base payments for these providers?
Secretary Azar. So we are hearing the very important
feedback from you and others about that regulation, and we want
to take that in as we look at how and whether to finalize at
CMS the relationship of these intergovernmental transfers to
supplemental payments and, also, if there are ways we can work
with States to restructure payments in a way that would be
consistent with the law. So we want to work with the States,
not be adversarial to them, on this.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Well, thank you, Mr. Secretary.
And I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back.
Pleasure to recognize Mr. Shimkus of Illinois for his 4
minutes of questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here.
Coronavirus is a novel pathogen, as a lot of us know, but
in your testimony you also mention emerging microbial threats.
And, Madam Chairman, I ask to submit in the record this
news release from the World Health Organization on the 17th of
January 2020.
Ms. Eshoo. So ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Shimkus. And in the 114th Congress, I joined with Gene
Green on what we called the ADAPT Act. Last Congress, it was
Tony Cardenas and I, with the help of the now-chairman of the
subcommittee, Anna Eshoo, who joined, and technical assistance
by HHS, on what we call the REVAMP Act. And it is an attempt to
address how, if you have this antimicrobial resistance, how
public funding may not be the only way you can address this.
Can you talk about that challenge?
Secretary Azar. Yes, I am very concerned about the drug
development around antimicrobial resistance in terms of
creating a sustainable market.
You know, we have had, actually, tremendous success from
the efforts you have led and the Congress has led and BARDA at
my agency have supported. We have supported the development of
16 novel antibacterial projects. I believe three have actually
come to market.
What we are finding, though, is there is a market failure
question here, where you are basically asking a company to
develop a drug but then not to have it used much. And that is
not a usually sustainable business model.
So I have actually commissioned my team to work on how we
can possibly solve that; is that more like a bioterrorism
chemical countermeasure and the approaches that we need there.
Quite concerned about this.
Mr. Shimkus. And that is what we have tried to do
legislatively, and, at sometime, one was the tradeable vouchers
debate, which I think should have legs, especially in this
concern of, as you put it, trying to have something on the
shelf that you don't want to use. That is the key.
Scott Peters and I are also working on legislation that we
call Ending the Diagnostic Odyssey. And it is an attempt to
help DNA sequencing so that when there is a disease or some
event you don't have to test, test, test; you can go just
through the sequencing aspect of that.
Do you have any thoughts on or comments of what you all may
be doing that we don't know about in trying to push more DNA
identification?
Secretary Azar. So I have not studied that particular
issue. We are happy to get back to you on that. It certainly is
at the fore right now as we deal with novel coronavirus and
have the CDC diagnostic, but also hope that commercial
innovators will develop physician bedside diagnostics for rapid
insight testing.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. And this is timely--well, it obviously is
timely because of the threat that we are all concerned about
now, but it is also Rare Disease Week. And a lot of that
community is, you know, looking for this as a novel way,
especially on what we call that diagnostic odyssey. And we see
that with people who are struggling with just types of cancer
and trying to identify the right treatment early versus what I
would say sometimes is a trial-and-error method that is very
damaging to the health of the patient.
And with 30 seconds left, I wanted to just briefly--and it
has been asked a little bit before. You all do support Medicare
D reform; is that correct?
Secretary Azar. Oh, absolutely. It is a real opportunity
for seniors.
Secretary Azar. Well, you would cap catastrophic payment,
the limit at $3,100. So a patient would never pay more than
$3,100. And then, at least the Grassley-Wyden plan, the senior
could actually opt into a program where they would pay no more
than $258 a month for their drugs, no matter what their
expenses are.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Sarbanes, is recognized
for his four minutes of questions.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Secretary Azar, you certainly know that the popularity of
e-cigarettes has recently led to an unprecedented surge in
youth tobacco use, and it is bringing back a vengeance the
tobacco epidemic in this country we have worked so hard to
curb. It shows why we have to improve the law and something
this committee has been working on.
Unfortunately, the Trump administration is now proposing,
as I understand it from the budget, removing FDA's oversight of
tobacco products in favor of an untested agency that will take
years to get off the ground, which threatens to set us back
even further. I am perplexed that the administration would
decide to do this, remove FDA's authority, alter the agency's
public health mission, which includes making, quote, ``tobacco-
related death and disease'' part of America's past, not
America's future, and by doing so, ensuring a healthier life
for every family.
This latest move is kind of breathtaking. It makes no
sense. It is a crazy thing to do by the administration, which
unfortunately, hasn't taken significant action against big
tobacco as more of our Nation's youth are becoming addicted.
In January, after heavy lobbying from big tobacco, as we
understand it, and the vaping industry, and listening to
partisan political consultants like Trump campaign manager Brad
Parscale, the administration reversed course. We were on a
trajectory where we thought everybody was on the same page.
The administration reversed course, and announced a policy
which failed to ban all flavored e-cigarettes, allowing popular
menthol cartridges to stay on the market, and allowing all
flavored disposable e-cigarettes and open tank e-cigarettes to
proliferate through our Nation's schoolyards, which is exactly
what they are doing.
And I am concerned that removing this authority from the
FDA, which is a part of the proposal, could lead to even more
loopholes and more industry influence.
My question is this: When formulating the budget proposal
to remove the FDA's tobacco oversight authority, did you, your
agency staff, White House staff, or staff of the Office of
Management and Budget, speak or meet with any lobbyists or
other representatives of the tobacco industry, or, for that
matter, political operatives who work for or are contracted by
the President's reelection campaign?
Secretary Azar. Well, I certainly--I can't speak for
others. I am not aware of any such deliberations. The idea was
that if we move the tobacco center out from under FDA, first,
if it were a politically appointed--a presidential-appointed,
Senate-confirmed leader, they would be more accountable to
Congress. Second, as a direct report to me, or whoever is
Secretary, elevating the role of tobacco control there.
It has always been a little bit of an odd connection. FDA
is about safe and effective, whereas the tobacco center is
about regulating a product that is undeniably bad. And so there
is a----
Mr. Sarbanes. It doesn't make any sense, does it?
Secretary Azar. It would be subject to Congress if it was
something----
Mr. Sarbanes. I mean, we are at the height of it. We are at
this tipping point on this epidemic when it comes to vaping.
I mean, there does reside, however you want to sort of
carve up what you consider the appropriate mission of the FDA
to be; there certainly exists, resides within the FDA now
significant expertise and experience in terms of dealing with
this issue. Why you would propose, at this moment in time, when
this epidemic risk in a sense overtaking the dimensions of the
previous tobacco epidemic we saw in this country, by zeroing
out that authority and moving it to an untested new agency,
which, by the way, I think would be more susceptible to
political influence of the kind I was just recounting than it
is now. It doesn't make any sense to me. I urge you to
reconsider that. We are in the midst of this crisis, and we
have to use every tool available to us here in the government
to respond to it.
With that, I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
There is 5 minutes and 22 seconds left on the clock. Any
member that would like to leave to vote, when we get to--you
can leave now. When we--when the clock goes to zero, they will
hold the vote open for those that have not arrived from our
subcommittee, and at that point, we will take a 20-minute
break.
But now I would like to recognize the gentleman from
Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie, for his 4 minutes of questions.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
I look forward to getting into the coronavirus. I will do
that in my second rounds of questions. So the SUPPORT Act we
passed last year included my bill, the Comprehensive Opioid
Recoveries Act, to establish treatment centers that offer FDA-
approved medications, and assistance treatments, all of them
comprehensively. Currently, SAMHSA has the grant application
open for entities to apply and I am glad HHS is moving fast in
implementing the program. But my question is: How is HHS
implementing other parts of the SUPPORT Act? And does HHS
conduct any oversight on how the funds are actually being used?
Secretary Azar. So, first, thank you for the SUPPORT Act,
and it is so comprehensive we actually established a SUPPORT
Act implementation leadership committee to track all of the
different work streams needed under the SUPPORT Act. It is
really enhancing our work across all five elements of our
strategy on opioids, and so, we are just--we are driving
forward, making progress on the opioid epidemics. We have got--
the overdose deaths are down for the first time in decades as a
result of our collaborative bipartisan efforts here, and we are
implementing and using the SUPPORT Act authority. So thank you
for those.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Thank you.
And also, in 2018, Congress passed my bill, the bipartisan
BOLD Infrastructure for Alzheimer's Act. Can you please provide
an update on how this law is being implemented across the
country?
Secretary Azar. So, with that Act, I want to, if I could
get back to you in writing on that, I don't have all the
details on that particular program. I apologize, but if I could
get back to you.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Thank you.
And this is kind of technical from my role as ranking
Republican on the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee on
this committee. This committee and Oversight and Investigations
conducted extensive oversight, cybersecurity at HHS, including
through technical audits conducted by GAO of cybersecurity
controls at HHS operational divisions. So, as I said, it is
very technical.
Last Congress, the Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations held a closed hearing, in part, because HHS
failed to properly identify and address certain
vulnerabilities. We recently received preliminary results from
the most recent audit of another HHS agency, though I can't go
into details in this setting.
So my question is: Does HHS have a point person who
coordinates corrective actions on cybersecurity among all HHS
agencies, and, if so, will you direct that person to continue
to work with the committee on improving enterprise
cybersecurity at HHS, and ensuring that mitigations applied in
one setting are consequently applied through all of HHS?
Secretary Azar. Yes, we do. Our chief information officer,
Jose Arrieta, who works directly with me, absolutely is in
charge of those issues. If I could go back to your previous
question, I had misheard on the BOLD Act.
Mr. Guthrie. On the BOLD Act, yes.
Secretary Azar. So I apologize on that.
For fiscal year 2020, CDC will have two funding
opportunities to carat ck word. I can't find it as a verb
actions under the BOLD Act. So first, there will be the public
health programs to address Alzheimer's disease and related
dementias; and second, there will be the centers of--the Health
Centers of Excellence to Address Alzheimer's Disease and
Related Dementias. We expect both of those funding
opportunities to be out in the coming month. And for fiscal
year 2021, the President's budget for CDC includes $3.493
million to continue to support these Alzheimer's activities.
Mr. Guthrie. Because by 2050--that is when I will be 86, I
believe--they believe it is going to be a trillion, estimated
to be $1 trillion spent on Alzheimer's disease. Not only is it
devastating to the individual who has it, the family that cares
for that person, but also it would be devastating to the
deficit and the budgets of our country. So this is something
very important. Thanks for your leadership and effort, and I
appreciate working with my colleagues here to move the BOLD Act
forward and address it.
And I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
A pleasure to recognize the gentleman from New Mexico, Mr.
Lujan, for his 4 minutes, and I will wait right here with you
and then we will run over.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Secretary Azar, when Donald Trump was running for office
four years ago, he famously said that he wouldn't cut Medicaid.
He didn't say it once or twice, but claimed it at least five
separate occasions, that he would not cut Medicaid but, in
reality, no President and no administration in the last 50
years has done more to undermine Medicaid than Donald Trump.
In fact, his first major legislative effort to repeal the
Affordable Care Act would have ended Medicaid as we know it,
and put the healthcare of 70 million Americans at risk. And if
my colleagues from the other side of the aisle want to protect
people with preexisting conditions, they should drop the
lawsuit. That could happen tomorrow.
After President Trump failed to cut Medicaid legislatively,
he decided to try the same thing administratively, even though
the law clearly does not allow it.
Secretary Azar, there has been some misreporting that the
block grant guidance is limited to adults in the expansion
population, but under the administration's guidance, States
could block grant Medicaid for more than just expansion adults.
Isn't that true?
Secretary Azar. Congressman, I don't--I don't believe that
is the case. I will ask did CMS administrator to get back to
you on that, but my understanding was that it would be an
optional demonstration for adults only, and that it would
actually not affect coverage for our most vulnerable, our
pregnant women, children, elderly adults, people on eligible on
the basis of disability. But I will ask Administrator Verma to
get back to you on that, because that is not my understanding.
Mr. Lujan. Let me jump into this. I am glad that you
pointed that out, because I think that there is a concern here,
and I hope that you would agree with me that, if that is your
understanding, that you do something about it, Mr. Secretary,
because the Center on Budget points out that people that are
low-income parents, women who are pregnant, and people with
disabilities who are covered through Medicaid expansion could
be included in what I will describe as the President's illegal
block grant guidance.
Is that something that you would agree with if that is the
case? Would you stop it if, in fact, the guidance does allow
for those vulnerable populations to be discriminated against?
Secretary Azar. So I have been under the view that it does
not affect coverage for our most vulnerable populations. It
doesn't allow them to strip benefits, or strip eligibility.
Essential health benefits have to be covered. You can't change
eligibility. You can't cap or limit----
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Secretary, if I may, just for clarification,
because it sounds like we are on the same page.
Secretary Azar. What you are saying I am not--the concerns
you are expressing----
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Secretary----
Secretary Azar [continue]. I don't believe we are in the
HOA, but we will get back to you on that.
Mr. Lujan. Let me ask you this pointed question.
Secretary Azar. Yes.
Mr. Lujann. If, in fact, the President's Medicaid block
grant program does allow for those folks to be thrown off and
get caught up in this, will you stop it?
Secretary Azar. Well, we are not going to approve plans
that allow people to be thrown off, because it can't change
eligibility. I can't change eligibility.
Mr. Lujan. Let me ask it one more time, because it sounds
like you are getting there.
Mr. Secretary, if, in fact, vulnerable populations like
pregnant women, families, and those that are disabled, are
subject to this rule where they could be block granted, will
you stop it?
Secretary Azar. I don't believe we would--I will not
approve a plan that removes coverage for our most vulnerable
citizens.
Mr. Lujan. So that is enough for me. You said you will not
approve a plan.
Secretary Azar. I will not approve--with very low-income
parents, children, pregnant women, elderly adults, or people
eligible on the basis of disability should not be affected in
terms of their Medicaid coverage, is what I am informed. I will
get back to you from Administrator Verma to confirm all of
those details. I want to make sure that I am right on that, but
that has been my understanding of the HOA program.
Mr. Lujan. What I am looking for is assurance that if what
my comments are associated with being consistent with the
Center on Budget points out, you, in fact, will not approve
that plan and you will not allow for Medicaid block grant cuts,
devastating cuts go into a place that will be subjected to
pregnant women, families, and those with disabilities?
Secretary Azar. The categories that I mentioned before are
ones that I do not believe are subject to it, plans should not
be approved if they would harm eligibility for those
individuals.
Mr. Lujan. So if the Center on Budget's assessment is
correct, you will not allow that to go into effect?
Secretary Azar. I do not believe their assessment or
description of the program is correct, and I have said I don't
expect that I would approve any plan that would harm our
vulnerable populations. It is a healthy adult opportunity under
Medicaid expansion, but we will get you any clarification on
that afterwards. Thank you for raising that to me.
Mr. Lujan. There is a reason that most of us in this
Congress has--have opposed Medicaid block grants. These are
devastating programs. It is another effort to undermine
Medicaid, and to continue to cut the program which President
Trump promised he would not. This is another example of where
he is.
And with that, I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The committee will now recess for approximately
20 minutes. So hold on to your seats while you stand up and
stretch and we race over and come back.
It sounded like the Secretary said yes, Ben Ray.
[Recess.]
Ms. Eshoo. The subcommittee will come to order. Thank you.
Thank you, Dr. Azar, for your patience.
And I now would like to recognize the gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for his--is it 4 minutes--4 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I appreciate you being here. Thank you so much. The
President and your agency have expressed concerns with the
middlemen in the drug supply chain, pharmacy benefit managers,
PBMs. Over time, PBMs have morphed into under-regulated
entities with opportunities to exploit their position in the
middle of the drug transactions in the U.S. For example,
according to a new report from XIL Consulting, which is run by
former Express Scripts' executive, PBMs benefit from an obscure
fee known as direct and indirect remuneration, DIR--I know you
are familiar with that--at a rate exceeding 500 percent per
prescription as compared to the average administration fee.
Last year, the administration proposed a rule to address these
DIR fees, but later withdrew it.
Do you still have plans to implement accountability
measures for PBMs?
Secretary Azar. No.
Mr. Griffith. And if so, what does that regulation look
like?
Secretary Azar. So I remain very concerned about the DIR
fees and their impact, especially on America's community
pharmacists, as well as independent specialty pharmacies.
So, the reason that we did not finalize that rule--and we
were very transparent at the time--was the concern that by--if
we forced the DIR fees to basically go through to the benefit
of the patient, that that could cause an increase. The
middlemen would jack up the part D premiums for our seniors,
and that was the concern and the President just has been
adamant that he does not want to run the risk of part D
premiums going up.
We--so it remains a priority for the administration to deal
with this issue. If we ever could legislatively, that would be
useful also.
Mr. Griffith. And as you know, I would love to have a
legislative solution, but we thought this might be a good test
case to do it with that.
Secretary Azar. Maybe even through, if we could get
bipartisan, bicameral drug pricing legislation, that might be a
vehicle to have that in there.
Mr. Griffith. It might be.
And let me ask you this: There has been some mention
earlier today of H.R. 3. I raised the concern, and then later,
it was raised by the Congressional Research Service that the
bill, as written, is just blatantly unconstitutional. Have your
lawyers advised you that that is the case in their opinion as
well?
Secretary Azar. I have not had anyone study the
constitutionality issues on H.R. 3 about the penalty amounts
and whether that would work. So I haven't seen any analytics on
that.
Mr. Griffith. Any time they want a discussion on it, I am
more than happy to facilitate one.
Let's talk about opioids, because I only have a little bit
of time left. Over the past few years, there has been a lot
talk about how they are prescribed in America, and how pain is
medically managed in general. And I will tell you, that I
thought we were on the track of getting our healthcare
professionals to back off of giving out so many opioids for
pain, but I have a friend who is currently undergoing some
procedures, and we were talking yesterday about how they had
given her opioids, how she took it in the initial day after
some painful procedures, but that after that, she turned it
away but they--you know, she has got it sitting in her house.
What has this administration and HHS done to reduce the
overprescribing of opioids?
Secretary Azar. So we have actually, through the CDC, put
out guidance to professionals on appropriate prescribing. We
continue to work on even further titrated by different pain
areas on what the best guidance is to do that.
It is distressing to hear that. We have seen, though, an
over-25 percent, I believe, decrease, maybe 30-percent decrease
in the opioid prescribing of illegal opioids to date since the
President took office. So we are making progress, but, of
course, it is disturbing to hear any pockets like that.
Mr. Griffith. Well, and--look, it is going take time but we
can't--just because we have started to solve the problem, we
cannot think it is solved, and we cannot take our foot off the
gas pedal in trying to make sure that we don't overprescribe,
and that we deal with this issue. It is very serious in my
district and many others.
I thank you very much, and I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair is pleased to recognize the gentleman from
Oregon, Mr. Schrader, for his 4 minutes.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Thanks for being here, Secretary Azar. I appreciate it
very, very much. I am going to leave my coronavirus questions
to the next panel, but we do want to make sure the CDC is fully
funded, and a little concerned about the original budget. Glad
to see some changes coming forward.
My question, the first question, is on Medicare Advantage.
It is a huge program in Oregon and many, many States. It
leverages our Federal tax dollars to maximum advantage. Most
Oregonians, most seniors get a lot of their prescription drug
coverage from Medicare Advantage. Very concerned that this
administration, and frankly, others, have tended to try and cut
Medicare Advantage programs. I think that is foolhardy. The
whole goal here is to actually make sure that the savings from
the Medicare Advantage are plowed back into making sure there
are more benefits that are covered, better prescription drug
coverage, and expanding it to a larger universe.
So could you give me some assurance you are going to
continue, this administration? You will try and continue to
improve the Medicare Advantage program and not take away the
savings that could be plowed into more benefits for folks.
Secretary Azar. No, absolutely. So I am actually under
direct orders of the President in his Medicare executive order
to enhance and protect Medicare Advantage, exactly the things
you are talking about: Offer more supplemental benefits, make
sure people--make those plans as attractive as options for
people as possible.
Mr. Schrader. Just saw guidelines on reducing caps and that
sort of thing that made me nervous about what the intent was.
The second question is on the proposed Medicaid rule. Hear
a lot about that back home. In many States, I was budget chair
for my State back in the day, and it seemed like a great
opportunity for our States to, again, leverage Federal dollars
with State tax dollars, actually with private hospital dollars
and long-term care dollars. So it was a really smart use, I
thought, of taxpayers' limited ability to finance programs they
want. This really made great use of the dollars.
I am very concerned with this new MFAR rule that you are
going to--ostensibly it is, with all due respect, framed in the
guise of transparency, when, indeed, it is a backdoor attempt
to take away matching funds, the ability for the provider tax
to be leveraged in many States, including ours.
So, I guess, given the fact the executive order requires
Federal agencies to perform this regulatory impact analysis to
determine the effect of the impact of the proposed rule, but
the proposed rule says the fiscal impacts of the Medicaid
program from the implementation of the proposed rule is
unknown. Do you consider that to be a comprehensive regulatory
impact analysis?
Secretary Azar. I haven't looked at the reg impact analysis
there. So I just I don't know the specifics on that, but,
certainly, I do want to assure you we are hearing the feedback
from you and others and governors about this. We are looking at
this not to be penal, but, rather, to make sure that those
intergovernmental transfers are genuine State money that is
getting matched and not funny money or schemes--that is really
the intent--and to also be more prospective, not penal, looking
backwards, as much as we can.
So we are--I appreciate getting this feedback. We are
hearing a lot of it, and we are taking that in.
Mr. Schrader. Well, what some people would call funny money
schemes, others would call smart financing in using the
accounting system the way it has been established for decades
to maximum advantage. It would really put a huge hundreds-of-
million-dollar hole in the Oregon State HHS budget. So I would
urge you to back down on that a little bit, or at least give it
some more serious thought.
I yield back. I thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
It is a pleasure to recognize the gentleman from Florida,
Mr. Bilirakis, for his 4 minutes of questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
appreciate it very much.
Secretary Azar, thank you, first of all, for your
leadership. I appreciate it very much. And thank you for your
responsiveness to a lot of my constituents' concerns as well.
Again, we have begun to make progress, in tackling our
Nation's opioid crisis, and HHS has played a key role in that
effort. Thank you for your continued support, of course.
Do you feel--and this is a budget question; do you feel HHS
has the necessary resources to continue to implement provisions
of the 2018 SUPPORT Act and the 2019 HHS Pain Management Task
Force recommendations?
Secretary Azar. I do believe so. In fact, we have increased
funding for opioids in this budget.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. Very good.
Also, next, the community house centers, as you know, do a
wonderful job. The funding is expiring soon. Now, we
reauthorized it for an additional seven years, and that is a
great thing. But, again, how do community health centers serve
as a gateway to integrated care for individuals with mental
illness and substance use disorder?
Secretary Azar. You know, more than 28 million people rely
on HRSA's community health centers that we fund. They are a
critical part of our primary care network, of preventive care
for individuals, and they deliver high-quality service. And we
are using them also as part of the Ending the HIV Epidemic
program to reach the underserved and reach people that we need
to bring into treatment and prevention.
You know, more than 93 percent of our 1,400 health centers
provide mental health counseling and treatment. Sixty-seven
percent of them provide substance abuse services. I believe
the--I think the number 60 percent of the clients at the
community health centers, I believe, are ethnic and racial
minorities. I am always just so impressed when I visit them,
the quality of care and the quality of service there.
Mr. Bilirakis. Absolutely. Do you have anything to add?
Because I wanted to give you an opportunity to add, because
this is a big issue affecting our constituents, obviously, on
the insulin pricing. I know that this has been mentioned in the
committee, but if you could maybe elaborate on that, I would
appreciate it very much.
Secretary Azar. I appreciate that. I did want to clarify
one thing from Mr. Walden's question earlier regarding a piece
of legislation. I misheard about, I guess, it is a proposal to
cap out-of-pockets at $50 for insulin. The administration does
not have a formal statement of administration position on that
piece of legislation yet. Of course, we want to get out-of-
pockets down. We want to deal with the insulin issue, and get
insulin pricing down for everybody, but we don't have a formal
statement yet on that issue.
The part D reforms the committee has worked on and that has
a lot of bipartisan support though, that could be such a
benefit to people, that catastrophic cap at $3,100, spreading
that cap over 12 months, where no senior would ever pay more
than 258 bucks a month for their prescriptions if they opted
into that. What an incredible thing we could deliver for
America's seniors if we could get bicameral, bipartisan action
on that.
Mr. Bilirakis. Absolutely.
Well, thank you for clarifying that, and, of course, we
will follow up with you, because, again, this is a big issue
affecting our constituents.
How does the budget address school safety? I don't have
much time, do I? How does the budget address school safety and
the mental health needs of our students?
Secretary Azar. So we fund Project AWARE in here, which is
a really important school-based school safety program for those
for mental health services. We have Healthy Transitions funded,
which improves access to mental disorder treatment and related
support services for youth. We have the Safe Schools Framework
Implementation Toolkit to help educate teachers and
administrators to identify kids in crisis who need mental
health intervention. That is part of it.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. Thank you very much.
I appreciate it, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
It is a pleasure to recognize the gentleman from
Massachusetts, Mr. Kennedy, for his 4 minutes of questions.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here.
This week, DHS implemented their well test for immigrants
nationwide. The earlier estimates show that the rule could lead
to 4.7 million people withdrawing--excuse me--from Medicaid and
CHIP alone, many of whom are legal immigrants, the children of
immigrants, asylum seekers, and refugees. Yes or no, sir,
nearly five million people are forced to forego their health
coverage; is that a success?
Secretary Azar. We do not believe that individuals who come
to this country should be dependent on public taxpayers for
healthcare or other services.
Mr. Kennedy. So refugees having access to healthcare is a
success?
Secretary Azar. We do not believe that individuals who
should come to this country to be dependent on public welfare
programs. That is the--that is the--that is the basis for
that----
Mr. Kennedy. So, sir, you have frequently told the story of
your grandfather arriving at Ellis Island from Lebanon as an
impoverished teenager who spoke no English. You talk about him
being met by a member of the United States Public Health
Service. You speak proudly of that story. Under this rule,
based on your own telling of that story, your grandfather would
have been turned away. So I ask you, yes or no, are you proud
of this public charge policy?
Secretary Azar. So my grandfather came and worked his way
through his bootstraps.
Mr. Kennedy. Would he have gone--would he have had access
to healthcare under this policy?
Secretary Azar. No, he would not have.
Mr. Kennedy. And do you----
Secretary Azar. And he wouldn't have asked for it, because
he would have wanted to make his own way.
Mr. Kennedy. And so you are proud of this policy.
Secretary Azar. I am proud of my grandfather and 100 years
ago, he came to the United States----
Mr. Kennedy. That was not the question.
Secretary Azar [continue]. In Ellis Island.
Mr. Kennedy. That was not the question. Are you proud----
Secretary Azar. We supported this policy. It is--we----
Mr. Kennedy. I am going to take that as a no.
Secretary Azar. The American people don't support the idea
that people should be coming to this country to be----
Mr. Kennedy. Mr. Secretary, next question. Are you aware
that under your leadership, the number of Americans without
health insurance has risen for the first time in a decade in
2018 by roughly two million people?
Secretary Azar. So actually, the numbers on the uninsured
require a bit more depth than that. The--what is happening on
the uninsured is actually the ACA has--most of the growth of
uninsured is because the ACA priced individuals out of the
individual markets.
Mr. Kennedy. Sir, I am almost out of my 4 minutes.
Are you aware, sir, Mr. Secretary, that the percentage of
uninsured children rose by .6 percent under your leadership?
Would you consider fewer children with access to healthcare a
success?
Secretary Azar. So actually, in terms of children and
coverage, we have SCHIP. We have reauthorized that for a long
period of time. We have got the Medicaid program----
Mr. Kennedy. So you contest the numbers?
Secretary Azar. So in terms of the uninsured numbers there,
the children that are uninsured are likely part of the coverage
gap left by the ACA, as well as the pricing out of
nonsubsidized----
Mr. Kennedy. Sir, do you believe that it is the--so last
month, we held a hearing here about an opioid epidemic where a
representative from the Department of Health and Human Services
of North Carolina stated that if North Carolina had expanded
Medicaid, 415 more people would be alive in North Carolina
today. Do you believe that this administration's opposition to
Medicaid expansion that, according to that individual, has cost
lives; is that a good policy choice?
Secretary Azar. I am not going to validate that
politician's statements. I don't know who it was----
Mr. Kennedy. It was a representative of the Department of
Health and Human Services of North Carolina.
Secretary Azar. I don't know who they are. I don't know the
basis for that. I haven't seen the evidence.
Mr. Kennedy. So you are unaware of the fact that Medicaid
has saved lives in North Carolina?
Secretary Azar. No----
Mr. Kennedy. The absence of Medicaid expansion----
Secretary Azar. That is not what I am saying. I am saying I
haven't seen the evidence basis for the assertions you are
making and that he made.
Mr. Kennedy. One last question for you. You have spoken
about this administration's efforts to combat coronavirus and
the so-called increased choice for healthcare. For one man,
Osmel Martinez Azcue, those two things recently converged when
he tried to be prepared after developing flu-like symptoms
following a trip to China. He was left with a bill of well over
$1,000, and a demand of proof that the flu he was tested for
wasn't related to any preexisting condition, or else he would
be forced to pay a few thousand dollars more.
So, please explain to me as we are staring down a potential
pandemic, and the CDC is warning about fundamental changes to
our way of life because of it, do millions of people that have
signed up for junk insurance plans pushed by this
administration, do they really have a choice?
Secretary Azar. So the short-term limited duration plans
are an option for individuals. We have been very clear that
they may be the right choice for some, but they may not be the
right choice for others who have preexisting conditions.
Mr. Kennedy. Even people with thousands of dollars of
uninsured claims in the midst of a potential pandemic, that is
a good choice?
Secretary Azar. So if an individual, if it is a choice
between no insurance and some insurance at 60 percent lower
than what the Affordable Care Act has priced them out of the
market at, it is at least an option for individuals provided.
Mr. Kennedy. Unless they expanded Medicaid.
I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
It is a pleasure to recognize the gentleman from Indiana,
Dr. Bucshon, for his 4 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you very much.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here today.
I am going to switch gears a little bit. 340B is a critical
program, especially for rural hospitals, and I am just
interested in what you think should be done, if anything, to
continue to ensure that the 340B program, given its significant
growth, is helping more patients get access to care?
Secretary Azar. You put your finger right on it there when
you mentioned the growth. It has grown from $7 billion of
pharmaceutical sales in 2012 to $19.3 billion in 2017, and we
believe in the 340B program, but we do believe those savings
need to actually make their way to patients, not just
subsidizing hospitals, but actually make their way to patients.
I mean, imagine, for instance, just take the issue of
insulin. Hospitals often acquire their insulin at an extremely
low price, but they don't have to necessarily pass those
savings on to the patient that they are serving as an
outpatient. That is partly why we would, part B, propose the
changes and have tried to implement the changes that would
reduce what seniors have to pay for part B--for--would have to
pay in the Medicare program for their drugs.
Mr. Bucshon. Do you think that more transparency in the
340B program would be part of the solution?
Secretary Azar. Absolutely. We support transparency in the
program. We support giving the regulatory authority as part of
our budget, and also requiring that hospitals that want to get
the benefit of those savings I just talked about, to retain
that in the program, would have to dedicate one percent of
their work towards delivering charity care which seems like a
pretty low bar.
Mr. Bucshon. So what you are saying is probably that HRSA
does need probably more authority and more teeth to address the
program. Would you agree with that?
Secretary Azar. We need greater oversight, but we need
regulatory authority to implement that oversight so that we can
have--so we can actually do audits in an enforceable way and
have that type of transparency.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you.
I would also like to thank you for making improvements in
pain management a key component of the HHS opioid strategy
plan. I mean, I firmly believe we will never successfully
address the opioid epidemic unless we also improve pain
management, and I am a physician, and patient access to non-
opioid therapies, particularly FDA-approved medical devices,
which have the greatest opioid-sparing potential.
Can you tell us what HHS is doing to promote pain
management best practices and the status of various provisions
in the SUPPORT Act to break down barriers to non-opioid
therapies for pain?
Secretary Azar. So one of my top priorities has been to
leverage the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovations
authorities to fight the opioid epidemic and that is why we
developed the Maternal Opioid Misuse, or the MOM Model, and we
recently announced the participants in that model and that is
going to address the fragmentation of care for pregnant and
postpartum Medicaid beneficiaries with opioid use disorder by
supporting care coordination and better integration. So that is
part of that.
Mr. Bucshon. Great. And earlier in the hearing, you were
starting to give some bullet points on, I think, corona, your
plan, the five-point plan or whatever. In the last 50 seconds,
can you expand on that?
Secretary Azar. You bet. First, expand our surveillance
system so we have novel coronavirus surveillance comparable to
what we have on the flu, because that is the bedrock of our
public health response; second, money to support State and
local public health departments are going to have to do a lot
of work here; third, vaccine research and development; fourth,
therapeutic research and development; and fifth, finally,
strategic national stockpile acquisition, especially of
personal protective equipment.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you for that.
And do you feel that we have had enough access to--in China
to get the data that we need to help solve this problem? Has
that loosened up?
Secretary Azar. We have struggled. The World Health
Organization GOARN team has now completed its mission. We are
waiting for its report. The initial reports I have is that that
team felt they were getting access to information and evidence,
but I want to see the final results of that.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Just for the record, HHS has existing oversight authority
of the 340B, and it is my understanding that HRSA has conducted
1,500 audits of the program. So the question----
Secretary Azar. The courts actually have said we do not
have the ability to implement regulations. So that--and that--
--
Ms. Eshoo. We are not talking about that. We are talking
about audits, and so that is why I wanted to get this on the
record. Look at your audits and see what is in them. It is
under the control of your department.
I now would like to call on, or recognize, the gentleman
from California, Mr. Cardenas, for his 4 minutes.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and I
appreciate the opportunity for us to have this oversight
hearing.
Secretary Azar, thank you so much for being with us. This
is an opportunity for to us ask you some essential questions in
fulfilling our oversight duties. And last time you were here
before us for our budget hearing, I asked you about your
agency's role in the horrifying practices of separating
children from their families. Today, I would like to ask you
about other ways that the administration is impacting families,
both in my district and throughout the country.
I would like to ask you about an issue that is frightening
families in my own district. I am, of course, talking about the
for-profit company's proposal for a detention center in my
district, a proposal approved by HHS and that wants to use our
Federal tax dollars to put a facility there to have children in
a prison-like setting.
VisionQuest, the company that received these funds from
your agency, has a history of alarming reports and stories of
abuse within their programs right here in this country. These
stories include descriptions of excessive use of physical
restraints and isolation, verbal abuse, food deprivation,
humiliation and intimidation, and even deaths and this is all
about them having children in their care.
As part of the due diligence of your organization, would
officials within the Office of Refugee Resettlement be aware of
these types of violations before awarding a contract to such a
company like VisionQuest?
Secretary Azar. I don't want to endorse the statements that
you have made regarding that entity, because I do not know the
particulars of that entity or the allegations that are being
made there. So I want to be careful I am not endorsing that,
but----
Mr. Cardenas. OK. Go ahead.
Secretary Azar [continue]. I would expect it would be part
of any grant review of any grantee to examine their past
history, and treatment of children. I would absolutely expect
that, yes.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. If you could please report to this
committee if any of the grantees, such as the one I was talking
to, if there is any evidence within the Department of any valid
situations with an organization such as--an organization that
would be entrusted with Federal funds to house children.
Secretary Azar. Sure.
Mr. Cardenas. OK? Thank you.
But funds--these funds that you would be providing as of,
unless you were to have such evidence; you would go ahead and
contract with an organization?
Secretary Azar. Well, that is how, as you know, the
Unaccompanied Alien Children program runs, is we hire grantees
that run permanent, hopefully, permanent State-licensed
facilities that care for children until we can place them with
sponsors. That is really what the system Congress set up. That
is what we run.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you.
And the city of Los Angeles is in the process of
solidifying their ordinances to whether or not they are going
to allow private entities to use Federal funds to house
children.
I have another issue I would like to discuss with you. I
want to turn to the issue of impacting American families,
especially vulnerable children throughout America. In your
written testimony, you speak about the importance of promoting
adoption to give children the stability and love during their
childhood. You speak about prioritizing adoption, but you
neglect to mention the fact that right now in America, the
agencies are turning away qualified potential parents because
they are either LGBTQ, or they happen to be of a religious
minority here in America. This is in the--this is in spite of
the fact that LGBTQ parents are seven times more likely to
foster or adopt children than non-LGBTQ parents.
My question is, in your efforts to identify and address
barriers to adoption, can you tell me how eliminating data
collection and reporting on sexual orientation over fostering
adoptive youth and parents is helpful to furthering that goal?
Secretary Azar. So the AFCAR is what you are referring to,
I believe, is the AFCAR's reporting system and the original
regulation contain 270 individual data points, 153 of which
were new, and the States, there was significant feedback about
just the sheer volume of data collection and expense to States,
all of which is money that, if we add more and more questions,
more and more data collection, that is money the States can't
use to actually assist with adoption and foster care placement.
So it is really just an effort to streamline those data
requests in there.
Mr. Cardenas. My time has expired.
I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. Is the gentleman yielding back?
Mr. Cardenas. Yes.
Ms. Eshoo. I thank the gentleman.
It is a pleasure to recognize the gentlewoman--and that she
is--from Indiana, Mrs. Brooks, for 4 minutes.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And welcome, Secretary Azar. Thank you for being here.
And thank you for pointing out that just this past June,
the President signed PAHPA, the reauthorization of PAHPA, of
which this committee worked very hard on in the last Congress,
and we finally got it done in this Congress.
And I worked particularly hard with the chairwoman and the
ranking member of this committee to try to make sure we
improved our readiness and our response, and because the
question of a pandemic is really not a question of if, but
when, I think most people, and obviously CDC is acknowledging
that.
One thing I would like people who are listening to
understand, the global security--Global Health Security Index
was recently issued, and the United States of America was first
in the world out of 195 countries for prevention, detection,
response, and public health. And I also want to commend the
administration for the National Health Security Strategy that
was put in place for 2019 to 2022. I want to commend you for
leading that work.
But with respect to PAHPA, I am curious. How are you
leveraging, how is HHS leveraging all of the new things that we
put into PAHPA? And then I have one--I would like to also ask
you to address, because there are so many good things in your
budget, but I am particularly concerned about a $200 million
cut to BARDA, because BARDA has brought forth so many
incredible innovations and the partnership that they have with
the private sector. Given this proposed cut, what strategies
are we going to put in place if BARDA is cut?
Secretary Azar. So on the BARDA question, so that was, of
course, in the budget before the coronavirus situation, and
because Congress in the appropriations in December added, I
think, $535 billion of Ebola funding available in 2020, we are
pulling forward some of our acquisition strategies for BARDA
into 2020 around, especially vaccine and therapeutics on Ebola.
So that created some offset. We may need to relook at that
now, given some of the offsets proposed in the supplemental
requests but that was meant to be somewhat because we had
pulled forward some of those acquisition strategies to 2020.
Mrs. Brooks. OK. But the private sector companies who are
our partners in developing the diagnostics, the therapeutics,
the vaccines, and because the government is the customer for
those products, is it fair to say then that BARDA, and all of
the BARDA professionals who are working in BARDA, is it fair to
say that they should not anticipate, with what is happening
right now a cut in their funding?
Secretary Azar. We would--first, we would work with the
appropriators as to whether the offset we proposed on the 535
Ebola to be part of the funding of the supplemental, if that
happens. I can tell you from feedback this morning at the House
Appropriations Committee, I think that may be unlikely from the
appropriators.
Mrs. Brooks. We still have Ebola in Africa. Is that
correct?
Secretary Azar. We do, although fortunately, it is on the
downswing on the Epi Curve at this point but what we would do
is use that money for acquisitions on Ebola, if that money
remains there for Ebola in 2020 vaccines and therapeutics that
we have got. But if not, we would work with appropriators on
making sure BARDA is adequately funded certainly.
Mrs. Brooks. And are there any other issues or any other
strategies or framework that we provided in PAHPA that you are
using specifically right now to combat the coronavirus?
Secretary Azar. On the coronavirus, the--I can't trace
directly to the PAHPA authorities but, for instance, our
vaccine strategies are very much influenced by that in terms of
recombinant DNA, the universal vaccine research that we are
doing in the influenza case, as well as cell-based technology
to bring domestic manufacturing capabilities here.
Mrs. Brooks. I yield back my time. I thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back.
Just for the record, the gentlewoman asked about the $200
million cut to BARDA, and the Secretary responded.
The administration, Mr. Secretary, put out the budget ten
days after, after, not before, after declaring a public health
emergency. So your answer is really not correct on that.
Secretary Azar. Well, I am sure you understand the budget
is locked in December. So it is already probably was printed by
the date of the coronavirus outbreak.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, you mean the administration doesn't have
the ability to call it in and cross something out and say, N-O,
we are the not cutting this, we need it? I mean, that is not--
come on. Come on. All right.
Now the gentleman from Vermont, Mr. Welch, is recognized
for 4 minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. You have been here a while.
Drug importation, we are very happy that you are proceeding
on that and, as you know, we have a Republican Governor in
Vermont who is extremely interested in getting authority to do
this. They hope to have everything that is required for you
sooner than the deadline. So we think it is a great
opportunity. Our Republican Governor and Democratic legislature
wants to take advantage of this.
One of the concerns that the Governor has, in particular,
but all of us, is including insulin and that is not included,
and my understanding is that there have been some concerns
raised as to whether that can be safely done. It really would
make a huge difference to Vermonters and, as you know, a lot of
people already drive across the border to get insulin, and even
some companies do that.
Our view is that the concerns about safety are always
legitimate, no matter where the source of drugs, but our real
request is to accommodate insulin as one of the drugs that
could be imported as long as it is done safely. I wish you
could comment on that and tell us what we need to do to give
some relief to folks that are desperate about the cost
difference.
Secretary Azar. So unfortunately, insulins as an injectable
product are expressly excluded under Section 804 of the Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act which is the provision for the Canadian
importation regime that we are using. We have no objection to
it. In fact, the second part of the importation program where a
drug company could bring a product in with a new drug code and
actually price it at their--price at a lower list price so that
they could deal with their PBM, those middlemen contracts, that
are open for all products, including insulin.
Mr. Welch. So let me just understand. This is helpful. You
are saying it is because the statute----
Secretary Azar. Yes, we have--we did not----
Mr. Welch [continue]. Not because of a concern that HHS
has.
Secretary Azar. It is the statute.
Mr. Welch. So as far as you are concerned, if you felt
there was authority under the law for insulin to be included,
you would see no reason to object to that.
Secretary Azar. That is correct. We would be supportive if
the statute provided for that. We believe it can be imported
appropriately, but the statute does not allow me to approve an
importation regime under 804 with insulins in it.
Mr. Welch. So if we did an amendment to the statute to
allow for insulin to be an exception, you would be supportive
of that, it sounds like.
Secretary Azar. I can't formally state an administration
position, but I can tell you the President wants importation.
He wants it yesterday, and we are delighted the Governor is
working, because we want shovel-ready importation programs
that, when we finalize a rule that we could get to work on
approving.
Mr. Welch. All right. So who would I follow up within the
administration? It probably sounds like you----
Secretary Azar. Me.
Mr. Welch [continue]. But if I talk to the President about
supporting what statutory provision may need to be included in
order to allow insulin to come in. That would be huge, huge,
huge for the Governor of Vermont, and for the people of
Vermont.
Secretary Azar. Sure. Happy to work with you on that.
Absolutely. Talk directly to the President with you.
Mr. Welch. All right. Thank you.
And I yield back.
Thank you very much----
Secretary Azar. You bet.
Mr. Welch. [continue]. Mr. Secretary.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Carter, is recognized for 4
minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here.
I want to follow up on Representative Griffith's questions
about DIR fees by the pharmacy benefit managers and, of course,
as you know, the PBMs have squeezed out almost $4 billion out
of pharmacies that have retail pharmacies with these DIR fees.
In a survey that was done by the National Community Pharmacists
Association said that 58 percent of the independent retail
pharmacists in this country don't expect to be in business in
two years, the result of DIR fees which, of course, should be
of concern to all of us, but particularly to HHS and delivery
of healthcare services in our country.
I just wanted to ask you. I believe you responded to Mr.
Griffith by saying that the concern was the higher premiums
with the insurance companies. As you know, three PBMs account
for almost 80 percent of the market share in this country, and
all of those PBMs are owned by insurance companies. How can
we--how can we answer the question of whether those rebates
that they are getting, the PBMs they are giving, are going back
to the insurance company that is also owned by the same
company?
Secretary Azar. Well, that is one of the real problems we
have got, is we don't have PBM transparency. Absolutely. So we
can't actually know where those monies are flowing.
Mr. Carter. It would appear to me that that is just taking
money out of one pocket and putting it in the other pocket. I
mean, it is the same company and then it is extended even more
than that to include the pharmacies as well. So you know, the
vertical integration is something that has got to be addressed.
But what do you think we can do to address the DIR fees?
Now the DIR fees have been associated with higher out-of-pocket
costs for recipients, and that is certainly something we have
to be concerned about, and I know you are concerned about and
you have said in the past that you are. If we can lower out-of-
pocket costs, would it help to have the rebates at the point of
sale?
Secretary Azar. Oh, yes, it would help to have rebates at
the point of sale. That would lower out-of-pocket costs. And
pushing through, so folks understand, the DIR is basically a
penalty provision that the middlemen impose on the community
pharmacists, but the patient is made to pay off of the full
price when they buy the drug and the pharmacy later may get
this callback of this penalty, but the patient doesn't get a
refund of their out-of-pocket.
Mr. Carter. Absolutely. And that callback can take place
almost a year afterward----
Secretary Azar. Exactly.
Mr. Carter [continue]. And sometimes two years afterward.
Secretary Azar. Very unpredictable to the community
pharmacy. They are struggling from this. Absolutely.
Mr. Carter. Absolutely.
Now I want to switch to the coronavirus and these are yes-
or-no questions, if you could answer them for me. At this time,
at this time, are you and others involved in preparing for a
potential COVID-19 outbreak, doing everything you can to
prepare for such an event?
Secretary Azar. We are indeed.
Mr. Carter. At this time, if you and others involved in
preparing for a potential COVID-19 outbreak felt like you
needed more money, would you have asked for it?
Secretary Azar. I would have and I have and that request is
there.
Mr. Carter. OK. At any time, if you and others involved in
preparing for a potential COVID-19 outbreak need more money,
will you ask for it?
Secretary Azar. I will indeed.
Mr. Carter. Absolutely. So it is not as to say that the
amount of money that is asked for is proportional to the effort
that is going to be put forth to prepare for this?
Secretary Azar. Right. That is right. And the President has
made very clear in my own discussions with him, as well as
publicly, that we want to work with Congress on an appropriate
supplemental proceedings here and we have said--it quite
deliberately says at least $2.5 billion. We want to work with
Congress. We got to get that money and make sure that Congress
is satisfied with the funding also.
Mr. Carter. As should be the case.
And, again, if you find out that you need more, you are
going to come back to us, and we are going to approve it. We
want you to have everything that is available that you need to
prepare for this. And you are going to do that, correct?
Secretary Azar. That is correct.
Mr. Carter. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Ruiz, for 4 minutes.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you, Secretary Azar, for being here today.
As a father and a physician, I care very deeply about the
physical and mental health of children and also children while
in the custody of the Office of Refugee Resettlement. And I am
glad my colleague Tony Cardenas brought that up because I am
also dealing with a similar situation in my district.
ORR's website says their unaccompanied children program,
quote, ``takes into consideration the unique nature of each
child's situation and incorporates child welfare principles
when making placement, clinical, case management, and release
decisions that are in the best interest of the child.''
So let me get this straight, because I definitely want
answers. When determining appropriate housing for children in
ORR custody, do you give grants to for-profit organizations
with a documented history of child abuse?
Secretary Azar. Again, I can't speak to that particular
grant that was raised before. We would give grants to for-
profit or nonprofit without discrimination, but----
Mr. Ruiz. OK. So the caveat is those with a documented
history of child abuse.
I recently learned that, in addition to the facility in
Arleta, California, ORR is providing a grant to VisionQuest to
open a 130-bed shelter for unaccompanied children in the city
of Hemet, California, which I represent. VisionQuest is a for-
profit organization whose history suggests that their focus is
to make money rather than care about the well-being of
children.
This is exemplified by VisionQuest's very long history of
keeping children in abusive and harmful conditions, which my
colleague touched on. Dating all the way back to 1987, a report
from the RAND Corporation found that, quote, ``the treatment
methods used by VisionQuest were unorthodox'' and that
``activities engaged in by the youths posed unnecessary risks
to their health and safety.''
Last year, the Associated Press reported that in 1994 the
Department of Justice documented episodes of physical and
mental abuse at a VisionQuest shelter in Franklin,
Pennsylvania, including staffers pulling children's hair, using
harsh restraints, choking minors, and even slamming them into
walls.
And in 2017 the city of Philadelphia had to end a contract
with VisionQuest after State inspectors found that staff
members had choked, slapped, and injured children in the
facility.
Secretary, as our providing Federal funding to a for-profit
organization with a long history of child abuse is definitely
not in the best interest of children, are you familiar with
these reports?
Secretary Azar. I am not familiar with all of those
reports. Some of the allegations that you raised, I am familiar
with.
Mr. Ruiz. Here is the report.
Secretary Azar. Of course, whether for-profit or nonprofit
is not the factor----
Mr. Ruiz. This is the RAND report.
Secretary Azar [continue]. But we want to ensure that any
grantee----
Mr. Ruiz. And this is a----
Secretary Azar. Thank you.
Mr. Ruiz [continue]. Letter within the Department of
Justice documenting
Secretary Azar. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Mr. Ruiz. My question now----
Ms. Eshoo. Would the gentleman be seated and speak from the
microphone so that what you say can be properly recorded?
Mr. Ruiz. Sure. Will do.
So, now----
Secretary Azar. Of course, one of these is, I just noted,
from 1994.
Mr. Ruiz. Of course. So that is why I mention a long
history of abuse.
Secretary Azar. But we will make sure any grantee is
appropriate to the----but we need to make sure that----
Mr. Ruiz. And so that is why----
Secretary Azar. Correct, and not----
Mr. Ruiz. That is why, when you look and review at these
programs, I want to ask you, what is the process? Is there
transparency? How do you determine and how do you open this up
to communities to determine who is going to house children with
the safety of these children in mind?
Secretary Azar. So, for these permanent bedded facilities,
which is our goal at the request of Congress, the grantees
would actually have to be State-licensed. And so there is a
State licensure procedure.
Mr. Ruiz. OK.
Secretary Azar. That would be the community involvement.
Mr. Ruiz. Well, the State of Pennsylvania denied them their
ability to take care of children because of those horrible----
Secretary Azar. And then they would not be able to be a
grantee in that case.
Mr. Ruiz. And they had to close that facility.
So the question is, when you look at those reports and you
review the evidence, would you be open to reevaluating these
grants and your relationship with VisionQuest----
Secretary Azar. I will ensure----
Mr. Ruiz [continue]. And their care for ORR?
Secretary Azar. I will ensure that ORR has looked at these
and this was part of the evaluation criteria in looking at
them.
Of course, just because an entity has--all of the behaviors
you described are absolutely unacceptable. I just want to be
very clear about that.
Mr. Ruiz. And I am glad you said it, because I----
Secretary Azar. Absolutely unacceptable----
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman's time has expired.
Secretary Azar. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Missouri, Mr. Long, for his 4 minutes.
We really need to move along, because we have another
panel, and everyone knows it is a very important one. So let's
stay within our time.
Mr. Long, 4 minutes.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And, Secretary Azar, I want to thank you for being here
today. I know we tried to get together one time, and as soon as
we sat down, my phone started blowing up that my house was on
fire in Missouri, which it turns out it wasn't, but the alarm
company people seemed to think it was and they sent the fire
department. I am sure you remember that.
But I want to thank you for working so hard to advance the
administration's health agenda on behalf of the American
people.
As you note in your testimony, rural Americans face many
unique health challenges. And, under your leadership, HHS
created the Rural Health Task Force and is proposing a four-
point strategy to transform rural health, which is vitally
important in my area, as I represent a lot of rural areas.
Can you first speak to the Rural Health Task Force's role
in identifying the needs of rural areas and how to meet those
needs department-wide?
Secretary Azar. You bet. Yes, absolutely. Thank you.
The Rural Task Force identified four key priorities for us.
The first, we have to develop a sustainable model for rural
healthcare. We can't just patch it over with money if it is not
underlying economically viable. Second, we have to have
prevention and health promotion in rural America. Third, we
have to leverage technology and innovation like telehealth.
And, fourth, we have to get the next generation of providers
out into rural America, and we have to allow nurse
practitioners and P.A.s to practice to the full extent of their
license in rural communities.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you.
And one area in rural health that has been seriously
impacted over the last few years is durable medical equipment,
as you are apprised of. I was pleased that CMS issued the
interim final rule in May of 2018 that provided payment relief
for durable medical equipment in rural areas and continued the
relief in the 2019 end-stage renal disease final rule until the
end of 2020.
Can you tell me if CMS plans to continue this relief in
rural areas after 2020?
Secretary Azar. So I am not able, obviously, to discuss a
pending regulatory action, but I do know that that was a major
priority, to get that payment fix in place through the interim
final rule to ensure better equity for rural America. So that
remains very much top of mind for us.
Mr. Long. OK.
And in the President's fiscal year 2021 budget, there is a
provision that would expand the competitive bidding program for
durable medical equipment into rural areas in 2024. We have
heard many complaints about the competitive bidding program
over the years, really since its inception. Can you detail how
you would like to reform the program and how it would impact
rural areas?
Secretary Azar. Yes. What we would like to do in the budget
is, actually pay for durable medical equipment under the
competitive bidding program and move that, though, from a
single payment amount that is based on the maximum winning bid
to actually paying suppliers on their own bid amounts and then
expanding the competitive bidding to additional geographic
areas, including rural areas.
We think that would actually enhance access to DME in rural
areas by allowing competition there rather than simply having
to depend on the payment result secured elsewhere. We think
that can solve a lot of the access challenges that we saw that
we had to work to fix with the interim final regulation.
Mr. Long. OK.
And has CMS engaged with outside experts, economists, or
consumer groups on this as it considers expanding the
competitive bidding program?
Secretary Azar. We do. We engage with stakeholders and
experts before we consider any new policy. And, of course, the
benefit when we do notice-and-comment rulemaking is to get that
feedback.
Mr. Long. Would you go forward with the proposal without
the Congressional approval?
Secretary Azar. I believe, for some of the regional
elements on competitive business, I believe that we--I don't
know if we require statutory authority. I want to get back to
you on that, as to whether the budget has that as an
administrative action or a statutory request. If I could get
back to you, Congressman, on that.
Mr. Long. If you would, I would appreciate it.
Secretary Azar. You bet. Thank you.
Mr. Long. And I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from Michigan,
Mrs. Dingell, for her 4 minutes of questions.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I know it has been a long
afternoon.
It has been nearly a month since you declared a formal
public health emergency and response to the coronavirus global
threat. On February 2, you sent a letter to Congress that you
intend to use or transfer or reprogram authority to reallocate
approximately $136 million from current programs.
Yesterday, we got the details of those transfers, and I
would like to request unanimous consent to enter that into the
record.
Ms. Eshoo. So ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Madam Chair.
These include $62 million transferred out of NIH, $37
million taken from the Low Income Energy Assistance Program,
and $7.5 million from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid.
Given that you plan to take $37 million from the Low Income
Energy Program, do we have any estimates of how many people
that is going to impact and who is going to go without heat
this winter?
Secretary Azar. So, for the transferred reallocation
authority, that works out to a 0.2-percent change. And we did
that across the Department evenly, but then, within different
agencies, they selected various programs.
On LIHEAP, we are now late in the season, almost at the end
of February. I don't have an analysis for you of----
Mrs. Dingell. Can we get, for the record, please, what we
think the impact will be? Because we obviously are worried
about people who aren't going to have heat.
You are going to take--and I don't mean to be--I just have
to go fast. I have 4 minutes. You are going to be taking--you
took $62 million from NIH. Is that going to harm our ability to
conduct medical research into new cancer treatments--I am
happy, with you, that opioid deaths have gone down this year.
There is no one who feels stronger. Maybe Annie. We are
together--and meet other public health challenges. What is
going to happen to those programs?
Secretary Azar. So the NIH, in doing the reallocation and
taking their allotment of the 0.2 percent, they firewalled off
certain priorities, including, I know, opioid research and
development is one of the primary areas----
Mrs. Dingell. So it has not been cut?
Secretary Azar [continue]. Pediatric cancer--right.
Mrs. Dingell. All right.
Now, I know you talked about this yesterday, but you stated
in your Senate testimony yesterday that the U.S. Currently has
about 30 million stockpiled N95 respirators, which are masks
that can help stop a person from inhaling infective particles,
but that it might require 300 million for healthcare workers
alone. This doesn't include masks, gloves, and personal
protective equipment.
That was yesterday. We have heard about nearly 900 more
cases worldwide, 60 more deaths. I am really worried, as I know
the Chair is, about the supply chain in this country. Your own
agency has stated that 65 percent of N95 respirators are
manufactured outside of the U.S., in China and Mexico.
Yesterday, The Washington Post told us that a large group-
purchasing organization says we may only have a 2-week supply.
I don't want to frighten anybody. We shouldn't be rushing
off. But are we facing an imminent shortage of N95 respirators
and other personal protective equipment?
Secretary Azar. So I did want to clarify on the numbers
that I told the appropriators this morning. After the hearing,
I learned some additional information about the number of masks
that we have. We have a higher number, but the mix is
different. So we have 30 million surgical masks, the gauze
masks. We have 12 million N95 NIOSH-certified masks, and then
five that are not NIOSH-certified--5 million N95s. So I just
wanted to clarify the data on that.
One of the things we are doing with the transfer money that
we discussed earlier is contracting to get--get contracts
started with domestic manufacturers of N95 masks so that we can
scale up production----
Mrs. Dingell. But how long is it going to take to scale up
that production?
Secretary Azar. It will take time because we do not have as
much domestic manufacturing----
Mrs. Dingell. Is it a national security threat that 90
percent of our generics are coming from China? We have this
kind of shortage. What are we going to do--and I am out of
time--to help bring the kind of production of these kinds of
essentials to this country so we are not dependent on anyone
else?
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from Delaware, Ms.
Blunt Rochester, for 4 minutes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And, also, welcome, Mr. Secretary.
I have to express my deep concern and disappointment in the
implementation of the Affordable Care Act, which is the law of
the land. It appears that the Department of Health and Human
Services has made it harder for Americans to access and afford
the vital health insurance coverage that they rely on.
Your department recently proposed a rule that would
discontinue the ACA subsidies for low-income families who do
not actively reapply during the ACA's open enrollment period.
These are low-income Americans who are currently enrolled in
zero-dollar-premium plans.
Secretary Azar, your department's analysis acknowledges
that there are 270,000 Americans who are reenrolled in these
zero-dollar-premium plans that could lose their coverage. And
yet you proposed ending auto-enrollment for these individuals,
thereby endangering their coverage.
First, a ``yes'' or a ``no'' question: In deciding to
propose this policy, did you consider the fact that it would
result in American families losing coverage?
Secretary Azar. I want to get back to you for the record,
if I could. I don't know that we actually proposed it, as
opposed to asking for comment on whether one should allow auto-
reenrollment for people that are 100-percent subsidized in the
ACA exchange markets. I think we asked just for comment on
that, as opposed to proposing that as the approach.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. So I am assuming, if you are asking
for comment, it is something that you are considering?
Secretary Azar. It is under consideration, if we should
require someone to apply who is getting 100 percent of their
subsidy paid for, their premiums paid for, should they
affirmatively demonstrate that they continue to qualify on an
income and wealth basis for that, as opposed to just rolling
over and then pay and chase later if we find months later, they
don't qualify.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. So can you guarantee that no
individuals would lose coverage as a result of this policy?
Secretary Azar. Well, if they don't qualify, then they
wouldn't retain coverage at 100-percent subsidy----
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Meaning, if you changed the policy,
then they wouldn't qualify and they could lose----
Secretary Azar. They shouldn't qualify.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. I am particularly alarmed that your
department would propose such a policy given that Congress
statutorily directed you to establish automatic reenrollment
for all individuals enrolled in the marketplace. That provision
was signed into law by the President at the end of the year.
This proposed policy goes against congressional intent.
Mr. Secretary, will you commit to the American people that
you will not take any action that would cause American families
to lose their health insurance? That is just a ``yes'' or
``no.''
Secretary Azar. I believe that rider was with respect to
2020 moneys, and the request for information was regarding the
2021 plan year, which is not subject to that rider, is my
understanding.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. The deep concern is that the
Department now has a record of refusing to properly invest in
robust advertising and outreach. The Department has drastically
reduced funding for outreach and education activities. It has
gutted the Navigator program, limited the time for enrollment,
and is giving consumers less opportunity to make informed
choices. Now the Department threatens to discontinue American
families' subsidies who have become accustomed to being
reenrolled every year.
Mr. Secretary, would you commit to working with me to
ensure that Americans wishing to enroll in coverage will be
well-informed about the opportunities to enroll?
Secretary Azar. Well, I am always happy to work with you,
Congresswoman, on any issue.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Well, we have talked about working
together before, so I just want to put it on the record on this
particular issue.
Secretary Azar. So, you know, just in terms of open
enrollment, we put out a billion reminder emails, we had----
Ms. Blunt Rochester. It is just a ``yes'' or ``no''
question, because my time has expired. Yes?
Secretary Azar. Happy to work with you.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. OK. We will follow up.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from California, Ms.
Barragan, for her 4 minutes of questions.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here today.
As we have heard from you, our U.S. Government has
implemented aggressive measures to help prevent the spread of
the coronavirus. There have been repatriation missions. There
have been travel bans, airport restrictions, and additional
travel notices issued. Many of these actions have impacted Los
Angeles County and, in particular, my district.
On February 2, the President signed a proclamation banning
foreign nationals who have traveled to China in the preceding
14 days and were not the immediate family of U.S. citizens and
permanent residents. Over the course of a few weeks, 808 U.S.
citizens were flown back to the United States, where they were
quarantined for 14 days at military bases.
As of today, 37 countries have confirmed cases of
coronavirus. Should we expect travel bans from countries, like
Italy, who have confirmed cases of transmission but are on a
different continent than current travel bans?
Mr. Secretary, how sustainable are quarantines and travel
restrictions in holding the coronavirus at bay?
Secretary Azar. It is an excellent question. And that is
why, when we did the initial 212(f) China ban that you
mentioned, we were very clear, we can't hermetically seal the
United States off, and, at some point, there would be
sufficient spread in other countries that measures like that
would not be effective.
With China, of course, with the epicenter being in China
and with the aggressive measures taken by China, that is what
we felt was appropriate to do there. We will constantly look at
other travel advisories, 212(f) restrictions, or surveillance
and requests for home isolation as we gather more information.
But it is a very fair point, absolutely.
Ms. Barragan. And so, following up on that, what resources
are going to the quarantines that are happening?
Secretary Azar. So----
Ms. Barragan. And should these be expanded? Should they be
extended? You know, what additional resources do you expect are
going to be necessary?
Secretary Azar. So I would actually like to get us out of
the Federal quarantine business. And I do want to commend
California and the local governments there. They have really
been a superb partner with us on the repatriation of American
citizens. But it is quite expensive to maintain institutional
quarantine.
We don't envision further repatriation flights that really
has implicated that need for us to scale up this type of
facilities-based quarantine. In the future, as I think Dr.
Schuchat mentioned yesterday, we would envision more self-home-
isolation activities, State- and local-based monitoring and
quarantine activities.
Ms. Barragan. OK.
I want to drill down a little bit on this, because on
Monday HHS issued a statement that revealed a Naval base in
Ventura County, Point Mugu, may receive American travelers
coming through LAX who would be quarantined to be monitored for
symptoms of coronavirus based solely on their travel history.
Let me repeat that: based solely on their travel history.
Mr. Secretary, what are HHS's plans to quarantine Americans
based on solely their travel history? And would those be
voluntary or mandatory?
Secretary Azar. So that would be the Hubei province travel.
So an individual who within, the previous 14 days, has been in
Hubei province in China, as an American or a permanent resident
alien or family member, would be subject to mandatory
quarantine.
We are seeing very, very few of those individuals. I think
we had a family of three and then one individual is really all,
I believe, that we have right now currently in quarantine.
So that is more of a backup concept there, the Ventura
facility you are talking about, to know it is there. But we
have, again, worked very well with the State and locals in
California.
Ms. Barragan. Right. And we certainly know that the CDC has
said that it is not a matter of if the virus is going to spread
but a matter of when. You know, Congress wants to work with
your agency to fund adequate and effective and sustainable
public health responses. We can't do that without sufficient
funding going forward to appropriate to State and local
partners.
Secretary Azar. Yes.
Ms. Barragan. I know that you will be seeing out of the
Congress, especially out of the majority, a proposal on that.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Secretary Azar. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from New Hampshire,
Ms. Kuster, for her 4 minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
And, Secretary Azar, thank you for appearing before our
committee. There is a lot going on both in your budget and with
our concerns about the coronavirus, so I will move through this
quickly.
The key to a public health crisis, as you well know, is
trust and credibility. And my point is, it would be helpful for
clear, easy-to-understand, credible updates from this
administration to both us, as policymakers and Members of
Congress, and to the American people. And it would be even more
preferable if the statements by the President of the United
States did not contradict the statements of the scientists and
physicians at the CDC and in your department.
My time is limited. I want to jump right in on the
administration's continuing efforts to undermine the Affordable
Care Act's consumer protections for people with preexisting
conditions.
The administration and your testimony today claims to
support protections for preexisting conditions, but, with all
due respect, the facts speak for themselves. This
administration has repeatedly taken action, including court
proceedings, to undermine protections for people, including my
constituents, with preexisting conditions.
Your department finalized a rule to expand junk plans that
do not provide protection for people with preexisting
conditions and issued a 1332 waiver guidance creating new
standards inconsistent with congressional intent. The guidance
allows States to increase consumers' costs, reduce coverage,
and undermine protections.
Simple ``yes'' or ``no'' question, Secretary Azar: Are you
aware that the 1332 guidance could substantially raise costs
for Americans with preexisting conditions?
Secretary Azar. Actually, our 1332 guidance allowed me to
approve reinsurance waivers for 11 States, causing 10- to 30-
percent declines in premiums in the exchange market.
Ms. Kuster. And in the other States, what would the result
be?
Secretary Azar. One other State was, I think--I forget if
it was Hawaii that we approved a waiver allowing them to not
have the SHOP. I think that was it, if I remember. Yes, in
Hawaii. So that was at their request, to not have the State--I
forget the exact terminology of what the SHOP is, but it is a
technical aspect of the Affordable Care Act.
We have approved no other ACA 1332 waivers at this point.
Ms. Kuster. And will you commit not to approve waivers that
would jeopardize the health and well-being and the financial
well-being of Americans with preexisting conditions?
Secretary Azar. You can't waive the protection against
preexisting conditions, under 1332 or otherwise.
Ms. Kuster. And this administration is inviting States to
make changes to the ACA subsidy structure and direct taxpayer
dollars to junk plans. And those do indeed threaten and
jeopardize individuals with preexisting conditions.
Yes or no, do you think it is appropriate to allow States
to direct taxpayer dollars toward junk plans that do not
provide protections for preexisting conditions?
Secretary Azar. We think it is appropriate to allow States
to support access to these short-term, limited-duration plans,
which are plans that the Obama administration allowed to 12
months up until the end of the administration.
Ms. Kuster. Well, let me dive right into that. Under the
Obama administration, the short-term, limited-duration plans
were for just three months.
Secretary Azar. I----
Ms. Kuster. You have now extended it to 12 months with
three renewals. That is not the same condition.
Secretary Azar. I am afraid that is actually not correct.
The Obama administration had them for up to 12 months up until
the very end of the administration, when they passed a midnight
regulation shortening it to three months.
Ms. Kuster. To three months. That is my point.
Secretary Azar. Right at the very end. They were perfectly
fine with the----
Ms. Kuster. That is my point, is it was three months, and
you have allowed for extensions for up to three times. That is
four years.
And we had people testify here that they did not even have
noticed that their preexisting conditions were not covered, and
even insurers that said to them that if they didn't know they
had a preexisting that they should have known.
So this is something we need much more work on. I aim to
protect consumers with preexisting conditions.
Thank you. I yield back.
Secretary Azar. Just one correction. It is 12 reinsurance
waivers, not 11.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms.
Kelly, for 2 minutes.
And I just want to instruct the members; we have two more
to question, and they have agreed to limit their time to 2
minutes each. We will then take a very short break, maybe 5
minutes, to reset the witness table for the next panel and
allow the Secretary to take, you know, a few-minute break.
All right. So now we will recognize the gentlewoman from
Illinois, Ms. Kelly, for 2 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here.
I wanted to talk about two issues that I have paid a lot of
attention to and that have actually ravaged communities of
color across the Nation. One is maternal mortality, and the
other is gun violence.
President Trump has expressed concerns about maternal
deaths, and, following mass shootings last year, he called for
bipartisan solutions to reduce gun violence. Well, we in
Congress have come up with bipartisan solutions for both. I
have worked with my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
on a bill to expand Medicaid to provide postpartum coverage for
a full year. And Congress appropriated and President Trump
signed into law $12.5 billion in funding for the CDC to study
gun violence.
Yet your administration seeks to slash funding to and
block-grant Medicaid, implement more restrictive eligibility
criteria for Medicaid recipients, and completely zero out
funding for gun violence research.
Secretary, are you aware, yes or no, that the budget
contains a proposal that would allow States to impose an asset
test on pregnant women in Medicaid? It is pages 112 to 113 of
the HHS Budget in Brief.
Secretary Azar. I would want to look at that and get back
to you on that. I am not aware of that particular provision.
Ms. Kelly. OK.
Secretary Azar. We do have the proposal, similar to what
you just mentioned for Medicaid, that would allow States an
option to cover pregnant women for one year after birth if they
are suffering from substance use disorder. So that is another
part of the maternal mortality initiative.
Ms. Kelly. Yes. That proposal will cut Medicaid's funding
by $2.2 billion. That is because it would cause a lot of
people, including pregnant women, to lose their Medicaid
coverage. So maybe you----
Secretary Azar. That is a spending provision, the one I
just mentioned. It would actually expand--right now, they can
only get 60 days' coverage postpartum. This would allow that
coverage for up to a year as a State option in a non-budget-
neutral way, I believe.
Ms. Kelly. Well, my time is up.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
That legislation that we took up here is awaiting floor
approval. The gentlewoman has been a leader on this for long
before the rest of the members even knew that we had this
horrible statistic in our country.
Last but not least, the gentlewoman from Florida, Ms.
Castor, for her two minutes.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Secretary, the administration is urging the Federal
courts to strike down the Affordable Care Act in its entirety,
including the protections for more than 130 million Americans
who have a preexisting health condition.
I think my neighbors back home would want me to relay to
you how dangerous that is, how angry they are about it. They do
not want to return to the days when insurance companies could
discriminate against them if they had asthma, a cancer
diagnosis, some other preexisting condition. They don't want to
return to the days where an insurance company can cancel them
if they get sick.
And I think the coronavirus now highlights the importance
of consistent health insurance coverage that has a floor of
essential health benefits. And it really shines light on these
junk plans. Your department has finalized a rule to expand the
short-term, limited-duration junk plans. They are not required
to cover preexisting conditions. You acknowledged that in your
last budget hearing in front of this committee.
And a couple of studies have come out recently, a
Georgetown Health Policy Institute study, one commissioned by
Leukemia and Lymphoma Society, that kind of highlight the
abuses here.
Is the Department conducting any oversight on the abuses of
these junk plans, the abuses in marketing, and false promises?
Are you conducting oversight of these?
Secretary Azar. So the short-term, limited-duration plans
are off-exchange, and so we don't actually regulate----
Ms. Castor. Could you just say ``yes'' or ``no'' quickly?
Because----
Secretary Azar. We don't----
Ms. Castor [continue]. The time is short.
Secretary Azar. We don't regulate them directly. They are
subject to State insurance regulation.
Ms. Castor. You do not--so it is, like, hands-off? You
said, we are going to promote these junk plans, and you are not
conducting any oversight? Is that true, yes or no?
Secretary Azar. They are subject to State insurance
regulations, as individual markets should be.
Ms. Castor. And you don't check in with the State and
monitor the abuses in the junk-plan market that are raising
costs on everybody and excluding preexisting conditions?
Secretary Azar. So we----
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Secretary Azar. We do not support--we do not regulate State
insurance commissioners.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back.
Let's take a 5-minute break, and the staff can reset the
witness table, and then we will resume. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Ms. Eshoo. The Subcommittee on Health will come back to
order.
What we are going to do is, we are not going to have our
witnesses do their formal public statements. We have them all
in the record.
[The prepared statements follow:]
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Eshoo. We thank you for them. I have actually read
them, and I am sure my colleagues have as well.
What I just want to do quickly, out of respect to each, is
to just give a quick introduction. And then we will go to
members with their questions.
And, first of all, thank you for being here. I think that
the United States of America is so blessed--is so blessed--to
have, I think, the finest public health professionals in the
entire world. There is a reason why the world looks to us:
Because we have you and your expertise.
So, Dr. Fauci, thank you to you. America can't live without
you, really.
Dr. Hahn, welcome to you. I think this is the first time
that you are before the committee?
Dr. Hahn. Yes.
Ms. Eshoo. And we will make it really pleasant for you.
Dr. Hahn. Thank you very much.
Ms. Eshoo. We won't do to you what we did to the Secretary.
Mr. Secretary, welcome back to the table.
Dr. Kadlec, welcome to you.
And to Dr. Redfield from the CDC, thank you for being here.
And thank you, collectively, for what you have done to help
to brief the Congress during this.
Now, is it my turn to ask?
Staff. Yes.
Ms. Eshoo. OK. Let me start, obviously, with the
coronavirus.
I started out earlier today saying that confusion is the
enemy of preparedness. I do not put confusion at the doorstep
of Dr. Fauci, Dr. Hahn, Dr. Kadlec, and Dr. Redfield.
I think that you have done an excellent job in advising,
briefing the Congress and for the work that you are doing.
I think we have some problems with the administration,
because the professionals say one thing and then there is
confusion on the other side.
I hope that something else will happen, too, and that
briefings be held in public so the American people can hear
you. I hope, as we move through this challenge, that the
American people will come to know you the way we do, and that
we elevate the level of confidence and trust that I know you
can engender, but I don't think it is there now.
There is confusion; markets are roiling. It is not only
because of confusion, but there are many matters at hand. But
you, the scientists, the doctors--the American people couldn't
be better served. They just couldn't be better served. So thank
you to you for your especially important service right now.
What I want to get to--Dr. Hahn, let me start with you--is
our drug supply. Are manufacturers being forthcoming with the
FDA about potential shortages?
Dr. Hahn. Madam Chairwoman, thank you for the question.
We are being very proactive in our discussions with
manufacturers. As you know, drug manufacturers are required to
report to us when there are potential disruptions----
Ms. Eshoo. And how far in advance do they let you know that
there will be a shortage?
Dr. Hahn. Typically those conversations occur in real-time.
What we have done is----
Ms. Eshoo. Well, I know that--I think, usually, all of our
conversations are in real-time. I am saying, how much--you
know, in a trajectory of time, if they were talking to you
today, would they be able to tell when the shortage would
begin? How much runway do we have?
Dr. Hahn. We often do not----
Ms. Eshoo. For example, China and manufacturing. So we have
a problem with that.
Dr. Hahn. So, just as an example, I can tell you that drug
manufacturers are required to tell us when there is a potential
disruption to the drug supply. When the applicants apply to the
FDA, they might provide, for example, five different
manufacturers for the precursors to the drug and then five
manufacturers for the actual final drug form----
Ms. Eshoo. OK.
Let me ask you this. If the coronavirus outbreak is
continuing three months from now--and I pray that it isn't--
what do you estimate the American drug supply will be? Have you
done----
Dr. Hahn. So we have looked at this.
Ms. Eshoo [continue]. Forward-leaning planning?
Dr. Hahn. There are 183 prescription drug manufacturers in
China. Twenty are sole-source from China. That is both
precursors as well as the final drug form. We have reached out
to all of these manufacturers, and we have no shortages to
those sole-source drugs.
It is the redundancy, Madam Chairwoman, that is most
important, and if we have redundancy, then we can shift to
other manufacturing sources.
Ms. Eshoo. Yesterday, the FDA said that--you mentioned
this--the 20 drug products that are either solely sourced there
for their active ingredients or finished drug products from
China. Can you share that list with us, or is that proprietary?
Dr. Hahn. That is a proprietary list. We are internally
compiling lists associated with all the questions that we have
been asking of manufacturers.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Dr. Redfield, how many coronavirus tests can the U.S.
conduct as of today?
Dr. Redfield. How many cases?
Ms. Eshoo. Yes. How many tests----
Dr. Redfield. Oh, tests.
Ms. Eshoo [continue]. Can our country conduct as of today?
Dr. Redfield. I would have to get back to you with the
exact number.
Ms. Eshoo. OK.
I kind of teased, but I was serious, Secretary Azar. We
have some deep cuts to these agencies, the people that you are
sitting with. And it was mentioned by, I think, the ranking
member that the budget was printed and it couldn't be changed
because of the print and all of that.
I think, Secretary Azar, the $200 million in cuts at BARDA,
$700 million in cuts at CDC, and $3 billion out of NIH, are you
willing to reconsider that, given what our country is facing
and what the American people need day-in and day-out from these
agencies? They are the essentials.
Secretary Azar. The proposals to the budget do not impact
our ability to do the novel corona response. The CDC budget
actually has a $135 million increase in the fields of
infectious disease and global health security preparedness.
Ms. Eshoo. Do you think that, in other words, they deserve
these cuts? These are healthy cuts? This is good for them, and
it is good for our country.
Secretary Azar. You asked me about impact related to novel
coronavirus. These will not impact functioning related to that.
And, of course, we have these emergency supplemental request on
top of that.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, but if you wrote it in December, how do
you know that?
Secretary Azar. Because the changes that we make in the
budget are not related to categories that will impact our
ability to do the novel coronavirus response.
Ms. Eshoo. So there is nothing to reconsider?
Secretary Azar. I don't believe there is, in terms of the
existing budget proposal. We have----
Ms. Eshoo. Well, you know what?
Secretary Azar [continue]. The emergency supplemental
adding to accounts that we think are the relevant ones.
Ms. Eshoo. Today is February 26, 2020, and I certainly hope
you are right, but I think that we are shortchanging the
American people.
At this time, I recognize Dr. Burgess, the ranking member
of the subcommittee.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the Chair.
I would just point out, we are the United States House of
Representatives. All spending bills originate in the United
States House of Representatives. So it is certainly well within
our power to provide the level of spending that you all
request.
The House is just now doing its budget, several months
after the administration did its budget. I will be testifying
to the Budget Committee tomorrow. I think if people have
concerns, they ought to bring them up to the Budget Committee.
I just hope we will actually have a budget debate and vote on a
House budget, because we haven't in several previous years.
But I do want to thank the panel for being here today. This
is critically important. The Chair is correct that people do
need to see and this needs to be public. That is why we have
hearings, because hearings are on the record and are public,
which is why, several weeks ago, I suggested we have this
hearing, and I am glad we are having it today.
Secretary Azar, you were testifying on the budget before.
You did take some questions on the issue of the Office of
Refugee Resettlement. Just off the topic of the corona, can I
say, I have been fortunate enough to visit a number of your
facilities provided by Office of Refugee Resettlement, and I
think we are fortunate to have the men and women who are
working in those facilities. And would you just please convey
to them my thanks? Because I do think they do a good job, and
we would be much the worse without them.
Secretary Azar. I will. And that will mean a great deal to
them. Thank you.
Mr. Burgess. Dr. Hahn, you and I had talked a little bit,
somewhat earlier, about the supply chain and the active
pharmaceutical ingredients that we import from overseas. And
the fact was that there was an adequate stockpile as, sort of,
this story began to evolve several weeks ago.
To the extent that you can tell us, how are things looking
now, as far as the stockpile that companies have available, as
far as the active pharmaceutical ingredient?
Dr. Hahn. Thank you, Representative Burgess.
As we discussed before, we have received no reports of
shortages and found no shortages in prescription drugs coming
from China. And we have discussed this with manufacturers and
pharma companies, and adequate supplies currently exist.
Mr. Burgess. So can I just offer this observation? And I
have been on this subcommittee for a long time, and we have had
this discussion in other guises and other times. And if there
is any silver lining to this cloud, it may be that we recognize
that we need to bring some of that manufacturing back within
our own shores so that we are responsible for our--we have the
responsibility for those active pharmaceutical ingredients.
And I know this is something the President is focused on
and part of his rebuilding of America. This is, I think, work
that this committee, subcommittee, has done in the past. I
think it is something that we really need to take very
seriously.
We had some hearings on continuous manufacturing a few
weeks ago, and I think that is another aspect of this, where--
perhaps some attention to the continuous manufacturing, but the
main thing is make it here so we are not dependent on a sole
source from another country. Whether it be in difficulty from
an infection or just simply out of sorts with the United States
at the time, it does jeopardize our people, and I do think we
need to recognize that.
And, again, that is not a criticism of this panel. We have
known about that on this subcommittee for a long time, and it
is just, we haven't acted. Now, perhaps we will.
Dr. Redfield, I would like to ask you, we have heard
several times the World Health Organization was able to finally
get into China and assist them. And now that report is going to
be coming back. Are you satisfied with the level of interaction
that you have had with your Chinese counterparts? Because the
CDC itself was not allowed to go in. Is that correct? It was
only as part of the World Health Organization?
Dr. Redfield. We were able to have a representative on the
GOARN team that went to China to do the investigation. I have
had regular conversations with my counterpart, the head of the
CDC in China. We have had a good exchange of scientific
information. We do have a CDC office in Beijing, China, that is
there, and they continue to have good interactions with those
colleagues.
Mr. Burgess. So you think there is, working with the State
and local folks?
Dr. Redfield. There is good scientific interaction between
us.
Mr. Burgess. OK.
And, Dr. Hahn, let me just come back to you for a moment.
And thank you for the work you are doing on getting a
laboratory-developed test. That is critical. They can't all be
done at the CDC. We are going to have to be able to get those
tests done rapidly in the field for our people on the front
lines.
But is there any evidence if there is any sort of hoarding
behavior going on with things like personal protective
equipment or pharmaceuticals? Is that something about which we
need to become concerned?
Dr. Hahn. In terms of the supply for----
Mr. Burgess. Yes.
Dr. Hahn. We have reached out to manufacturers, and we are
aware that spot shortages can and have occurred. However,
currently, we know of no overall shortage related to PPE.
However, this is a very dynamic situation, as I mentioned at
yesterday's press conference, that we are likely to see some
pressure, particularly on the demand side here.
Mr. Burgess. Is there anything----
Dr. Hahn. We are working very closely with manufacturers on
this.
Mr. Burgess. OK. Is there anything you can do to prohibit
or prevent--not prohibit, but prevent hoarding activity by
people who might just be buying up equipment?
Dr. Hahn. Well, the Department has led an all-Department
effort to communicate to providers and hospitals regarding this
issue. And we have recommended following CDC guidelines with
respect to the use of particularly respirators, where it seems
to be the most pressure.
Mr. Burgess. OK. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman's time has expired.
It is a pleasure to recognize the gentlewoman from
Colorado, Ms. DeGette, for her 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. DeGette. I thank the Chair for including some of the
other subcommittees in this.
As four of the five of you well know, we have been having
hearings in the Oversight Subcommittee for years on these
issues. It is what keeps me up at night. The most recent
hearing we had was on December 4 about seasonal flu and
pandemic flu. And lo, here we are. And what I am concerned
about is, we are still not any more prepared than we were on
December 4. And so that is what I want to talk about.
Back in 2005, we had a National Blueprint for Biodefense--
or 2015. Some of you recognize this document. Our now-colleague
Donna Shalala had your job, Mr. Secretary. And in this
blueprint for defense, what we they did was, they said, in case
we have some kind of a pandemic, we need to have a clear line
of authority to make these decisions.
Are you aware of that, Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Azar. I wasn't aware of Secretary Shalala's
recommendation in----
Ms. DeGette. But are you aware of this blueprint?
Secretary Azar. More of the blueprint. I wasn't aware of--
--
Ms. DeGette. OK.
Secretary Azar. I wasn't remembering that recommendation.
Ms. DeGette. Well, so this is what I want to ask you.
Because I just got back from Japan on Monday, and so we were
really looking at the Diamond Princess incident. And here is
what I was concerned about, is, you had all these people
sitting in this petri dish of a ship for a long time. The CDC
said that people should not be flown back to the U.S. from that
ship. And then, apparently, the CDC was overruled by the State
Department.
So here is my question. You are the chairman of the
President's task force on the novel coronavirus. Who is in
charge? Are you in charge?
Secretary Azar. I am in charge. But in Japan, the Deputy
Chief of Mission, who is the Charge d'Affaires----
Ms. DeGette. Right.
Secretary Azar [continue]. Who made that decision, has full
authority of the President of the United States----
Ms. DeGette. Right.
Secretary Azar [continue]. When in a foreign country.
Ms. DeGette. So that is the problem.
Secretary Azar. No, that----
Ms. DeGette. Well, yes, it is, and I will tell you why that
is the problem. Because you are the head of the panel, the
health experts are saying you shouldn't be flying these people
back in, and then there is another agency that basically
overruled what you said.
If we have an outbreak in the United States, there are a
number of other agencies that are going to have other
interests. And I will just give you a couple of examples: the
State Department, which we just dealt with; HHS is you; the
State public health departments; various other agencies.
Who is in charge of the final verdict? Is it you?
Secretary Azar. It depends on the circumstances. If it is--
--
Ms. DeGette. That is not going to work if we have a
pandemic.
Secretary Azar. No. If it is in a foreign country, the
ambassador of the President is the final word on representing
the United States' interests in that country.
Ms. DeGette. So what happened is, they flew back in 14
Americans, maybe more, who were infected with the coronavirus.
That is why someone needs to be in charge. And you know what? I
think it should be you.
Secretary Azar. I just, with respect, I want to--the Deputy
Chief of Mission had a very difficult decision to make there.
They----
Ms. DeGette. I understand that. I don't need you to explain
that to me. What I am saying, as this goes along, there needs
to be someone who can overrule Homeland Security and State, who
can make these decisions for the American public based on
public health. And I am hoping we can have some more hearings
to talk about that.
Secretary Azar. I appreciate that.
Dr. Redfield, I want to ask you--because the Chair,
Chairwoman Eshoo, asked you the question about the lab tests,
and you said you didn't know how many lab tests are available--
do we have lab tests that will accurately test for the
coronavirus?
Dr. Redfield. Yes. I----
Ms. DeGette. OK. Now, what I heard was they are limited,
and people have to send their tests to the CDC to be tested. Is
that right?
Dr. Redfield. Presently, there are 12 jurisdictions that
have the test up and running. Nine of----
Ms. DeGette. Twelve jurisdictions throughout the United
States?
Dr. Redfield. Throughout the United States.
Ms. DeGette. And so people can send their tests there?
Dr. Redfield. They send their tests there.
Ms. DeGette. And when are we going to be able to put that
everywhere?
Dr. Redfield. Well, we are working cooperatively with----
Ms. DeGette. I am asking you, when are you going to be able
to put that everywhere?
Dr. Redfield. I was trying to say----
Ms. DeGette. Do you know?
Dr. Redfield [continue]. We are working with the FDA now.
We are hoping that later this week----
Ms. DeGette. OK.
Dr. Redfield [continue]. Our tests will be such that the
first one can go--all the laboratories that got it can execute
the current test on the modification that we did with the FDA.
Ms. DeGette. OK.
Dr. Fauci, I know you are working on developing a vaccine.
If we gave you more money, could we develop a vaccine more
quickly?
Dr. Fauci. We would need more money to take it for the next
step. We are in a Phase 1 right now, and we are OK. When we get
to----
Ms. DeGette. How much more money? How much more money?
Dr. Fauci. For?
Ms. DeGette. I think you could probably get bipartisan
consensus that we would give you the money.
Dr. Fauci. Yes. How much would you need for it to get it
over the hill?
Ms. DeGette. Yes. Yes.
Dr. Fauci. About $140 million.
Ms. DeGette. $140 million. I think----
Secretary Azar. And, Congresswoman----
Ms. DeGette. Yes?
Secretary Azar [continue]. If you wouldn't mind, the
emergency supplemental would actually dedicate a billion
dollars for vaccines. That is part of the detail we will be
working with the committee on.
Ms. DeGette. OK.
I just want to say one more thing, because my time is up,
and I know that Congresswoman Schakowsky is going to ask you
some questions about the supplemental. I just want to say that
even Minority Leader McCarthy today said we need at least $4
billion. And we shouldn't be shifting money away from Ebola and
other diseases into trying to deal with this coronavirus. We
need to work on all fronts at once.
And I thank you for your comment.
And I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie, is recognized for
his time.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you for all being here.
And just so everybody knows, we have been having these
meetings, if they have not been formal hearings, bipartisan,
with several of you over time. And I remember, when we first
started meeting about this, it might have been Dr. Fauci said--
I don't want to put words in your mouth, but we were going to
prepare for a pandemic. That is what the American people expect
us to do. We are going to prepare for a pandemic. We are going
to put things in place for a pandemic and hope and pray that it
never comes. We are going to get ready. And as we prepare for
it, people are going to see things, hear things, and maybe
react that this pandemic is imminent, when it may not be,
because we are doing what we are supposed to do.
The other thing is, I know the White House and the
administration needs to reassure markets and marketplaces where
we are and where we stand. And for everything that I have heard
previously and what Larry Kudlow has said, it is not
inconsistent with where we are.
But I know that the CDC came out and talking about the
pandemic, to be ready for it. And, Secretary Azar, if you would
like to explain this. I know the CDC warned that Americans
should--and I will quote--``prepare for community spread'' in
the United States and should be ready for, quote, ``significant
disruption.''
And would you explain what that means and what it means to
the average person, what that means? And what is the most
important message you would like for the American people to
know about the current state of America and the coronavirus?
Secretary Azar. Our messaging, from the President through
to the career officials at the CDC, has been consistent, but it
is striking a balance: America's risk is low at the moment.
That could change quickly. We are working to keep that risk
low, but we have always been transparent that we expect more
cases in the United States with a rapidly spreading virus,
especially with what we have seen.
For the average American, there is no change in their
behaviors except what we always would advise, which is: to
practice good public hygiene--washing your hands appropriately,
coughing into your arm, not touching your face with unwashed
hands--and appropriate preparedness activities at home. And you
can go to CDC.gov for normal advice for flu seasons,
hurricanes, and others. Good preparedness, and good
thoughtfulness at home.
We are trying to be very transparent to people of the risks
we face, even if we are at a low-risk situation now, so people
aren't surprised, so that they know what we are dealing with
and what uncertainties we are dealing with.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
And so, Dr. Fauci and Dr. Redfield, for 50 days, we have
learned much about the coronavirus, but much is still unknown.
What is the current--this is what I know people want to know at
home. What is the current scientific consensus about the
transmissibility, infectiousness of the virus? And how long,
once you are infected, if you are infected, how long can you
pass it on?
And what are the other remaining known unknowns? What are
the things you know that you would like to know the answer to?
With Dr. Fauci and Dr. Redfield and Dr. Kadlec, if that is
in your world.
Dr. Fauci. Well, first of all, we know it is a very
transmissible virus. There are some viruses that are not
efficient in going from human to human. What we learned early
on and we are convinced now, given what we have seen in China
and other countries, that it is a highly transmissible virus.
That is the first thing.
The second thing, when you say how long a person is
infected after they get infected, that is something that is
still up in the air. And the way you get the answer to that is
you try and isolate the virus, what we call, shedding for a
period of time.
And we know that there are individuals who are actually
able to transmit when they are without symptoms, before they
get symptoms. What we don't know yet--and I think we are going
to get information from the group, including the CDC individual
and one of my people who was in China with the WHO group--what
the extent of that transmissibility is from an asymptomatic
person. Is it minor, part of the driving of the outbreak, or is
it significant? That is going to be a very important thing that
is currently an unknown.
And, Bob, do you want to take over?
Mr. Guthrie. Dr. Redfield?
Dr. Redfield. I concur with Dr. Fauci. I think the biggest
challenge we have right now is, what is the relative
infectivity, whether before you get sick--are you more
infectious before you get sick, or are you more infectious
after you get sick?
We are tracking these patients that we do have in this
country to see how long they actually have a virus that can be
isolated from their respiratory secretions. It is probably
going to be longer than many of us originally anticipated. I
think, at this stage, we have an individual who is out about 18
days from the time they initially actually got sick.
So I think these are key questions, and we continue to try
to get the data to answer them.
Mr. Guthrie. So are there other things that you are looking
to know that you don't--that you know that you don't know that
you are trying to find the answers to?
Dr. Redfield. Well, I think one of the other areas from the
CDC's point of view is trying to understand the methods of
transmission. Is it all respiratory transmission through
droplets? Is there fomite transmission? For example, can this
virus survive on certain surfaces long enough for somebody else
to come down, put their hand down, and then touch their face?
You know, it is not clear right now what the relative
components of, say, droplet transmission is to fomite
transmission.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
My time has expired. I will yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, is
recognized.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
As all of you know, the World Health Organization has
declared the coronavirus outbreak is a global health emergency,
and our administration now has declared it a public health
emergency. Yet, Secretary Azar--we have talked about this, you
have heard about it--the Trump administration asked Congress
for just $2.5 billion to combat the disease that the CDC's
Director, Nancy Messonnier, warned could severely disrupt daily
life and could cause severe illness in the United States.
So, in that request, you did not, as I understand,
include--were not specific about surveillance for testing kits
that actually work--because not all of them have--and for
treatment. Instead, you suggested robbing $500 million from the
United States response to the Ebola epidemic, which actually
still is raging in places. So I find it incomprehensible that
you are asking for a molehill when what we really need is a
mountain of support here.
Secretary Azar, yes or no, do you agree with the President
of the United States that the coronavirus is ``very much under
control'' in the United States, unquote, and will, quote, ``go
away,'' unquote, by spring?
Secretary Azar. He did not say the last part that you just
said. He said we hope it will go away with warmer weather. I
hope everybody here would hope it would go away with warmer
weather.
The virus in the United States has been in a contained
situation to date, but that can change. As Dr. Messonnier said,
we expect more cases, and we expect that we will see at least
limited community transmission of the virus in the United
States.
Ms. Schakowsky. Let me ask you another question. My
hometown of Chicago reported the first human-to-human
transmission of the coronavirus in the United States. And
though the Illinois and Cook County and Chicago Departments of
Public Health have expertly, I would say, handled our two
coronavirus cases; they have not received any reimbursement or
financial assistance for the work they have done. I just met
with the director of public health in Chicago, who said they
are spending $150,000 per week to respond to this.
Will the United States be able, in the $2.5 billion, to
help local and State health officials who have already spent
lots and lots of money trying to deal with this?
Secretary Azar. So, yes, that is actually part of the
supplemental request, is to fund State and locals. In addition
to the $675 million FEP money they already have received for
many years, Illinois, of course, received each year $16.3
million for exactly these activities. But we want to give
additional funding through the supplemental request for those
activities.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, that is really good news. Thank you.
Secretary Azar, will your $2.5 billion be enough to help
healthcare workers in hospitals and nursing homes or the home-
care workers who have to care for quarantined individuals?
Secretary Azar. In what respect are you asking?
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, I mean----
Secretary Azar. The salaries? Because they are already
paid. I am just curious. I want to----
Ms. Schakowsky. No, I mean, I think----
Secretary Azar. If there are elements we need to add to our
request, we will be glad to----
Ms. Schakowsky. There may be a lot of additional costs
that--people that work in hospitals, and they may have to hire
more people. Is there any help that is going to be for
staffing?
Secretary Azar. Would you mind if Dr. Kadlec responds,
Congresswoman?
Dr. Kadlec. I can address part of your question, ma'am, and
that is, $350 million is dedicated for personal protective
equipment that could be used by healthcare workers in many
different settings. So we are stockpiling that to make it
available should communities need that in addition to what they
have on hand.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK.
Let me just finally say this. Last week, 45 of my
colleagues and I sent a letter to President Trump, and what we
were talking about is, are we going to be guaranteed affordable
treatments or vaccines that are developed?
We are concerned that private pharmaceutical companies may
end up having a role in this and raising the cost beyond the
point that people could well afford it.
Secretary Azar. We absolutely share your passion around
ensuring affordable access to medicines, but the private sector
must have a role in this. We will not have a vaccine; we will
not have therapeutics without the private-sector candidates
that they and we will have to invest in.
Ms. Schakowsky. But we have paid for all the R&D so far,
right?
Secretary Azar. No, that is not accurate. For instance,
Gilead has a product, Remdesivir, that was originally NIH-
funded basic research, I think, out of the University of
Alabama, but they have carried forward with development.
Moderna is using Dr. Fauci's----
Ms. Schakowsky. My time has expired, but if I could just
reaffirm then, you are saying it will for sure be affordable
for anyone who needs it?
Secretary Azar. I am saying we would want to ensure that we
work to make it affordable, but we can't control that price,
because we need the private sector to invest. The priority is--
--
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman's time has----
Secretary Azar [continue]. To get vaccines and
therapeutics. Price control won't get us there.
Ms. Eshoo [continue]. Expired, Mr. Secretary. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman from Michigan, the former
chairman of the full committee, Mr. Upton.
Mr. Upton. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I have a couple of questions that I hope to run through.
And I guess the first question ought to be directed to--first
of all, thank you all, 24/7, and for the briefings that we have
had over the last couple of weeks as well.
I guess this ought to be directed first to Dr. Redfield.
There is a report just published now in the last hour or two of
apparently there is a daily newspaper in Korea called the
JoongAng Daily, and they reported that there is a Korean
Airlines flight attendant who serviced a number of flights
between LAX and Seoul, and she was confirmed to have
coronavirus. They are not sure where she got it. There is some
suspicion that she had also worked a flight to Israel with that
apparent tourist group that came from Korea there in the
previous week.
What do you know about this? Is there some communication? I
hope you know something, but I know that it is recent news. But
it was published Tuesday in Korea; it is Thursday now. So just
wondering what you might know about this.
Dr. Redfield. I can say that I haven't been briefed on
that, sir. Normally what we would do, if we had confirmed
cases, obviously----
Mr. Upton. Now, this is a Korean woman, 24 years old.
Dr. Redfield. Yes. So that would be--we are interacting--we
actually sent someone yesterday to embed in the Korean CDC to
help facilitate communications between Korea's CDC and our CDC.
But I can tell you I haven't been briefed on that specific
situation. But I will look into it and get back to you.
Mr. Upton. OK.
And, second--and does anyone else know anything more?
Dr. Fauci, I know that China did publish, thank goodness,
the genetic sequence, which has allowed the rest of the world
to try and pierce the bubble here. Moderna Therapeutics is one
of the companies--I think they are out of Massachusetts--that
is actually working on, I want to say, a Phase 1, but I may be
wrong.
Dr. Fauci. Yes.
Mr. Upton. If it is successful, how long? What can you tell
us?
Dr. Fauci. We are working with the company Moderna on a
vaccine platform called messenger RNA. We are working at our
Vaccine Research Center.
And we did exactly as you said. As soon as the sequence was
put on a public database, we pulled the gene out for the spiked
protein, which is the protein that you want to make an immune
response against.
There are several steps in that that determine the success
or failure of what you are doing. And we have been able to
successfully express it in this particular platform that we are
going to use for a vaccine. We have shown that it is
immunogenic in mice. And very soon, within the next month and a
half to two, it is going go into humans in a Phase 1 study.
But I think people need to appreciate--because there is
often misunderstanding--a Phase 1 study, we will say, was three
months from the go, which was about a month and a half ago. It
will take about three months or four to determine if it is safe
and induces the kind of response that you would predict would
be protective.
Once you get there--it relates to the question that I was
asked before--then you go to a Phase 2 study. The Phase 1 study
has 45 people. A Phase 2 study has hundreds or maybe even low
thousands of people. That would take at least six or eight
months to show that it works. So, from the time you push the
button to go to the time you even know it works, it is about a
year to a year and a half.
Then, as the Secretary said, you have to partner with
pharmaceutical companies to make millions and millions and
millions of doses, which could also extend the time.
Mr. Upton. And that would be a vaccine or a remedy?
Dr. Fauci. That would be a vaccine----
Mr. Upton. OK.
Dr. Fauci [continue]. To prevent infection.
Mr. Upton. OK.
The last question that I have, and I will save this for
Secretary Azar. A couple of weeks ago, my colleague Debbie
Dingell and I sent a letter to the administration--you were
copied on it--as it relates to the supply chain of companies
with operations in China, specifically Wuhan province.
A lot of us are concerned about products that are made
there. Auto State, Michigan, we have a lot of different things
that are there. I know Apple, as an example; they fessed up;
their stock price collapsed and led to the market trouble that
we had this week.
What type of outreach are--have you initiated outreach to
companies large and small, particularly on the shortage
questions as well? Because they may not want to tell you what
they might know. Where are you all on that?
Secretary Azar. So, as chair of the task force, we have
directed a whole-of-government outreach to manufacturers and
suppliers across not just healthcare but everywhere. And Dr.
Hahn and Dr. Kadlec have led the effort with regard to
pharmaceutical, generic and biologic, and device manufacturers
in China.
And that is what Dr. Hahn was reporting on earlier, the
results of that outreach. Very proactive. As you know, with
drugs, they have to report to us potential shortages. Device,
we don't yet have legislation on that, so we are proactively
probing that system. As he reported, we don't yet know of any
potential shortages, but we are on that because we share your
concern about the risks there.
Mr. Upton. Just to follow up, is the Secretary of
Commerce--are they working on other things----
Secretary Azar. Yes.
Mr. Upton [continue]. Beyond just drugs and devices?
Secretary Azar. Yes. With their regulated entities and
their major manufacturing entities, they are working to gather
information about potential shortages, as they might impact the
economy. The National Security Council and the National
Economic Council are leading those efforts.
Mr. Upton. Thank you.
I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. I appreciate what Mr. Upton raised overall but
certainly the last part of it, the whole issue of our
dependence on China and that 90 percent of the American people
take generics and that those generic drugs are manufactured in
China and, to a lesser degree, in India, but China controls the
global market on the API, the active pharmaceutical
ingredients.
But I met with Dr. Kadlec after--I think it was the
classified briefing. He came to my office. What I wanted to
know was, do we have an inventory? Do we have an inventory of
who the manufacturers are? Are any of these plants shut down? I
know we asked questions about how long they can manufacture
until they can't, because drug shortages are a part of this
whole problem with the supply chain.
But when I met with Dr. Kadlec, we don't have that
inventory. Is that in place now Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Azar. Actually, I believe----I believe that is
what Dr. Hahn briefed you on earlier.
Ms. Eshoo. We do have an inventory?
Dr. Hahn. We have reached out to the manufacturers. We have
to do that proactively because there are not requirements, for
example, state of operations that are required to report to us.
Ms. Eshoo. But if we inspect manufacturing plants, don't we
know who they are?
Dr. Hahn. Yes, we do.
Ms. Eshoo. Don't we have a list of them?
Dr. Hahn. Yes, we do.
Ms. Eshoo. We do.
Dr. Hahn. Yes, we do.
Ms. Eshoo. What is the difference between that and the
question I asked then?
Dr. Hahn. So we have a list of manufacturers that have been
given to us by pharmaceutical companies who manufacture both
precursor products and final drugs in China. But there may be
five or six for each of these drugs, and they might be in
different countries.
Ms. Eshoo. I see. All right.
The gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Kennedy, is
recognized for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you.
I want to thank you all for being here. Thank you for being
willing to be before this committee. I have some differences
with some of you up there on our healthcare policy, but I am
grateful for your presence here, and I wish you all success. So
good luck to you, and good luck to us all.
First off, a bit of--just rapidly, sir, Dr. Redfield, if
you can. I have a 2-year-old and a 4-year-old, and a lot of
other parents of young children are nervous about this. Can you
just give me a real quick answer, as to parents of young kids,
is there anything people should be doing at this point or
should be concerned about?
Dr. Redfield. I want to echo what the Secretary said. Right
now, the risk to the American public is low, and we would argue
that they go on with their life. Our containment strategy has
been quite successful.
But that said, what was said also is that, in light of what
has happened in the Republic of Korea and Italy and Iran and
Japan and we have seen how fast this virus can move, we are
encouraging people, again, to just think about being prepared.
Mr. Kennedy. OK.
Part of being prepared is trying to make sure that there is
as much and as clear communication as to what we are
confronting and how the government is structured to be ready
for this and to meet this challenge.
I do think, obviously, as some of my colleagues have noted,
that, despite calls to strengthen our country's pandemic
preparedness, this administration did dismantle the Federal
Government's pandemic response chain of command, including
leadership structure at the White House through the National
Security Council's global health security unit.
So when you flash-forward to this year and the coronavirus
starts spreading throughout the world, there have been reports
of this task force--and, Mr. Secretary, you indicated that you
are, in fact, the head of it. I would ask just, if you can, to
the greatest extent possible, communicate what that structure
looks like so that people can have some understanding as to
what is backing that up. You don't have to do it now, but just
as you can. Just to get that information out would be helpful
to all of us.
So, moving on a bit, though, to try to make sure that there
is not just a structure put in place but that communication is,
in fact, clear, Mr. Secretary, I would take a bit of an issue
with the fact that the message is consistent. I think the
message from you all up here on this panel, so far has been
pretty consistent. I do have an ABC News story here that I am
going to enter for the record which quotes the President as
saying that it is, quote, ``a problem that's going to go
away,'' end quote.
The President is also quoted as saying, quote, ``The virus
we're talking about having to do, you know, a lot of people
think it goes away in April with the heat, as the heat comes
in. Typically that will go away in April. We are in great shape
though,'' end quote.
Dr. Fauci, does this go away in April with the heat?
Dr. Fauci. The history of respiratory viruses such as
influenza and other coronavirus viruses tends to diminish and
almost disappear as you get into the summer. That is just
something that happens. Every year, we see that with influenza.
However--underline ``however''--this is a new virus, so we
don't know what this virus is going to do. If it acts like
influenza, the heat will actually make it diminish in its
impact. But we have no way of knowing how it is going to act.
Mr. Kennedy. And I would say that there are different
temperature gradients across this country by April. Fair
enough?
Dr. Fauci. Correct. And also in different hemispheres,
because when we are having cold weather, others are having
warm, and vice versa.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you.
He has also stated that we are, quote, ``very close to a
vaccine,'' end quote. But, Doctor, you just laid out that,
best-case scenario, we are still 12 to 18 months away roughly.
Is that right?
Dr. Fauci. Correct.
Mr. Kennedy. He said--congressional staff briefed folks
yesterday in a press conference. Said, quote, ``It's not a
question of if but rather a question of when and how many
people in this country will have severe illness.'' Almost at
the exact same time, the President was saying that, quote,
``it's going work out fine,'' end quote, ``a problem that's
going to go away.''
Dr. Redfield, does the CDC agree that this is a problem
that is going to go away without intervention?
Dr. Redfield. I think it is important to recognize that,
from time to time, new pathogens come from animals and get into
the human species. Clearly, this is one of those times when we
have a new respiratory pathogen that has come into the human
species. And I think it is prudent to assume that this pathogen
will be with us for some time to come.
Mr. Kennedy. Dr. Kadlec?
Dr. Redfield. And as----
Mr. Kennedy. Dr. Kadlec?
Dr. Redfield. [continue]. Tony said, we don't know the
cycle of it. We don't know how it is going to--if it is going
to be impacted by humidity and heat. But I think we should
assume that this virus is going to be a virus that we are going
to be challenged with, similar to the other viruses that we
have that are respiratory.
Mr. Kennedy. Doctor, thank you.
I have ten seconds left. For the rest of the panel, ``yes''
or ``no,'' agree with Dr. Redfield?
Mr. Kadlec?
Dr. Kadlec. I support Dr. Redfield's view.
Mr. Kennedy. Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Azar. The President is expressing confidence that
this team, the public health infrastructure in this country,
State and local, that we can deal with this. We will prepare
for this. We will work together on this. He is trying to calm
the public.
We see in China that panic can be as big of an enemy as the
virus in these situations. And so there is always that
balance----
Mr. Kennedy. Mr. Secretary, I don't want to panic over this
either. The stock market is crashing. He is trying to stop the
stock market. He is not trying--he is outright contradicting
everything that you all have just said. Outright contradiction.
Secretary Azar. I think he is expressing confidence in----
Mr. Kennedy. With no medical basis for it. That is what you
have just expressed to us. Come on, sir.
Secretary Azar. Well, no. He is expressing that the
American people need to take a breath here, that there is no
change to anyone's daily life from this, that the country has a
plan, we have pandemic plans, there is a playbook for this, and
we are executing against that. But we have to be realistic,
also, and transparent that we will have more cases----
Mr. Kennedy. And, sir, as head of HHS, do you agree with
the President's statement, as I quoted, ``The virus that we're
talking about having to do, you know, that it will go away with
the heat''?
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman's time has expired.
Do you want to answer that quickly?
Secretary Azar. No.
Ms. Eshoo. No. I didn't think so. You are doing a great job
for the President, Mr. Secretary.
It is a pleasure to recognize the gentlewoman from Indiana,
Mrs. Brooks, for her time.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And thank you all so very, very much for being here and for
your work day-in and day-out on behalf of not only our country
but on behalf of the world.
And I would like to remind my colleagues that in November
of 2019 the United States of America was ranked number one in
global health security. The Global Health Security Index,
conducted by Johns Hopkins, of 195 countries, we are leading
the world.
Now, that doesn't mean that we can't always continue to
improve. And that is what PAHPA, which was passed, signed into
law in June, did. It actually took care--it focused on
vulnerable populations, like children, like the elderly. We
added a lot of new things to that.
One of the things, though, that I am concerned about is the
flexibility of the funding and whether or not--we introduced an
Infectious Disease Rapid Response Reserve Fund. Eighty-five
million was put into that fund. We have $705 million in a
Strategic National Stockpile fund. We have all of these.
How much flexibility is there? Or do we need to give you
more authority, Mr. Secretary, very quickly, to have more
flexibility to be able to not focus on Congress having to do
supplementals all the time? How much more flexibility do you
need?
Secretary Azar. Well, the Infectious Disease Rapid Response
Fund has been critical for us. The flexibilities in the
Strategic National Stockpile, is critical to us. The emergency
supplemental, is the most flexibility that you could give us
there; as we deal with the situation as it evolves, we would
appreciate that also.
The challenge with setting up long-term funding mechanisms
that are indefinite is they can become slush funds for any
other priority, as opposed to concrete, real public health
emergencies. I think that has always been the challenge.
Mrs. Brooks. And if you find that you need more funding for
any of these funds, will you come back and ask for more
funding?
Secretary Azar. Absolutely. And I want to emphasize, the
2.5 is at least 2.5. It is for 2020 only. And we will come back
if we need more. And we will work with Congress if Congress
wishes to give more.
Mrs. Brooks. Dr. Kadlec, with respect to the Strategic
National Stockpile, which I believe you oversee in conjunction
with the CDC--is that correct?
Dr. Kadlec. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Brooks. What is the status of our Strategic National
Stockpile?
Dr. Kadlec. Well----
Mrs. Brooks. Can you quickly say what those are?
Dr. Kadlec. Sure. It is a variety of countermeasures that
deal with chemical, biological, radio, and nuclear
capabilities, as well as for pandemic influenza. We have a
supply of personal protective equipment that we have on hand.
We have sent out a solicitation to get more, but the answer is,
we have a whole range of things that----
Mrs. Brooks. And these are at undisclosed locations----
Dr. Kadlec. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Brooks [continue]. Throughout the country, are they
not?
Dr. Kadlec. That is correct.
Mrs. Brooks. And, at this point, is the Strategic National
Stockpile sufficiently funded?
Dr. Kadlec. Ma'am, I think the thing is, at this point in
time, in light of what the requirements are, we have been
given, at least in terms of what is in the supplemental
request, another $400 million, that would be a great benefit to
help us address any kind of shortfalls for this event.
Mrs. Brooks. Last week, when I was home, I learned from a
local public health official in Indiana that an individual from
this county had traveled from China and, interestingly enough,
had come through the Chicago airport. And the Chicago airport
officials notified this public health official, said this
person is coming home to quarantine, and she appeared at this
individual's home within 24 hours of that person coming through
the Chicago airport.
I thought that was awesome. It was excellent that that kind
of coordination happened. How did that happen? And is that
happening all across the country?
And this individual is going to cooperate with the local
health official, and provide their temperatures for a couple of
weeks. Is this happening all across the country?
Dr. Redfield. Yes.
Mrs. Brooks. And who at the airports is notifying local
health officials?
Dr. Redfield. So what happened, when the original travel
restrictions were put in for China and Hubei, if you were
coming into the United States, an American citizen or a family
member or a permanent resident, on Hubei, you were required to
go into 14 days of quarantine. That quarantine could either
have been institutional or that quarantine could have been in
your home, working with the health departments. And that is
really how we have operationalized.
But if you had been from China, the requirement was that,
when you came through; you were screened. You were given an
education card, provided that you had no symptoms, telling you
about the risk and what the symptoms are and the contact
information with your local health department. And you, in
conjunction with your local health department, were going into
what we called voluntary monitoring and isolation.
And that woman that you gave the example of did exactly as
we instructed and they were instructed as they went through
Chicago O'Hare Airport.
Mrs. Brooks. And so, actually, it was my local public
health official that was incredibly impressed that she had
received this information. The young man and his family are
monitoring.
Madam Chairwoman, I would like to enter into the record--
CSIS produced a report in November of 2019 about U.S. global
health security, making sure we are ending the cycle, with a
number of recommendations. You and I serve on that commission.
I would ask that that be entered into the record.
Ms. Eshoo. So ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mrs. Brooks. With that, I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Ruiz, is recognized for
4 minutes.
And for those that are left, there is an agreement that it
is 4 minutes because the panel is getting nervous about time.
So let's honor that, OK? Thank you.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you for being here today.
I want to discuss a very important issue for local agencies
and that I know many other members are hearing as well, and
that is funding and reimbursement for moneys that our counties
and public health departments have spent up front to help fight
the spread of the coronavirus.
I am a disaster-trained emergency physician, and public
health expert. And in disaster or epidemic preparedness, rapid
reimbursement is a matter of readiness capacity.
I think we can all agree that a lot is being asked from the
public health infrastructure in our States. They are stepping
up. They are coordinating. They are doing the right thing.
On January 29, a flight carrying 195 Americans from Wuhan,
China, was diverted to March Air Reserve Base in Riverside
County, the county that my district is in. Riverside County
responded efficiently and was effective in monitoring and
quarantining all of these passengers for 14 days.
Over 40 county officials worked on this project. In
addition, the county supplied food, transportation, quarantine
supplies, screening, housing, a mobile health clinic, emergency
management standby, and support services for ambulances. All
told, these efforts are estimated at a little over $1.3
million.
And while that flight quarantine is over, the broader
response continues in Riverside and in communities across the
country. So receiving rapid reimbursement is critical to
capacity readiness in the future. If you drain resources
without replenishing them, you won't have necessary resources
to fight this public health crisis, such as bedside
diagnostics, personnel, and masks, just to name a few, and also
having the resources to create preparedness plans, quarantine
plans, et cetera, in the case of rapid transmission of this
virus in the future.
So I want to ask a question. Dr. Redfield, what are the
funds that are available to reimburse State and local officials
for their efforts in responding to coronavirus?
Dr. Redfield. I will defer some of this to the Secretary,
but I think he said, in the supplemental, a substantial
portion----
Mr. Ruiz. OK. So you are telling me--the last time we
spoke, you identified--somebody in your staff mentioned a few.
Now you are saying those funds don't exist; we need to pass the
supplemental to reimburse counties. Is that what I am hearing
from you?
Secretary Azar. So we have the FEP, which funds California
at $41 million a year, but the supplemental has requested $757
million from CDC----
Mr. Ruiz. OK. So which funds----
Secretary Azar [continue]. Which would have in that the
State and local funding----
Mr. Ruiz. OK. Are there funds right now that counties can
apply for?
Secretary Azar. No, there are not. That is what the
emergency----
Mr. Ruiz. There are no funds?
Secretary Azar. No additional to the emergency----
Mr. Ruiz. OK.
Secretary Azar [continue]. Funds that they get each year
for these activities.
Mr. Ruiz. All right.
Secretary Azar. That is what the supp is for.
Mr. Ruiz. Well, we are definitely----
Secretary Azar. We agree.
Mr. Ruiz [continue]. Going to work on that. And that is an
issue, right? Because we were under the impression that there
were. And rapid reimbursement is a matter of readiness
capacity. If we don't rapidly reimburse, our local agencies
will not be ready to deal with a potential rapid spread of the
virus.
Dr. Kadlec and Dr. Redfield, yes or no, can we get a
commitment from you both here today that you will reimburse
these expenses by local municipalities for the costs associated
with containing the spread of the coronavirus?
Dr. Redfield. Well, we are clearly going to work to see how
to get that done.
Mr. Ruiz. OK. So that is not a commitment.
Dr. Kadlec?
Mr. Kadlec. I think the thing is, we are committed to
basically work with you to do that.
Mr. Ruiz. OK. Well, we need to reimburse because,
especially in rural areas, where they don't have the resources,
they don't have the hospitals, the quarantine spaces, the
ability to get the supplies over to those areas, you are
putting them in vulnerable situations if you don't respond.
Dr. Redfield, since 2008, local and State health
departments have lost nearly a quarter of their workforce. Does
this affect our Nation's ability to mount and sustain a
response?
Dr. Redfield. I think it is one of the key core
capabilities that we need to continue to improve for our public
health ability--that is, the data modernization, which you all
have helped with last year; the laboratory capacity, to build
it and keep it fluid, as you see with the current diagnostic
test; and the third, most important one----
Mr. Ruiz. Yes. Listen.
Dr. Redfield [continue]. Is the workforce.
Mr. Ruiz. Work within a team.
Dr. Redfield. We need to build that workforce.
Mr. Ruiz. Be consistent. No discrepancy. Discrepancy breeds
anxiety. That brings panic. OK?
All right.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman's time has expired.
I wanted to get a commitment so that these agencies don't
lose the money that they are losing. You are asking them to
promise you even beyond where the cuts are. So I would be happy
if that could happen, but the Congress has a job to do to
restore the money in these agencies.
These cuts are really shameful. They really are. And when
we have such premier agencies, people at the top that know what
they are doing, and they are being cut, and the Secretary is
telling us, ``Well, we did $1.5 billion; everything is going to
be fine,'' I don't think so.
Dr. Bucshon from Indiana.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes, thanks for the 5 minutes. I appreciate
it. No, 4 minutes. I am just kidding.
Ms. Eshoo. Four minutes.
Mr. Bucshon. I mean, in reference to the funding, I just
want to--I mean, the Congress provides funding for the
agencies, and a the budget proposal is a budget proposal, no
matter which President it comes from. So I am not too worried
that this Congress won't provide the appropriate level of
funding.
And I understand also that additional funding--if we could
quickly bring up the supplemental and pass that, that clearly,
in my opinion, it would help if Secretary Azar and all the
people at this table do their job and get money to everybody.
The other thing is I just want to comment briefly on the
criticism of the President and what he has said. If the
President of the United States comes out and incites a panic in
the United States; it incites a worldwide panic. And I see the
role of the President as different than mine or Secretary
Azar's or others. And even though, you know, the President says
what he says, I do think having a calming effect in a situation
like this is appropriate, and allow the professionals behind
the scenes to do their jobs.
I just wanted to say that. And----
Secretary Azar. And if I could, I agree entirely. I think
the President's role has been actually critical in keeping the
country calm in this situation. He has expressed the levels of
doubt and uncertainty with his words that we have but also
tried to be reassuring to the American public as we also try to
be transparent about what the risks are coming forward.
We all have different roles to play here, as you said, and
the President is a very important one, guiding towards balance,
maturity, and calm in addressing a public health emergency.
Mr. Bucshon. I would agree. I mean, if the President came
out and incited a panic; he would be criticized for that.
So I guess, you know, we had this unprecedented containment
strategy when things were in China. Now that we know we have
had problems with person-to-person transmission in Italy and
South Korea and maybe other places, does that change our
current containment strategy?
And, Dr. Redfield, maybe you can address that.
Dr. Redfield. Yes. I would say first that we are
maintaining aggressive containment. I want to say that, of all
the strategies we have used in this multilayer strategy, the
most important one we have is an astute medical and public
health community in the United States. Of those 14 cases
originally that were diagnosed, only one was picked up by the
screening.
So we are now moving, obviously, to educate the American
Medical and public health community that it is not just China;
we have to worry about now; we have to worry about certain
places of Italy and Iran and whether it is the Republic of
Korea. So we are continuing with that.
And we are continuing to look at our travel alerts. You
know, we have put the travel alert to Level 3 now for Korea and
Level 2 now for Italy, Iran, and Japan, trying to let the
American public know this may not be the time to go to those
areas.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. Great.
And, again, for you, Secretary Azar, do you have anything
to add to that? OK.
Again, Dr. Redfield, as far as the testing goes, the CDC,
12 other public health laboratories have the testing, but I
guess they had some difficulty with the third reagent in the
test. And can you further explain the problems with the test?
And have those problems been resolved?
Dr. Redfield. So, first, the test really measured three
different--let's just say, three different nucleic acid pieces.
And one of them had a control; the third one had a control.
And, in that control, there was low-level contamination.
There was never any question about whether the test could
tell positive----
Mr. Bucshon. OK.
Dr. Redfield [continue]. Or negative. It just had a group
of individuals that we had to say we didn't know.
Mr. Bucshon. OK.
Dr. Redfield. Those samples, again, were at CDC. CDC has
continued, we have doubled--I found out we are at 350 to 500
samples a day, when the question was asked earlier, that we are
running right now.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. So the problem has been resolved,
basically?
Dr. Redfield. The problem is being resolved. We work with--
--
Mr. Bucshon. OK.
Dr. Redfield [continue]. The FDA. And we have a fix that is
supposed to be operationalized this week.
Mr. Bucshon. One other quick thing. Have you guys conducted
disease modeling for a potential COVID-19 outbreak in the U.S.?
Dr. Redfield. We do have modeling groups. It is a global
modeling group that is looking at a variety of different
models. And that is in process. As Tony said earlier, there is
still a number of things we don't quite know about this virus
to make those models available for prime time, but we are
working it.
Mr. Bucshon. You are working on it. OK. Thank you very
much.
I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
I think that concludes the questions that we have for you
today. Thank you to each one of you.
Mr. Secretary, you have been here for many hours, and, you
know, throw a punch, take a punch, right? But we are all here
for our fellow Americans--for our fellow Americans.
And I think if there is anything that has come out of this
today, we want facts. We want to bring the temperature down. We
want to bring the fear factor down. And anything and everything
that you can do in order to achieve that, as we move on with
Dr. Fauci's work, with larger distribution of the diagnostics
through the CDC in partnership with what we have across our
country, is going to go a long way.
So thank you to each one of you.
I am not going to adjourn. You can get up and leave while I
read a very long record of items that need to be placed into--
--
Secretary Azar. Thank you, Chairwoman.
Ms. Eshoo [continue]. The record.
Thank you. God bless you and your work on behalf of the
American people. Thank you.
All right. I am going to request--I have a unanimous
consent request to enter the following documents into the
record:a June 28 letter from four House committees to HHS and
CMS regarding the case Texas v. The United States; a December
2018 letter from four House committees to HHS and CMS regarding
the case Texas v. The United States; an April 2019 letter from
five House committees to HHS and CMS regarding the case Texas
v. The United States; a February 2020 letter from HHS in
response to the April 2019 joint letter from five House
committees regarding the case Texas v. The United States.
The committee actually is still in order. I wanted the
witnesses to be able to leave, but if anyone wants to gab, take
it into the side room so that I can read these into the record,
please.
A February 2020 letter from HHS in response to the April
2019 joint letter from five House committees regarding the case
Texas v. The United States; an October 2019 Washington Post
article entitled ``Trump Campaign Urges White House to Soften
Proposed Flavored Vape Ban,'' unquote; an October 2019
bicameral letter to HHS from two congressional committees
regarding the increased number of uninsured children in the
United States; June 2019 letter from the Energy and Commerce
Committee examining HHS's administration of the Medicaid
program; a statement from Johnson & Johnson regarding the
company's response to the coronavirus outbreak; a statement
from the American Society for Microbiology regarding the
coronavirus outbreak; a February 2020 article from BioCentury
entitled, quote, ``Biopharma Industry, Academics Push Back
Against Demands for Price Controls on COVID-19
Countermeasures,'' unquote; a January 2020 Wall Street Journal
opinion piece entitled, quote, ``Pharma to the Rescue,''
unquote.
Are there any objections?
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Eshoo. And the subcommittee will now adjourn. Thank
you, everyone.
[Whereupon, at 5:19 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
