- LIFTING VOICES: LEGISLATION TO PROMOTE MEDIA MARKETPLACE DIVERSITY

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LIFTING VOICES: LEGISLATION TO PROMOTE
MEDIA MARKETPLACE DIVERSITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND
TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 15, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-90

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-044 PDF                   WASHINGTON: 2023
___________________________________________________________________________

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              GREG WALDEN, Oregon
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York             FRED UPTON, Michigan
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           PETE OLSON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California           DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico            H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PAUL TONKO, New York                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York, Vice     BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chair                            BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa                 LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts                    MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California            RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California                TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DARREN SOTO, Florida
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
------

Professional Staff

JEFFREY C. CARROLL, Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Deputy Staff Director
MIKE BLOOMQUIST, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology

MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Chairman
JERRY McNERNEY, California           ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York             Ranking Member
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa                 JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         PETE OLSON, Texas
DARREN SOTO, Florida                 ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona              GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
ANNA G. ESHOO, California            BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              BILLY LONG, Missouri
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    BILL FLORES, Texas
DORIS O. MATSUI, California, Vice    SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Chair                            TIM WALBERG, Michigan
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico            GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
TONY CARDENAS, California
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Mike Doyle, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Robert E. Latta, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Ohio, prepared statement....................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, prepared statement..............................    83

Witnesses

Clint Odom, Senior Vice President, Advocacy and Policy, and
Executive Director, Washington Bureau, National Urban League...    10
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Catherine J. K. Sandoval, Associate Professor, Santa Clara
University School of Law.......................................    17
Prepared statement...........................................    19
Maurita Coley, President and CEO of Multicultural Media, Telecom
and Internet Council...........................................    40
Prepared statement...........................................    42
Diane Sutter, President and CEO of ShootingStar Broadcasting,
National Association of Broadcasters...........................    47
Prepared statement...........................................    49

Submitted Material

H.R. 549, Reaffirming the commitment to media diversity and
pledging to work with media entities and diverse stakeholders
to develop common ground solutions to eliminate barriers to
media diversity................................................    85
H.R. 3957, Expanding Broadcast Ownership Opportunities Act of
2019...........................................................    88
H.R. 5564, Enhancing Broadcaster Diversity Data Act..............   100
H.R. 5567, the MEDIA Diversity Act of 2020.......................   105
Letter of January 15, 2020, by Vanita Gupta, President and CEO,
Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights, to Mr.
Pallone, et al., submitted by Mr. Doyle........................   107
Letter of January 14, 2020, by Mike Gravino, Director, from the
LPTV Spectrum Rights Coalition, to Mr. Pallone, et al.,
submitted by Mr. Doyle.........................................   112
Letter of January 14, 2020, from Brenda Victoria Castillo,
President and CEO, National Hispanic Media Coalition, to Mr.
Doyle, et al., submitted by Mr. Doyle..........................   114
Letter of January 14, 2020, by Bertram Lee and Jenna Leventoff,
Public Knowledge, to Mr. Pallone, et al., submitted by Mr.
Doyle..........................................................   120
Survey of 2019 National Association for Mullti-Ethnicity in
Communications and Women in Cable Telecommunications Diversity,
by the Walter Kaitz Foundation, submitted by Mr. Doyle \1\
Statement ``Multicultural Media, Telecom and Internet Council,
Multicultural Media, Telecom, and Internet Council Supports
Congressman Butterfield's `Expanding Broadcast Opportunities
Act' to Restore the FCC's Tax Certificate Policy and Expand the
Broadcast Incubator Program,'' submitted by Mr. Doyle..........   122
Letter of September 3, 2019, by Maurita Coley, President and CEO,
et al., Multicultural Media, Telecom and Internet Council,
Multicultural Media, Telecom, and Internet Council, to Rosemary
Harold, submitted by Mr. Doyle.................................   123
Letter of December 11, 2019, by David Honig, President Emeritus
and Senior Advisor Multicultural Media, Telecom and Internet
Council, to Hon. Pai, et al., submitted by Mr. Doyle \2\
Review of September 20, 2019, from the EEO Supporters, to the
Commission, submitted by Mr. Doyle \3\
Review of November 4, 2019, from David Honig, President Emeritus
and Senior Advisor, Multicultural Media, Telecom and Internet
Council Conveners, EEO Supporters, to the Federal
Communications Commission, submitted by Mr. Doyle..............   130
Report ``Changes, Challenges and Charting New Courses: Minority
Commercial Broadcast Ownership in the United States,''
submitted by Mr. Doyle \4\
Article ``How the FCC Suppressed Minority Broadcast Ownership,
and How the FCC can Undo the Damage it Caused'' by David Honig,
submitted by Mr. Doyle \5\
Remarks, by Chairman Ajit Pai at MMTC's 9th Annual Broadband and
Social Justice Summit, submitted by Mr. Doyle..................   139

----------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF16/
20200115/110373/HHRG-116-IF16-20200115-SD007.pdf.
\2\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF16/
20200115/110373/HHRG-116-IF16-20200115-SD010.pdf.
\3\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF16/
20200115/110373/HHRG-116-IF16-20200115-SD011.pdf.
\4\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF16/
20200115/110373/HHRG-116-IF16-20200115-SD013.pdf.
\5\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF16/
20200115/110373/HHRG-116-IF16-20200115-SD014.pdf.

LIFTING VOICES: LEGISLATION TO PROMOTE MEDIA MARKETPLACE DIVERSITY

----------

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 15, 2020

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m., in
room 2322 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mike Doyle
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Doyle, McNerney, Clarke,
Loebsack, Veasey, Soto, O'Halleran, DeGette, Butterfield,
Schrader, Cardenas, Pallone (ex officio), Latta (subcommittee
ranking member), Bilirakis, Johnson, Long, Flores, Brooks,
Walberg, Gianforte, and Walden (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Rush.
Staff present: A. J. Brown, Counsel; Jeffrey C. Carroll,
Staff Director; Parul Desai, FCC Detailee; Jennifer Epperson,
Counsel; Evan Gilbert, Deputy Press Secretary; Waverly Gordon,
Deputy Chief Counsel; Alex Hoehn-Saric, Chief Counsel,
Communications and Consumer Protection; Jerry Leverich, Senior
Counsel; Dan Miller, Senior Policy Analyst; Phil Murphy, Policy
Coordinator; Alivia Roberts, Press Assistant; Tim Robinson,
Chief Counsel; Rebecca Tomilchik, Staff Assistant; Mike
Bloomquist, Minority Staff Director; William Clutterbuck,
Minority Staff Assistant; Jordan Davis, Minority Senior
Advisor; Michael Engel, Minority Detailee, Communications and
Technology; Peter Kielty, Minority General Counsel; Ryan Long,
Minority Deputy Staff Director; Kate O'Connor, Minority Chief
Counsel, Communications and Technology; Brannon Rains, Minority
Staff Assistant; and Evan Viau, Minority Professional Staff,
Communications and Technology.
Mr. Doyle. The committee will now come to order. The Chair
recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE DOYLE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Well, good morning, everyone, and welcome to the
Subcommittee on Communication and Technology's legislative
hearing on Lifting Voices: Legislation to Promote Media
Marketplace Diversity.
I would like to thank our witnesses for appearing before
the subcommittee today.
Today, we will discuss four pieces of legislation that seek
to address a fundamental shortfall in our nation's media
landscape: the lack of female and minority employment in and
ownership of traditional media distribution outlets.
In the United States, women and people of color own less
than ten percent of all commercial radio and TV stations. We
know that media outlets reflect the values and priorities of
their owners and their employees. So, it is critical that we
find ways to make these distribution channels more reflective
of our country's racial and demographic makeup so that our
media may effectively serve the needs of the diverse
communities that make up our nation.
Studies have shown that broadcast television and radio
continue to be crucial sources of news, public safety
information, and entertainment for everyone, but especially so
for minority communities. It is critical that these outlets
provide a diverse array of local voices that speak to the needs
of the communities they serve and that is where these
statistics about female and minority ownership are telling us
that we are coming up short. That is one reason I am happy that
we will be considering H.R. 3957, the Expanding Broadcast
Ownership Opportunities Act, introduced by Mr. Butterfield.
Mr. Doyle. This legislation would reinstate the Tax
Certificate Program for socially disadvantaged individuals at
the FCC. This program would incentivize sales of broadcast TV
and radio station to women and people of color.
We will also consider H. Res. 549 introduced by Ms.
Demings.
Mr. Doyle. This resolution affirms the commitment of the
House to media diversity and pledges that Congress will work
with media entities and diverse stakeholders to develop common
ground solutions to eliminate barriers to media diversity.
Next, we will consider H.R. 5564, the Enhancing Broadcaster
DIVERSITY Data Act, introduced by Ms. Clarke, which would
require the FCC to complete its rulemaking reviewing the Equal
Employment Opportunity rules.
Mr. Doyle. The bill also requires the FCC to create a
public, searchable database of the broadcast ownership data
collected by the FCC.
And finally, we will discuss H.R. 5567, the MEDIA Diversity
Act, introduced by Mr. Long and Mr. Veasey, which would require
the FCC to consider, with the input of its Office of
Communication Business Opportunities of the Commission, market
entry barriers for socially disadvantaged individuals in the
communications marketplace.
Mr. Doyle. So, I look forward to the discussion on the
legislation before us today and I wish to yield the balance of
time to my good friend and a true leader on these issues, Mr.
Butterfield.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Doyle follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Mike Doyle

Good morning, and welcome to the Subcommittee on
Communication and Technology's legislative hearing on ``Lifting
Voices: Legislation to Promote Media Marketplace Diversity.''
I'd like to thank our witnesses for appearing before the
Subcommittee.
Today, we will discuss four pieces of legislation that seek
to address a fundamental shortfall in our nation's media
landscape--the lack of female and minority employment in and
ownership of traditional media distribution outlets.
In the United States, women and people of color own less
than ten percent of all commercial radio and television
stations.
We know that media outlets reflect the values and
priorities of their owners and their employees.
It's critical that we find ways to make these distribution
channels more reflective of our country's racial and
demographic makeup so that our media may effectively serve the
needs of the diverse communities that make up our nation.
Studies have shown that broadcast television and radio
continue to be crucial sources of news, public safety
information, and entertainment for everyone, but in particular
minority communities.
It is critical that these outlets provide a diverse array
of local voices that speak to the needs of the communities they
serve, and that's where these statistics about female and
minority ownership are telling us we are coming up short.
That's one reason I'm happy that we will be considering
H.R. 3957, the "Expanding Broadcast Ownership Opportunities
Act" introduced by Mr. Butterfield.
This legislation would reinstate the tax certificate
program for socially disadvantaged individuals at the FCC.
This program would incentivize sales of broadcast TV and
radio stations to women and people of color.
We will also consider H. Res. 549, introduced by Ms.
Demings.
This resolution affirms the commitment of the House to
media diversity and pledges that Congress will work with media
entities and diverse stakeholders to develop common ground
solutions to eliminate barriers to media diversity.
Next, we will consider H.R. 5564, the ``Enhancing
Broadcaster DIVERSITY Data Act'' introduced by Ms. Clarke,
which would require the FCC to complete its rulemaking
reviewing the equal employment opportunity rules.
The bill also requires the FCC to create a public,
searchable database of the broadcast ownership data collected
by the FCC.
Finally, we will discuss H.R. 5567, the ``MEDIA Diversity
Act'' introduced by Mr. Long and Mr. Veasey, which would
require the FCC to consider, with the input of its Office of
Communications Business Opportunities of the Commission, market
entry barriers for socially disadvantaged individuals in the
communications marketplace.
I look forward to the discussion on the legislation before
us today.

I yield the balance of my time to my good friend and a true
leader on these issues, Mr. Butterfield.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much, Chairman Doyle, and
to you, Chairman Pallone. Thank you very much for your
willingness to put this up for a hearing today. We have been
talking about it for several months now and you promised me a
hearing and, today, you have made it happen. So, thank you so
very much.
Historically, Mr. Chairman, the number of minority- and
women-owned commercial broadcast stations has been abysmally
low, never rising above three and six percent, respectively.
This lack of racial and gender diversity in ownership stems
directly from past discriminatory barriers designed to exclude
certain groups from the market. The FCC, itself, routinely
discriminated against qualified African Americans, refusing to
grant its first broadcast license to an applicant of color
until 1949, decades after the first license was issued. Such
obstacles have frustrated the ability of women and minorities
to access the information, resources, and capital needed to
purchase broadcast stations.
In 1978, the Commission established the Minority Tax
Certificate Program, providing a tax incentive to those who
sold their stations to minorities. While in existence, the
certificate boosted ownership exponentially, raising the number
of minority stations from 48 to 323. It is time for Congress,
and I hope in a bipartisan manner, to do its part to ensure
that women and minorities have equal access to the ownership
market.
That is why I introduced 3957. The bill would reinstate and
expand the Tax Certificate Program at the FCC and increase the
Commission's ownership reporting requirements. I believe that
these actions, along with the other bills we considered here
today, are important first steps toward a truly equitable media
marketplace.
I thank the witnesses for their testimony today. I thank my
friends on both sides of the aisle for embracing this
legislation and I look forward for it to having a good markup,
passing the House, passing the Senate, and being signed by the
President.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman yields back and I yield back my
time.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Latta, the ranking member, for
5 minutes for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT E. LATTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

Mr. Latta. Well, thanks, Mr. Chairman, and good morning,
and welcome to our first hearing of the New Year.
I would like to start by thanking my Democratic colleagues
for continuing to work with us last year to complete many of
the bipartisan priorities that began under the leadership of
the committee Republicans. Our multi-Congress effort is now
close to bearing fruit on issues like broadband mapping and
supply chain security. We will continue to push these measures
forward.
But for now, I want to thank my friends across the aisle
for committing to hold today's hearing in that same bipartisan
spirit.
I also wanted to note that, during our majority, we tended
to have educational hearings dedicated to understanding the
issues we sought to legislate. Although we are moving straight
to a legislative hearing today, I appreciate my colleagues
reaching across the aisle to hold a hearing on such an
important topic as we have today, just before the Martin Luther
King holiday.
Traditionally, discussions on Capitol Hill and over at the
Federal Communications Commission about the media marketplace
have focused on the examination of media ownership rules. And I
know, Mr. Chairman, we may have differing views on that topic
but, today, we are here to discuss ideas on how we can promote
diversity in the media marketplace, a goal all of us share on
this dais.
The FCC regulates broadcast stations with the goal of
promoting a diversity of voices that best serve the public
interest. Therefore, in an ever-changing media marketplace, it
is essential that the FCC consistently take a look at how its
rules and regulations reflect the media landscape and see if
they continue to promote diversity. That is why I am pleased to
be considering legislation today from Representative Billy
Long, H.R. 5567, the MEDIA Diversity Act that requires the FCC
to collect information that considers market entry barriers for
socially disadvantaged individuals in the communications
marketplace.
Although the ideas and concepts presented at today's
hearings are not an exhaustive list, they represent a good
first step toward considering how to increase opportunities and
lift the voices of under-represented groups in media.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the
broadcasters and MVPDs for taking numerous voluntary steps to
promote viewpoint, ownership, and employment diversity. Many
have established programs to hire and promote women, people of
color, and veterans into executive leadership positions or
programs to encourage local journalism that reflects the
communities these media entities serve.
I know broadcasters and MVPDs are taking big strides to
ensure the news and entertainment they produce reflect the
interest of people in the communities they serve. Despite these
steps forward, more work must be done.
I welcome today's testimony and looking forward to hearing
any additional ideas the panelists or others may have on how we
may better promote media diversity without a heavy hand of
owners' regulation on media entities.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Latta follow:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Robert E. Latta

Good morning, and welcome to our first hearing of the new
year. I would like to start by thanking my Democratic
colleagues for continuing to work with us last year to complete
many of the bipartisan priorities that began under the
leadership of Committee Republicans. Our multi-Congress effort
is now close to bearing fruit on issues like broadband mapping
and supply chain security. We will continue to push these
measures forward but for now, I want to thank my friends across
the aisle for committing to hold today's hearing in that same
bipartisan spirit. I also want to note that during our
majority, we tended to have educational hearings dedicated to
understanding the issues we sought to legislate. Although we
are moving straight to a legislative hearing today, I
appreciate my colleagues' reaching across the aisle to hold a
hearing on such an important and timely topic, with the Martin
Luther King Junior holiday just around the corner.
Traditionally, discussions on Capitol Hill and over at the
Federal Communications Commission about the media marketplace
have focused on the examination of Media Ownership rules; and I
know, Mr. Chairman, we may have differing views on that topic.
But today, we are here to discuss ideas on how we can promote
diversity in the media marketplace-a goal all of us on this
dais share. The FCC regulates broadcast stations with the goal
of promoting a diversity of voices that best serve the public
interest. Therefore, in an ever-changing media marketplace, it
is essential that the FCC consistently take a look at how its
rules and regulations reflect the media landscape and see if
they continue to promote diversity. That is why I am pleased to
be considering legislation today from Representative Billy
Long, H.R. 5567, the MEDIA Diversity Act, that requires the FCC
to collect information that considers market entry barriers for
socially disadvantaged individuals in the communications
marketplace.
Although the ideas and concepts presented in today's
hearing are not an exhaustive list, they represent a good first
step toward considering how to increase opportunities and lift
the voices of underrepresented groups in media.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
broadcasters and MVPDs for taking numerous voluntary steps to
promote viewpoint, ownership, and employment diversity. Many
have established programs to hire and promote women, people of
color, and veterans into executive leadership positions, or
programs to encourage local journalism that reflects the
communities these media entities serve. I know broadcasters and
MVPDs are taking big strides to ensure the news and
entertainment they produce reflects the interests of people in
the communities they serve.
Despite these steps forward, more work must be done. I
welcome today's testimony and look forward to hearing any
additional ideas the panelists or others may have on how we may
better promote media diversity without a heavy hand of onerous
regulation on media entities.
Thank you, and I yield the balance of my time.

Mr. Doyle. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Pallone, chairman of the full
committee, for 5 minutes for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Doyle.
It is timely that we are holding this hearing today to
discuss the lack of ownership and employment diversity in the
media marketplace. Earlier this week, there was a lot of
criticism about the Academy Award nominations for lack of
diversity in the acting and directing categories. This same
criticism holds true with media ownership. I don't think anyone
can dispute that ownership of our media does not reflect the
diversity of our country.
The numbers are clear and alarming. While women and people
of color make up over 50 percent of our population, broadcast
ownership by them hovers around ten percent and we have to do
better. Representation matters because the people behind the
scenes influence the programming that we see and hear and that
programing plays a critical role in our democratic process in
influencing people's perspectives.
In the early days of broadcasting, it was virtually
impossible for women and people of color to hold media outlets.
Today, the opportunities are not impossible but they are still
very limited. Women and people of color can still face
discrimination when it comes to accessing capital and, as a
result, we are far more likely to see consolidation than
diversity when an outlet is sold.
And while I would hope large media companies would reflect
the diversity of the communities they serve, women and people
of color are, unfortunately, under-represented in their
executive suites. We also do not have any data to better
understand employment demographic trends because the FCC has
failed to collect that data for nearly 20 years, and this is
extremely unfortunate. Diverse employment is just as critical
as diverse ownership. It is the executives and producers who
influence programming decisions, which news stories to cover,
and importantly, how to cover a story.
So I am pleased that we are here today with bipartisan
efforts to improve diversity in the media marketplace.
Representative Butterfield's bill would reinstate the
successful Tax Certificate Program; Representative Clarke's
bill ensures that FCC's data is analyzed and not simply
reported; and legislation from Representatives Long and Veasey
requires the FCC to examine market entry barriers for women and
people of color. I commend these members for their leadership.
It is imperative that Congress, the FCC, and all interested
stakeholders work together to help bring more diversity to our
nation's media ownership.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

It is timely that we are holding this hearing today to
discuss the lack of ownership and employment diversity in the
media marketplace. Earlier this week, there was a lot of
criticism about the Academy Award nominations for a lack of
diversity in the acting and directing categories. This same
criticism holds true with media ownership. I do not think
anyone can dispute that ownership of our media does not reflect
the diversity of our country.
The numbers are clear--and alarming. While women and people
of color make up over fifty percent of our population,
broadcast ownership by them hovers around ten percent. We must
do better.
Representation matters because the people behind the scenes
influence the programming that we see and hear. And that
programming plays a critical role in our democratic process and
influencing people's perspectives.
In the early days of broadcasting, it was virtually
impossible for women and people of color to own media outlets.
Today, the opportunities are not impossible but are still very
limited. Women and people of color can still face
discrimination when it comes to accessing capital, and, as a
result, we are far more likely to see consolidation than
diversity when an outlet is sold.
While I would hope large media companies would reflect the
diversity of the communities they serve, women and people of
color are, unfortunately, underrepresented in their executive
suites. We also do not have any data to better understand
employment demographic trends because the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) has failed to collect that data
for nearly 20 years. This is extremely unfortunate--diverse
employment is just as critical as diverse ownership. It's the
executives and producers who influence programming decisions,
which news stories to cover, and importantly, how to cover a
story.
I am pleased that we are here today--with bipartisan
efforts--to improve diversity in the media marketplace.
Representative Butterfield's bill would reinstate the
successful tax certificate program. Representative Clarke's
bill ensures that the FCC's data is analyzed and not simply
reported. And legislation from Representatives Long and Veasey
requires the FCC to examine market entry barriers for women and
people of color.
I commend these members for their leadership. It is
imperative that Congress, the FCC, and all interested
stakeholders work together to help bring more diversity to our
nation's media ownership.

And with that, I yield the time remaining--well; I guess I
am splitting it between Representative Butterfield--what is
that?
Mr. Butterfield. Just Yvette.
The Chairman. Oh, just you? Only you? All right, I yield
then to----
Ms. Clarke. Only me.
The Chairman [continuing]. Representative Clarke, the rest
of my time.
Ms. Clarke. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank our
subcommittee chairman and our ranking member. I thank you for
yielding the time and Chairman Doyle for convening the
subcommittee hearing today promoting media marketplace
diversity.
As a co-chair of the Multicultural Media Caucus, along with
Congressman Tony Cardenas and Congresswoman Judy Chu, I am
reminded of the important role each of us plays in a larger
fight for a more diverse and inclusive future.
During my tenure in Congress, I have dedicated my time to
issues related to the state of diversity and inclusion in the
media, telecom and tech industry spaces. One of my goals is to
ensure diverse voices are being represented on and off screen,
which includes ownership in traditional media distribution
outlets.
Today, our committee will discuss legislation that seeks to
help address ownership diversity and access to capital for
women and people of color, including my bill, H.R. 5564, the
Enhancing Broadcaster DIVERSITY Data Act. This bill calls for
stronger reporting by the FCC to complete its rulemaking,
reviewing its broadcast and cable EEO rules, and to create a
searchable database of the collected data.
I want to thank my colleagues and the witnesses for being
here today to help transform our world into a more equitable
space, where a myriad of thoughts, experiences, and points of
view can be utilized to strengthen our society.
I look forward to hearing your testimony, and I thank you,
and yield back to you the balance of the time.
Mr. Doyle. Does the gentleman yield back?
Mr. Pallone. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Walden, ranking member of the full committee,
for 5 minutes for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Well, good morning and thanks to you for having
this hearing and all of our witnesses for weighing in on this
really important issue of media diversity. And while we have
traditionally talked about promoting media diversity as it
relates to the FCC's Quadrennial Review of medical ownership
regulations, today's hearing, I am told, will instead focus on
how to better understand the problem before us and how best to
incentivize all media entities to create opportunities for and
lift the voices of under-represented individuals, as the
hearing suggests.
Now I understand the efforts of the broadcast industry and
the media industry as a whole take to ensure diversity of
ownership, viewpoint, and employment. My wife and I were 50-50
co-owners of our radio stations over the course of 21 years,
probably the only one on the dais who has actually had to make
these decisions in concert with my wife, who managed the
business--decisions about hiring, decisions about programming,
how to serve the local community. We created Spanish
programming three nights a week on two of our stations that
were live and local, with lots of dedications of songs and
information to try and serve the growing Hispanic population in
my community.
So I appreciate the many steps that industry has taken to
not only recognize and take responsibility for this issue but
also the many programs and initiatives they put in place to
promote opportunities for women, for minorities, for veterans.
And I look forward to hearing from our witnesses about those in
more detail today.
I also want to mention that while this hearing is a great
step forward to evaluate steps that can be taken to promote
diversity in broadcasting, we can't solve the problem without
looking at this issue through the media marketplace itself. The
tech industry has increasingly become a prime competitor to
traditional broadcasters and multichannel video programming
distributors or MVPDs. One of the biggest problems facing the
broadcast industry is a lack of financing. And as any business
person knows, it is really difficult to create opportunities
when there is a lack of cash flow.
However, billions of dollars are being poured into creating
more content now than ever before, which provides ample
opportunity to promote diversity and programming. In addition
to the focus on creating opportunities in executive leadership
positions for minorities, women, and veterans, I am pleased to
see other industry efforts underway that provide opportunities
to diverse candidates for roles at every step of the content
creation process. And while I recognize the FCC does not have
jurisdiction over-the-top services, these services,
nonetheless, should be an element of our conversation, as we
examine voluntary efforts to promote diversity.
Where the Commission can play a role, it appears they have.
And while I won't get into the reasons about why some of this
progress has been halted by the courts, it is important that we
focus on the larger issue at hand: how to promote opportunity.
Some of the bills before us today represent an important
step forward to promoting diversity in the broadcast industry
but, as I am sure witnesses will acknowledge, we have a lot
more work to do.
So I would like to thank my colleagues for their bipartisan
work on this issue. And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance
of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Good morning, and welcome to today's hearing on promoting
media diversity. While we have traditionally talked about
promoting media diversity as it relates to the FCC's
quadrennial review of media ownership regulations, today's
hearing will instead focus on how to better understand the
problem before us and how best to incentivize all media
entities to create opportunities for and lift the voices of
underrepresented individuals, as the hearing title suggests.
I understand the efforts the broadcast industry--and the
media industry as a whole--takes to ensure diversity of
ownership, viewpoint, and employment. As a former broadcaster
and radio station owner, I believe I am the only person on this
dais who has had to make those hiring decisions for a broadcast
station. I know firsthand the business imperative to serve your
local audience with local news and programming specific to your
community, and what happens to advertising revenue when you
don't ensure a rich diversity of content.
So, I appreciate the many steps that industry has taken to
not only recognize and take responsibility for the problem, but
also the many programs and initiatives they have put in place
to promote opportunities for women, minorities, and veterans,
and I look forward to hearing from our witnesses about these
today.
I also want to mention that while this hearing is a great
step forward to evaluate steps that can be taken to promote
diversity in broadcasting, we can't solve the problem without
looking at this issue across the media marketplace. The tech
industry has increasingly become a prime competitor to
traditional broadcasters and multichannel video programming
distributors, or MVPDs. One of the biggest problems facing the
broadcast industry is a lack of financing, and as any
businessperson knows, it is difficult to create opportunities
when there is a lack of cash flow. However, billions of dollars
are being poured into creating more content now than ever
before, which provides ample opportunity to promote diversity
in programming. In addition to the focus on creating
opportunities in executive leadership positions for minorities,
women, and veterans, I'm pleased to see other industry efforts
underway that provide opportunities to diverse candidates for
roles at every step of the content creation process. While I
recognize the FCC does not have jurisdiction of over-the-top
services, these services nonetheless should be an element of
our conversation examining voluntary efforts to promote
diversity.
Where the Commission can play a role, it appears they have.
And while I won't get into the reasons about why some of this
progress has been halted by the courts, it is important that we
focus on the larger issue at hand: how to promote opportunity.
Some of the bills before us today represent an important step
forward to promote diversity in the broadcast industry but as
I'm sure our witnesses will acknowledge, more work can be done.
I would like to thank my colleagues for their bipartisan
work on this issue and I yield back.

Mr. Doyle. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair would like to remind Members that, pursuant to
committee rules, all Members' written opening statements will
be made part of the record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Doyle. So, we would like to now introduce our witnesses
for today's hearing. First, we have Mr. Clint Odom, Senior Vice
President, Advocacy and Policy, and Executive Director,
Washington Bureau, National Urban League. Welcome, Mr. Odom.
Ms. Catherine Sandoval, Associate Professor at Santa Clara
University School of Law, welcome.
Ms. Maurita Coley, President and CEO of Multicultural
Media, Telecom and Internet Council, welcome.
And last but certainly not least, Ms. Diane Sutter,
President and CEO of ShootingStar Broadcasting, and also
someone who grew up in Pittsburgh. So, you get as much time as
you would like when it is your turn to speak.
So, we want to thank all our witnesses for joining us
today. We look forward to your testimony.
At this time, the Chair will now recognize each witness for
5 minutes to provide their opening statement but, before we
begin, I want to explain our lighting system.
In front of you is a series of lights. The light will
initially be green. The light will turn yellow and, when that
light turns yellow, you have one minute to wrap up because once
that light turns red, bad things happen. But please wrap up
your testimony when the red light comes on.
Now, we will start with Mr. Odom. You are recognized for 5
minutes, sir.

STATEMENTS OF CLINT ODOM, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, ADVOCACY AND
POLICY, AND EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, WASHINGTON BUREAU, NATIONAL
URBAN LEAGUE; CATHERINE J. K. SANDOVAL, ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR AT
SANTA CLARA UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW; MAURITA COLEY, PRESIDENT
AND CEO OF MULTICULTURAL MEDIA, TELECOM AND INTERNET COUNCIL;
AND DIANE SUTTER, PRESIDENT AND CEO, SHOOTINGSTAR BROADCASTING,
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF BROADCASTERS

STATEMENT OF CLINT ODOM

Mr. Odom. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member,
Chairman Pallone, and Ranking Member Walden, and members of the
subcommittee.
I am Clint Odom, Senior Vice President in Policy and
Advocacy, as you have heard, for the National Urban League.
Since 1910, the League was established as a nonpartisan,
nonprofit civil rights organization dedicated to the economic
empowerment of African Americans and other underserved
populations. We conduct our work through a network of 90
affiliates across 36 States and the District of Columbia.
I am here today to share our perspectives on proposed
legislation and policies to advance the critical goal of media
diversity. Before my current role, I served in the United
States Senate as a staffer and as a senior staffer in the
Federal Communications Commission. I now have the privilege of
serving on the FCC's Advisory Committee on Diversity and
Digital Empowerment under the leadership of Chairman Ajit Pai.
African Americans represent 13.4 percent of the United
States' population. We are also major consumers of media.
According to Nielsen, African Americans spend more than 50
hours a week watching live and time-shifted television, more
than ten hours per week than the total population. Ninety-one
percent of African Americans can be reached weekly through
television. Yet we are woefully underrepresented as employees
in the media industry and as owners of media businesses,
particularly those businesses that rely on FCC licenses.
According to a recent opinion piece by our president and
CEO, Marc Morial and FCC Commissioner Jessica Rosenworcel,
women own just seven percent of commercial TV stations; people
of color only three percent of those stations; and people of
color serve only as one in ten general managers of TV stations.
According to data from the National Association of Black
Owned Broadcasters, African Americans own 0.15 percent of full
power commercial radio stations and one percent of the full
power commercial TV stations in the United States. The owners
of these TV stations could sit in the five seats at this
witness table.
The League broadly supports the legislation under
consideration today. This body should reaffirm its commitment
to media diversity and to policies that advance that goal. The
Tax Certificate Program has always been considered an important
but very modest proposal to address broadcast and media
ownership that reflected few women and minorities. This program
has always enjoyed bipartisan support. It is time for Congress
to act.
The League also supports legislation that would produce
data around media ownership and employment. This represents a
sound basis for policymaking. American management guru, Peter
Drucker, memorialized the expression you can't manage what you
can't measure. To that end, legislation sponsored by
Representatives Clarke and Long represents a common sense
approach for any diversity legislation or policies. The FCC has
not adequately collected or shared with the public EEO data for
20 years. We can't afford to keep our blinders on.
While we will spend considerable time today talking about
legislation, there have been some voluntary methods that the
National Urban League and other civil rights organizations have
championed that we think are worthy of at least notice.
We have engaged directly with media companies, like
Comcast/NBC Universal, Charter, T-Mobile, to develop diversity
plans that have yielded commitments by these companies to
improve the racial diversity on their Boards of Directors, in
the c-suites with corporate staff, and procurement, and
community investment. These companies have agreed to work with
us, not because diversity is a feel good value, rather, they
understand that diversity is a business imperative.
Companies that have figured this out produce or distribute
compelling content that shows the breadth and beauty of our
great country. It is fair to ask the question: Why does
diversity matter--media diversity?
I had an uncomfortable conversation recently with someone
who felt that diversity on the Presidential debate stage, for
example, was nothing more than an interior decorating problem.
This statement ignores the history of our country. The
composition of our media industry is every bit important as the
diversity of this subcommittee, and Congress, and the
candidates who compete for the highest office in the land. In a
real sense, the media industry is built upon airwaves that
belong to the American people. These licensees matter because
they determine the content we see on the big screen and,
increasingly, on the little screen.
By 2045, more than half of our nation's population will be
people of color. There is no meaningful--if there is no
meaningful opportunity for women and people of color to be
employed in this industry or own the means of production; we
will see a distorted image of ourselves. Even more, we risk
losing the competitive edge that has made us the world's leader
in film and television industry and arts.
I thank you for the opportunity to present and look forward
to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Odom follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Odom.
Ms. Sandoval, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CATHERINE J. K. SANDOVAL

Ms. Sandoval. Good morning, everyone. My name is Catherine
Sandoval and I thank the members of the Communications and
Technology Committee of the House Energy and Commerce Committee
and also, particularly thank Chairman Doyle, Ranking Member
Latta, Mr. Pallone, and also full Ranking Member Walden for
convening this really historic hearing on lifting voices and
legislation to promote media marketplace diversity.
I am honored to speak to you today as a law professor at
Santa Clara University in California's Silicon Valley, who
teaches communications, energy, contract, and antitrust law,
and conducts research on media ownership diversity.
I am a Latina from a trailer park in East Los Angeles, who
is also a former broadcaster, and served as the vice president
and general counsel of Z-Spanish Media Corporation, which
merged with Entravision Corporation. I was the director of the
FCC's Office of Communications Business Opportunities when the
tax certificate was still in effect and researched the
aftermath of its repeal.
As a former commissioner of the California Public Utilities
Commission, I can attest to the importance of broadcasting to
public service and to public safety.
I commend this committee's consideration of H.R. 3957,
which would adopt a 21st-century Tax Certificate Program to
create incentives for broadcast transactions with a diverse
range of American entrepreneurs.
H.R. 5567 would support the FCC's analysis of market entry
barriers and diversity and spur improvements in data collection
and availability.
The reaffirmation of Congress' commitment to media
diversity and to developing collaborative efforts to reduce
barriers to diverse media ownership, as articulated in H.R.
549, will support America's economy and enhance our democratic
dialogue.
And transparency about broadcasting cable employment
opportunities spurred by H.R. 5564 reflects both good public
and corporate governance.
The DC Circuit in TV9 versus FCC in 1974 emphasized that it
is upon ownership that public policy places primary
responsibility with respect to diversification of content and
that it is historically proven to be significantly influential
with respect to editorial comment and the presentation of news,
as Congress member Walden mentioned. Owners decide whom to
employ and whether people like me get a chance to serve the
public interest through working in a broadcast business.
The Tax Certificate Program created the opportunity for
minority entrepreneurs like my former boss, Amador Bustos, to
acquire his first broadcast license. The company I work for, Z-
Spanish Media, grew to own and operate 36 radio stations,
broadcasting in several languages in Texas, Florida, Illinois,
California, and other States. Z-Spanish merged with
Entravision, run by Walter Ulloa, who continues to broadcast in
Spanish and English.
The Tax Certificate Program spurred the creation of
businesses that enhanced program diversity and employed a
diverse staff. When Congress eliminated the tax certificate for
FCC license transactions in 1995, sellers turned to other
means, such as 1031 exchanges, installment sales, or trust
transactions, to defer capital gains.
The research project I helped to design at the FCC, the Ivy
Group Study: Whose Spectrum is it Anyway? reported that once
the Tax Certificate Program was canceled, sellers, brokers, and
financiers stopped returning the calls of many minority brokers
and female--minority and female broadcasters and entrepreneurs.
Access to deals constricted as sellers looked elsewhere for tax
deferral and buyers they already knew.
My book chapter on minority commercial radio ownership,
published in this book in 2011, reviewed over 11,000 FCC
records and found that most of the minority radio licensees in
the mid-2009 had entered the market and acquired their first
license before the enactment of the Telecommunications Act of
1996. The market entry of many of those broadcasters can be
traced to the tax certificate. And only Congress can authorize
a 21st-century tax certificate, as the FCC continues to work on
other important issues.
Last, I would like to emphasize that broadcasting is
critical for millions of Americans who rely on it daily for
public--for news and public affairs information, and especially
critical during times of emergencies. When PG&E's Web site
crashed during the power outages initiated in October of 2019,
when fire danger was high, broadcast radio and television was
the key resource about school and job closures, and which
communities would lose or maintain power.
Broadcast and broadband are synergistic communications
media. America's public safety, economy, and democracy benefit
from a robust and diverse broadcast sector.
I thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today and
commend your initiatives to spur media ownership diversity and
to enhance service to the American public. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sandoval follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Ms. Sandoval.
Ms. Coley, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MAURITA COLEY

Ms. Coley. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman----
Mr. Doyle. Your microphone. There you go.
Ms. Coley. Thank you.
Good morning Chairman Pallone and Doyle, Ranking Members
Walden and Latta, and distinguished members of the
subcommittee. My name is Maurita Coley and I am president and
CEO of Multicultural Media, Telecom and Internet Council,
affectionately known in FCC circles as MMTC. We sincerely
appreciate this opportunity to provide our views on ownership
and employment diversity in the media marketplace.
My written testimony and numerous attachments are on
record. So for my 5 minutes, I just really would like to focus
on two points.
Number one, as you have heard today already, there is an
embarrassingly low number of minority- and women-owned
broadcast stations. As you will continue to hear from the panel
today, the primary reasons for this are access to capital. This
FCC Tax Certificate is actually a currency. It is used by
minority prospective owners--it was used when it was in effect
to enter an elite club of owners, who really would not have
paid attention to these prospective owners, had they not borne
the tax certificate. So it is as good as gold.
It is also a very modest tool. It is an elegant tool and it
enables the minority prospective owner to come to the table by
offering the seller the benefit of capital gains tax deferment.
So we completely support Congressman Butterfield's bill to
bring the tax certificate back.
I also note for the record that the tax certificate policy,
while it was repealed in 1997, there was legislation introduced
by Senators McCain and Menendez, and Congressmen Rush and
Rangel would have not only brought the tax certificate back but
extended it to cable and telecommunications, as it had been in
the past. And I would just like to note that for the record and
let the committee know that we are very supportive of that.
Second, on the issue of equal employment opportunity, we
fully support the bills introduced by Congressmembers Clarke
and Long and the resolution by Council--Congressmember--I am
sorry--Demings. You can't make policy without data. So the FCC
should be tasked with collecting data and enforcing the laws
that have been neglected for almost the past 20 years.
In general, as Congressmember Butterfield has already
mentioned, the historical roots of discrimination in
broadcasting actually started decades ago, when the FCC itself
discriminated in the very issuances of licenses. We have never
recovered, but that is not an excuse not to try now.
For a historical perspective on the FCC's past, that
discriminatory issuance of broadcasting, such as refusing to
grant licenses to racial and religious minorities or to
historically black and other minorities serving colleges and
universities, I direct you to a 2018 article in the Southern
Journal of Policy and Justice written by our cofounder, David
Honig. It is called How the FCC Suppressed Minority Broadcast
Ownership and How the FCC can Undo the Damage it Caused.
I would be remiss to sit here and not mention a positive
note. FCC Chairman Pai's administration has taken several
encouraging steps in the right direction. First, he re-
chartered the FCC Diversity Committee, on which several of us
on this panel serve, and more importantly, he moved the FCC's
EEO Division to the Enforcement Bureau, responding positively
to suggestions made by MMTC and 38 organizations that signed on
to our comments.
And now, a little bit about MMTC. For those who don't know,
we have practiced in this area. We are in our 34th year. Our
mission is to promote ownership and employment diversity. We
have a brokerage where we have helped to actually connect
minority- and women-owned buyers. And I would not--I would be
remiss if I didn't talk about a couple of stories here.
So our first story is radio pioneer--Radio One pioneer
Cathy Hughes. Some people know the story. She was rejected by
over 30 banks before she finally was able to enter the
broadcast market. She and her son, Alfred Liggins, used a tax
certificate to purchase three of their earliest radio stations.
Today, they are Urban One. They own 54 radio stations serving
15 million listeners.
Our second story is our Board Member Raul Alarcon, who used
a tax certificate, and pledged all of his family's assets to
purchase WSKU- AM in New York. And today, Spanish Broadcasting
System has a portfolio of 17 radio stations in major markets.
These stories, I would love for the committee to interview
these stories themselves, so you can get it firsthand. And as I
said, MMTC enthusiastically supports the bills and the
resolutions today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Coley follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Ms. Coley.
Ms. Sutter, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DIANE SUTTER

Ms. Sutter. Good morning, Chairman Pallone and Doyle,
Ranking Members Walden and Latta, and members of the
Subcommittee.
My name is Diane Sutter, and I am the president and CEO of
ShootingStar Broadcasting. I am testifying today on behalf of
the National Association of Broadcasters and the thousands of
local radio and television stations across your hometowns.
Broadcasters provide the important information, news, and
entertainment that connect and reflect the diverse communities
we serve, including women and communities of color. In today's
media marketplace, localism and ensuring that our programming
reflects the communities we serve is not only in the public
interest; it is good business.
My career in broadcasting started at a radio station in
Pittsburgh. I rose from newsroom producer to sales, then sales
manager--the first woman to hold that position in the market--
station manager, and ultimately, general manager of Shamrock
Broadcasting's AM/FM combination there.
At the time, I was the first female general manager in the
Pittsburgh market, my hometown. Later, I became the first
female television general manager in Lexington, Kentucky. And
later, I was able to rise through the ranks of the corporate
offices of Shamrock television, where I became president--the
first woman in that role--and the first to be responsible for
the purchasing and selling of broadcast properties, as well as
their overall operations.
My time as a broadcast executive taught me a lot but it was
nowhere near what I needed to know in order to navigate the
challenges of buying a station or brokering a broadcast deal on
my own. It was at Shamrock where I gained hands-on experience
in broadcast acquisitions and sales, including due diligence,
working with a company to acquire bank financing, setting up a
capital structure, making the bank presentations, and going
through the FCC process, and then the eventual station
transition.
It was the culmination of those experiences and
relationships that were essential to help me put my first deal
together. Without them, it is highly unlikely that I would ever
have been able to become a station owner. That is why, after I
acquired my first television station, a CBS in Abilene, Texas,
I partnered with the NAB Leadership Foundation to create the
Broadcast Leadership Training Program, or BLT, as we
affectionately call it. I wanted to share what I had learned
with other women and people of color, who I saw facing similar
challenges that I had faced and who, frankly, face many of
those same challenges today.
BLT is a 10-month executive MBA-style program intended to
help talented senior level broadcasters who aspire to advance
as group executives or station owners, particularly women and
people of color. It allows them to be exposed to the
fundamentals of purchasing, owning, and running a successful
broadcast operation.
The BLT program, supported by broadcasters for
broadcasters, is celebrating its 20th anniversary this year.
And of the 325 graduates, over 65 percent have been promoted
one or more times and 55 have been or are currently station
owners.
BLT success stories include people like Carolyn Becker of
Riverfront Broadcasting, who came into the program managing two
radio stations and now owns 18 small market stations.
DuJuan McCoy of Circle City Broadcasting, another alum,
bought his first seven broadcast stations while still in the
class. He went on to sell those stations, buy new ones in
larger media markets, and today owns the CW affiliate in
Indianapolis.
Orlando Rosales and his partner, Mayela Rojas of Media
Vista Group, were both BLT graduates and started with one
Spanish-language Azteca television station in Fort Myers/
Naples, Florida. With the help of BLT faculty and myself, we
worked for three years to get them the financing of three
Univision stations in Florida, Minnesota, and Missouri that
they have purchased.
These are only a few examples but I can assure you there
are many more. And as a woman who rose through the ranks of
industry to become a CEO and owner/operator, I not only share
your interest in increasing diversity across all media but
consider it a cornerstone of my career.
To that end, there are actions that Congress can take to
help incentivize sales to broadcast entrants. First, Congress
can promote media diversity by passing Representative
Butterfield's Expanded Broadcast Ownership Opportunities Act,
that legislation to reinstate the tax certificate. From 1978 to
1995, the program was highly effective in leveling the playing
field for underrepresented broadcasters, increasing minority
ownership in broadcast stations by more than 550 percent.
Second, Congress should examine whether modifications can
be made to SBA loan guarantees that better reflect the
realities and unique challenges of financing broadcast
properties.
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sutter follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Ms. Sutter.
So we have concluded our openings. We are going to now move
to member questions. Each Member will have 5 minutes to ask
questions of our witnesses. I will start by recognizing myself
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Odom, in your written testimony, you mentioned that the
number of stations owned by people of color may be at risk of
falling even lower than the incredibly low levels that exist
right now.
Can you explain why you think this risk exists and do you
see the same risks for women-owned media outlets also?
Mr. Odom. Thank you for the question, Mr. Chairman.
We have been in contact with African American licensees who
have raised this issue. The ownership structure that some of
the African American broadcasters enjoy doesn't just turn on
vagaries of how long the license lasts. They also turn on
things like how long does their financing last. How long do
their joint arrangements or sidecar arrangements with
television stations or ownership groups last?
And although the numbers that I have sketched out for you
are poor, at least in the television space, they are at 14
African American-owned television stations; some of those you
know are absolutely at risk of ending because--not because of
the license term ending, but because some of the arrangements,
financing arrangements, and sidecar arrangements could be at
risk.
Mr. Doyle. I see.
Ms. Sutter, you had your first deal to buy a station. Tell
me how--you know discuss like some of the challenges that you
faced to acquire that station, the financing part of it, and
how Mr. Butterfield's legislation--were you able to use that
program when you bought your station? But tell us how you think
this bill will help someone trying to acquire their first
television station.
Is your microphone on?
Ms. Sutter. I was not able to use the tax certificate
because, at the time, the tax certificate only related to
people of color and minorities. Women were not included in the
original tax certificate.
Mr. Doyle. I see.
Ms. Sutter. But I would have liked it if they were.
The challenges for me were that access to capital clearly
is--was then and is now the major deterrent to being able to
get a deal done.
I was very lucky that I was able to get a deal
accomplished. That was because of two reasons. One, I had
access to the information that you need before I ever had to go
and buy a station. I had been a general manager for radio and
TV for over ten years had never had that kind of information
provided. I learned it at Shamrock when I was doing
acquisitions for them.
The second thing was access to capital. While it is
definitely a problem, I had the ability to go to the banks that
were in the Shamrock credit, people I already knew and who knew
me and that allowed them to be willing to at least hear me, to
at least hear me out. And so, because I already had those
relationships, I was able to get a first deal done. And it
didn't help that as president of Shamrock, my duty was to sell
off their television stations and I bought their last one.
So those made it a very unique situation, but I realized
that that meant that there were others that needed to be able
to have that same advantage. They weren't going to be having
the advantage I had of being at the corporate offices for
Shamrock and head of their television.
So the BLT program was created to address those two
particular things and the NAB has, for 20 years, supported it,
as have other broadcasters. This is a program where the women
and people of color are fully supported financially by the
broadcasters. It is about a $17,500 investment in each graduate
to be able to learn those things that they need.
The faculty for the program comes from the ranks of the
people who are in the industry you would need to know. It is
the bankers. It is the brokers. It is the group heads. It is
the members of the FCC that come and teach the faculty aspects
of the program. So that is how we managed to get it to happen.
Mr. Doyle. I see.
Ms. Coley, maybe you could discuss how you see Mr.
Butterfield's legislation closing that financing gap.
Ms. Coley. Well, as I mentioned earlier, the tax
certificate is synonymous with access to capital. When I spoke
with Raul Alarcon, and actually in my legal career, I
represented Radio One and TV One, so I knew that the tax
certificate was used like currency because when they
encountered a deal that they wanted to buy, more than likely,
the seller was not even going to give them a chance. That is
what they communicated to me. But when they were able to offer
the possibility of a tax certificate, that was something that
distinguished them from the crowd of buyers and it gave them a
leg up and helped them. So it is like currency. It goes--they
still have to pay. They still have to pledge you know
everything, but their first and last-born children but the tax
certificate helped make the difference.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you. I see my time is expiring.
The Chair is now going to yield to our ranking member of
the full committee, Mr. Walden.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
Mr. Latta for yielding to me, as well, in the timeline here.
And so I appreciate all the combined wisdom at the table. We
need your input on this. We appreciate what you are doing out
there and, certainly, the role of BLT and other programs like
that have made a real difference.
And I think, Ms. Sutter, up until '95, as we have talked,
there was this Tax Certificate Program in place and we are
examining the legislation today to reinstate it.
How would you change it?
Ms. Sutter. Well, the first thing I would do is make sure
that it also included women----
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Ms. Sutter [continuing]. And the proposal does that. So I
think that is an important addition from what it was.
Mr. Walden. I just thought I would give you a chance to say
that twice.
Ms. Sutter. Yes, sir. I also had the privilege of
testifying before the committee when they did away with the tax
certificate. So I am hoping that my appearance today will
suggest that----
Mr. Walden. Full circle.
Ms. Sutter [continuing]. It is time for--full circle. Yes,
sir. Yes, sir.
The tax certificate itself, as Maurita said, is something
that benefits both the buyer and the seller and I think that is
what makes it unique. And I would want to ensure that we kept
those things, those pieces of it that made it so successful
because, otherwise, not only access to deal financing but deal
flow. It allows minorities and women of color to be involved in
getting the call from the seller that they are actually going
to give you an opportunity to bid. Many times we don't even get
into the deal flow.
Mr. Walden. Interesting. Interesting. That is an important
note.
I was thinking, too, as I listened to you, how much of this
is a sort of license issue, broadcast issue, whatever, and how
much of it is a banking issue?
Ms. Sutter. I think it is a combination of both. I think--
--
Mr. Walden. You really haven't addressed the banking piece.
I mean, I think about you going into a lender and they are
going, I don't know. Is that the lender issue? Because you know
how to run a business; you have proven that.
Ms. Sutter. Yes, but ownership is different because, in
essence, someone else is investing in you.
Mr. Walden. Yes, right.
Ms. Sutter. And so as a result, they need to know more than
you are just a good person and a good operator. They need to
know that you are capable financially of being able to uphold
your commitments.
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Ms. Sutter. So when someone else invests in you, it is
incumbent upon you to be able to demonstrate that their risk
matches the reward.
Mr. Walden. Sure. And then in terms of collateral, can you
speak to those issues as well?
Ms. Sutter. Yes, one of the challenges and what makes
broadcasting unique is that probably our most valuable asset is
our license and that is not permitted to be used as
collateral----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Ms. Sutter [continuing]. In any kind of a financial way.
So many of the banks look to broadcast, whose value is not
in equipment or in bricks and mortar. It is in the value of the
goodwill and that is not something that a bank can attach as
collateral.
Mr. Walden. Which I think makes the industry very unique in
that respect.
Are there other witnesses who want to speak to that part of
this equation?
Ms. Sandoval. Thank you very much, Congressmember Walden.
One thing I would like to emphasize is that the tax
certificate is absolutely critical to access to deals. Right?
It provided not just access to capital but access to deals. And
this is particularly important because, under the
Communications Act Section 310(d), the FCC cannot consider
whether a different party in an application to transfer a
license would better serve the public interests. So what the
tax certificate did is that it----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Ms. Sandoval [continuing]. Created private sector
incentives to actually do deals with minority buyers and
eligible buyers, who would then apply, together with the
seller, to the FCC for a license transfer applications.
So these incentives were really important because,
especially under the tax code as it existed then, and there
still are incentives in the tax code now to do other deals,
where you could have done a 1031 exchange, or do other things
to try to defer capital gains, or do a trust. And so the tax
certificate gave an incentive to do something different----
Mr. Walden. Got it.
Ms. Sandoval [continuing]. And partner with people whom you
wouldn't have partnered with before.
And I would also like to underscore and thank MMTC for
their brokerage. When I worked for Z-Spanish Media, in fact Z-
Spanish acquired some stations through David Honig, as a
broker, who put buyers and sellers together. And as I
mentioned, our station owner got his first deal through the tax
certificate, which though he had a Ph.D. from U.C. Berkeley,
though he had been a broadcaster, it was the tax certificate
that created the access to the deal.
Mr. Walden. All right. All right, very good.
Mr. Odom, real quick.
Mr. Odom. Yes, sir. This Tax Certificate Program is just
the latest in a very long line of bipartisan tax policies that
have been pursued by the Congress to achieve results that--
where the markets create sometimes impenetrable barriers;
whether it be the New Markets tax credit or the most recent
Opportunity Zone tax credit that was passed at the end of 2017,
these are the ways of enacting social good through the tax
policy using market-based incentives.
Mr. Walden. All right, thank you.
I would just conclude by saying when we bought our stations
from my parents, I will always remember being with my wife--we
were working on Capitol Hill than in the law firm downtown,
when my father said, oh, by the way, it was the worst February
we ever had, and the exciter just burned out on the FM; you are
going to need to replace that. It was like, what am I getting
into here, Dad?
Anyway, thank you. Thanks for having this hearing.
I yield back.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. McNerney for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. I thank the chairman and I thank the
witnesses for your testimony this morning.
Professor Sandoval, my district includes part of Contra
Costa, San Joaquin, and Sacramento Counties. As a former
California PUC Commissioner, I am sure you are familiar with
that area. It has a very diverse population and it was severely
impacted by the recent wildfires in California.
For example, during the Kincade fire, a small fire erupted
that resulted in the City of Oakley residents having to be
evacuated. Eighty-eight cell towers went down in Contra Costa
County, and a highly dangerous air quality filled the area. So
if we don't do more to increase minority ownership of
broadcasting stations, what would it mean during times of
crisis for constituents in districts like mine where the real
risks of being impacted by wildfires and other national
disasters?
Ms. Sandoval. Yes, thank you very much. And thank you for
your service to the community and California Congressmember
McNerney.
I would like to underscore what you were saying about the
important role of broadcasting during disasters. And sadly, we
have had our share in California. And what was absolutely
critical was that during the large-scale power shutoffs that
happened during the high winds and wildfire danger, very
quickly PG&E's Web site crashed. And so people were not able to
get information about where to go, which was really critical,
especially for people who needed to keep their diabetes
medication refrigerated, use equipment on the medical baseline,
how to figure out if their job was closed, if their school was
closed, and pick up their kids, or where it created a real
crisis because people couldn't work for days and lost income.
But PG&E was actually able to fax out a list to the
broadcast stations of the cities that were going to lose power.
And so people depended--millions of people depended on
broadcast radio and television for information about where
power was out, where power was available, and what the closures
were.
And as you mentioned with the evacuations and the fires, in
Sonoma County, you also had 200,000 evacuated during the
Kincade fire; radio was absolutely critical when, particularly
as you mentioned, sadly, cell phone towers went down, whether
it was due to a lack of power or the California legislature
just held a hearing on this topic, where they identified both a
lack of power, as well as issues with lack of redundant
networks, and, in some cases, lack of maintenance contributing
to outages.
So while day-to-day many of us do rely very heavily on cell
phones and the internet, broadcasting really showed itself
truly to be a lifeline and broadcasting that addresses the
needs of diverse communities is particularly important,
especially during those types of crises.
Mr. McNerney. OK, thank you.
The digital divide is a real challenge facing my district.
In your testimony, you note that, for those living on the other
side of the digital divide, radio and television broadcasting
remain daily mainstays. If we don't do more to increase
minority ownership of broadcasting stations, what would it mean
for the individuals living on that side of the digital divide?
Ms. Sandoval. Yes, and thank you for bringing that up. And
as you know, the digital divide is something that pervades not
only rural America, and 95 percent of California's landmass is
rural, and so we have many rural communities as well as other
states in the nation, but also in urban areas, like San Jose,
there is a major area where there is a huge digital divide gap,
where they have mapped it. It is a predominantly Latino
community, where a lot of the residents have not used the
internet for the last month, and it is also a flood zone. And,
in fact, it is the flood zone for the reservoir and experienced
having flooding with the rains in 2017.
So it is absolutely critical that we work simultaneously to
close the digital divide and to ensure that we also harness
broadcasting. Because one of the things that happened in
Paradise, California, the campfire, was that for a variety of
reasons, the county didn't activate broadcast alerts. And so
particularly with also a lot of elderly people depend on
broadcast and didn't have the cell phone access, didn't use the
internet, and didn't get the message. And this is part of what
contributed to 85 people dying in that fire and to just the
breadth of that terrible fire which destroyed Paradise,
literally.
So I think addressing both of these things is really
critical to the safety, as well as to the economy of our
nation.
Mr. McNerney. OK, you will have to answer this briefly, or
the chairman will give a little sound here.
Can the FCC and Congress solve the diversity and problems
laid out in today's--today with race and gender-neutral
remedies?
Ms. Sandoval. So the FCC has been trying race and gender-
neutral remedies for the last 25 years, since Adarand. And
after Lamprecht, they basically dropped all of the programs. So
there was an opportunity 25 years ago to do an Adarand study.
We did four different studies, when I was the director of the
Office of Communications Business Opportunities that laid the
foundation for the Adarand studies but the FCC has never done
the full studies that are necessary.
So we have had a 25-year experience with race and gender-
neutral policy and what we have seen is with basically the
people who have been in the best position to grow were people
who had entered previously and also, some of the graduates of
some of these particular programs. But race and gender-neutral
policies have not produced the kind of results that the
policies before 1995 produced.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Latta for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well thanks, Mr. Chairman and thanks to our
panel for your great testimony today.
I want to applaud Chairman Pai's focus on working to
promote diversity and, in particular, the Incubator pilot
program that the Commission adopted, which is, unfortunately,
held up by the courts.
And today's testimony also discusses the great programs and
initiatives that the broadcast industry has voluntarily
implemented, including the Broadcast Leadership Training
Program. These programs aim to facilitate diversity in the
media marketplace by providing opportunities for people to
enter the broadcast industry and rise to the executive
leadership positions.
Ms. Sutter, if I could start my questions with you, what
role can Congress play in shaping an incubator program, similar
to the one proposed to Chairman Pai, that would apply to both
TV and radio?
Ms. Sutter. Thank you very much.
The FCC Diversity Committee, of which I chaired, and also
two members of the testimony committee here are a part of--
thank you, Clint and Maurita for your service--work very hard
to create the incubator program. And the FCC supported the
recommendations that were made from the Diversity Committee and
implemented the Incubator Program.
We would suggest that you are constrained by those same
things that the FCC is, and we would encourage this committee
to consider adding the Incubator Program to your consideration
of things that can improve diversity in the industry, and we
would also ask that you include television. So I appreciate
your suggestion in that regard because the Incubator Program,
as it was put forward, was only for radio.
I have graduates of the BLT program right now in television
that are looking to acquire television stations and the
Incubator Program, which was a way for stations to be able to
provide station ownership opportunities to those that could be
taking a year to work with them to be able to learn how to
manage and own stations, and then they would have the
opportunity to buy those stations. So I think that is another
vehicle for that and would hope that Congress could do
something to codify that along with the tax certificate.
The two of those things together make a pretty poignant
opportunity.
Mr. Latta. Well, let me follow up with another question to
you because I know that, hearing your discussion in regard to
the access of capital out there, let me go with another
question on that area.
When you discuss your learning experiences as you advanced
in the broadcast industry, from buying your first station to
helping entrants secure their first deals, do you believe it is
difficult to know when a broadcast property is on the market
due to a lack of transparency of those transactions?
Ms. Sutter. Yes, sir. I referenced the idea that access to
deal flow is as important as access to capital.
One of the things that the tax certificate did was to
incentivize sellers to look for a potential person of color or,
hopefully now, a woman to be a buyer. They do not have that
incentive at this time. And so that provides clear reasons to
seek out women and people of color as potential buyers. And we
have many qualified individuals who, both in and out of the BLT
program, are able to do that. And so I think that is an
excellent way for that to happen.
Mr. Latta. Let me ask what role should Congress have, then?
Ms. Sutter. Well, I would hope that Congress would add the
Incubator Program as a consideration to the legislation that
you are already putting forward.
Mr. Latta. OK, thank you.
In my last minute and 17 seconds, I am not picking on you
here; we have heard that some statistics show that employment
diversity among broadcasters remains better than their over-to-
top streaming competitors in the tech industry. How much of
that do you believe is because of the FCC regulations versus
practical interests of broadcaster-produced content that
reflects the interests of the communities they serve?
Ms. Sutter. I think there is no question that the
difference between some of the other companies and
organizations that you reference in broadcasters is that we are
local, and that we are about being in our communities, and
knowing how to create programs that serve those communities
because one size does not fit all. And our ability to be able
to do those things in individual markets that respect those
markets is what separates us.
Mr. Latta. OK. Well, thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Soto for 5 minutes.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have the honor of representing a very diverse area in
central Florida of high growth and this continues to be a big
issue.
I noticed the FCC is releasing new FM station applications,
but they haven't really released a lot of new television
station applications over the years. So my first question is:
Would these bills help with this new tranche of FM stations
coming out to increase minority and women's business ownership?
And would we need to open up more new TV stations to help also
give more access, since it is tough to buy one compared to
creating one?
And I will start with you, Mr. Odom, and we will go down
the line.
Mr. Odom. This isn't an issue that we have expressed an
opinion on, but I think if you look at the simple matter of
law--laws of demand and supply, we have had a constriction of
the supply of television stations. I imagine some of that is
owing to the fact that we have had some of that spectrum ceded
to the commercial wireless space.
So I think it would be great to create new market areas,
and new licenses. I just don't know how realistic that is and
we have not, as an organization, looked at that particular
issue.
Mr. Soto. Ms. Sandoval?
Ms. Sandoval. Yes, thank you very much, Congressmember.
I applaud the FCC for taking the initiative to look at
spectrum allocation and how they can create opportunities for
more stations, such as FM stations.
I agree that the television band has been constrained, even
though we have had the auction of digital television.
I would note that the FCC has a duty under 309(j) of the
Communications Act to create incentives for small, minority-,
and women-owned businesses in the communications industry,
including through the auction of licenses.
So things like the tax certificate really affect the
secondary market, but I believe that H.R. 5567 would also help
to support the FCC's analysis of market entry barriers, which
is another thing that is required by the Communications Act in
Section 254. So I believe that these bills would be
complimentary but, as mentioned, the FCC has a lot of work to
do, and I think that this would be synergistic with looking at
where there have been new licensing opportunities.
Last, I would like to add that when I looked at my
research, pulling over 11,000 records to analyze the status of
minority broadcasts, that sometimes when the FCC had done
things, like they expanded band or the 8090 dockets, where they
expanded stations, that was a really critical entry point.
So I think this is going to be a critical entry point of
opportunity; we need to make sure that the policies are there
to really value and create the rules that promote diverse media
ownership and service to the public.
Mr. Soto. Ms. Coley?
Ms. Coley. We, MMTC, haven't spoken on this issue as well.
However, I believe that anytime there is an opportunity where
there are new opportunities to--like the 8090 docket was one of
the ones where it just opened up a lot of new licenses. So the
tax certificate wouldn't necessarily work in that respect, but
I think that what Congress could do is to act as--to have
something that encourages financing, that encourages diversity
with respect to the new allotment. The tax certificate, you
know, wouldn't really be the way.
Mr. Soto. Sure.
Ms. Sutter?
Ms. Sutter. To speak to your question more specifically;
the FM--the entrance of new FM stations for an auction would
certainly be welcomed.
I referenced in my testimony Caroline Becker and two of her
18 stations she acquired in the FM auction, and they built
those stations.
The problem with television allocations right now is
because we are repacking the entire table of allocation for
television; as we go through the conversion process and
redistribute all of the TV stations, it is frozen at the
moment. I believe that once, in fact, that gets--that gets
fully exercised and all of the repacking is done, that we would
hope that the Commission would go back and find more television
licenses to put for auction.
Ms. Coley. And Mr. Soto, if I may?
Mr. Soto. Sure, please.
Ms. Coley. At MMTC, it has been mentioned, we work with
everyone, in terms of we have a nonprofit brokerage where we
aggressively seek out minority- and women-owned prospective
buyers. And so, in that context of our brokerage, I think that
if there were new allotment, that would be a great opportunity
for us to use our services to try to find minority and women
owners.
Mr. Soto. Thank you all for your response.
My time has expired.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes my good friend, Mr. Bilirakis, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it
very much.
I want to focus on another subject that hasn't been brought
up, but first, I would like to tell you that Sheila Johnson,
who is the founder of the BET, lives in my district part-time.
She is a wonderful, wonderful person.
Ms. Coley. Oh, wonderful.
Mr. Bilirakis. She is a trailblazer and she was born in
McKeesport, Pennsylvania. Did you know that?
Ms. Sutter. All good things come from western Pennsylvania.
Mr. Bilirakis. Another fellow Pittsburgher, absolutely.
Yes, particularly in western Pennsylvania.
Ms. Sutter. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bilirakis. But I represent the Tampa Bay area and I am
very proud of that.
Ms. Sutter. We like that, too.
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes, absolutely.
So, in any case, this--an issue with regard to veterans. In
many circumstances, veterans are deemed part of a class for
distinctive treatment. For example, the Small Business
Administration has a Set-Aside Program for service-disabled
veterans who own small business, to allow these businesses to
adequately compete for certain government contracts.
Many federal agencies have similar programs for both
veteran-owned businesses and service-disabled veteran-owned
businesses, in addition to programs for sex- and race-based
diversity.
Ms. Sutter--Mrs. Sutter, what actions are the broadcasting
industry taking to promote and incorporate veterans, and
particularly veterans with service-connected disabilities, into
the marketplace?
Ms. Sutter. Thank you for your question.
Mr. Bilirakis. Sure.
Ms. Sutter. The Broadcast Education Foundation, the
Leadership Foundation of the NAB, has a number of initiatives
that they do to work with veterans. They have partnered with
Veterans Strong and, at their national convention, they hold a
military veterans outreach breakfast every year at the national
convention and it is for H.R. directors from company broadcast
companies from all around the country. And there are speakers
and panelists to talk about how to recruit veterans, how to
reach them, and then once they are in the workforce, how to
work with them to help them succeed.
In addition, they also host--co-host a career fair with the
Broadcast Education Association to specifically address
veterans and encourage them to participate in the fair and then
help them move on in that regard into the broadcasting
industry.
But I think one of the greatest examples is that most of
the broadcast companies out there are interested in reaching
veterans. As you all probably know, our Congressional PSA
Program that the NAB does, veterans, is one of the main topics
that are available for Members of Congress to use.
But to give you a specific example, Hearst Broadcasting
actually has a director of military recruitment and that is a
military veteran in that role, and the job of that veteran is
to go to bases specifically for the purpose of recruiting
veterans to come into the broadcast industry.
Mr. Bilirakis. Has there been a great deal of interest on--
--
Ms. Sutter. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bilirakis. Good. Very good, on the part--I would think
so.
Ms. Sutter. And the--well, the CEO of Hearst Television, is
a BLT grad. So----
Mr. Bilirakis. Oh, OK.
Ms. Sutter [continuing]. Suffice it to say, he understands
that importance.
Mr. Bilirakis. Excellent. Excellent.
What can Congress and the FCC do, as far as promoting
veteran-owned small businesses?
Ms. Sutter. Well, I think the program that you mentioned at
the SBA is certainly one because we, as broadcasters, also work
with the 7(a) Program and it is an adjunct to that. So
continuing to work on that program, I think, is helpful and
certainly, we, as broadcasters, want to continue to make sure
our doors are open to veterans to be part of our industry.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good.
Would anyone else like to add anything on that particular
subject? Yes.
Ms. Sandoval. Thank you, Congressmember, for this question.
I would note that, when I was a commissioner of the
California Public Utilities Commission, that we had a program
also specifically authorized by the California legislature that
promoted opportunities for a variety of diverse businesses to
be able to do business with the regulated utilities in
California, electric, gas, water, and telecommunications, and
that veterans, and especially service-disabled veterans, as
well as women, and gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender
people were specifically included in that program.
We found with a lot of utilities for--there is a huge
interest in veterans who have that experience with both the
working in a high-safety environment, a high-risk environment
like you get with the natural gas, and working with things like
climbing towers, which is also important for broadcasting. And
so I think promoting this would be important but, right now,
this is something that the FCC hasn't been charged with.
And so I think in looking at the legislation, this would be
another example that the FCC cannot, on its own, reinstitute
the tax certificate because Congress ended it. But Congress
could reinstitute the tax certificate and include groups such
as service-disabled veterans, as well as minorities and women.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Bilirakis. All right. Very good. I yield back.
Mr. Doyle. The Chair recognizes Mr. Veasey for 5 minutes.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really want to thank
all the witnesses for coming to talk today about diversity in
media and how we can really work with organizations to secure
diversity in media ownership in the United States. And I think
it is really interesting that we are having this hearing right
now because, as you know, the Oscar nominations were just
released. There has been a lot of talk about some of the
nominees and the lack of diversity with some of the nominees as
it relates to that segment of the media community. And so maybe
during this hearing, we can find a solution to hashtag
OscarSoWhite. I don't know if we are going to be able to find a
solution for that but at least if we begin to just start having
conversations, I think that we are really taking a step in the
right direction.
I want to talk with Mr. Odom and thank you for taking the
time to be with us this morning. In your testimony, you state
that while African Americans are a major consumers of media, we
are woefully underrepresented as employees in the industry and
co-owners of media businesses. The bill that we have been
talking about today that I am also a co-sponsor of with Mr.
Long would direct the FCC to study barriers to market entry for
minorities.
In addition to studying barriers, what do you think can be
done to encourage minorities, not only to own and operate media
stations, but enable more of them to reach positions of general
manager or a c-suite of media corporations in order to have
more control over what content is prioritized and shown to
consumers?
Mr. Odom. Thank you for your question, Congressman.
I think your allusion to the OscarSoWhite problem actually
put your finger on a potential solution. Many of the things
that we are talking about today require government fiat, laws
to be enacted, and the FCC to act, but there is a great area of
opportunity with the producers of--the distributors of content
and the creators of content to undertake on their own
initiatives.
I always like to commend our friends at NAB for the BLT
Program. Not only is it delicious, but it is moving the needle
in very important ways to find--and it is not compelled by
government action. It is compelled by the industry itself,
saying that we need to do better.
We have worked at the National Urban League, along with our
colleagues at NITOS, and Asians are Advancing Justice, and
other groups to approach companies that have challenges, self-
admitted challenges, with the number of employees they have,
the companies they do business with. And when we have been able
to sit down with them, we have produced, I think, some
impressive results and results that we will be hearing a lot
more about in the future.
Our work with Comcast/NBC Universal, in particular, over
ten years ago, we think has yielded some good results that have
turned into more programming, more distribution outlets, and
mentorship, and incubator programs inside that company that
have really yielded a lot of good results. We have worked with
T-Mobile just recently, hoping to get some data on that, when
that agreement becomes effective.
But I think some of these voluntary efforts that we have
been talking about can yield a lot of fruit.
Mr. Veasey. Do you want--would you like to see more
government? I mean, you have touched on that and I wanted to
ask you.
Mr. Odom. Oh, absolutely, there is a critical role here for
government. The Tax Certificate Program, as we said, could not
be done by Commission on its own initiative. If that had been
the case, it would have been done a long time ago and it would
have included women.
The data--we need the data. We need the Adarand studies;
you know, especially where race and gender challenges could be
brought. If you don't lay the proper factual and legal
predicate, these laws will be subject to challenge in the
courts or challenged by Congress undoing what it did. We have
got to create the facts. We have got to build the record.
As a young lawyer, I was at the FCC when the Adarand
decision came down, and we had to scramble and work with
Professor Sandoval to figure out how are we going to try to
keep some of these policies in place, in light of what appears
is strict scrutiny of anything that mentions women and people
of color.
Mr. Veasey. Yes, well, thank you very much.
Ms. Sutter, very briefly, I just am curious about what you
and your colleagues are planning to do to expand the number of
minorities, particularly people of color, in the ownership
sphere of the media industry.
Ms. Sutter. Well, certainly, the BLT Program has probably
been the most effective. We now have 55 that own or have owned
out of the 325 graduates and this program is celebrating its
20th anniversary this year.
And so continuing to do that, where we provide the
information that new entrants will need, as well as the ability
to know how to access capital, I think is really critical to
this. And the NAB remains, as I do, committed to doing this.
We also think it is important to get people to be able to
own; you have to get people into the business to get the
experience. So the NAB has a number of programs at the entry-
level, and mid-level, and for technical people so that we can
have people into the pipeline that then push toward that
ownership as we get farther along.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes a wounded--Billy; you are not
chasing little dogs around anymore, are you?
Mr. Long. No more poodle wrangling for me.
Mr. Doyle. You have 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Ms. Sutter, as I believe you know, I introduced a bill
last week, H.R. 5567, the MEDIA Diversity Act of 2020, that
directs the FCC to consider market entry barriers in the
communications marketplace.
In your testimony, you touched on obstacles you overcame in
purchasing your first station, including the inability to
access capital. Could you expand on that a little bit?
Ms. Sutter. Yes, sir. Thank you very much.
We touched on briefly the fact that it is very difficult to
get financing for broadcast properties, especially for new
entrants, because they don't have collateral by having other
stations and larger properties that they could pledge to a
bank. They are very resistant to loaning to broadcasters. We
are a cash flow business, not a collateral business. We are not
bricks and mortar. We are goodwill. We are part of the
community. As such, banks are reluctant. They don't understand.
And much of the work that we do is to try to educate banks
on how to loan to the broadcast industry because many smaller
regional banks are not familiar with how broadcasting works,
and so they are reluctant to be able to do that. And so it is
an education process.
And certainly, the idea of a tax certificate is something
that I think really addresses so directly how to get capital
because if, in fact, you have a major company that is willing
to sell to a new entrant, it gives a higher degree of
confidence to a bank that they are buying a property that is an
ongoing property, that it has got good resources. And so I
think that the tax certificate not only helps get us access to
deal flow, it helps us get access to capital.
Mr. Long. I know that there has been a lot of consolidation
of things going on since you purchased that first station. Has
accessing finance become easier or rougher since that time and
what is being done by the FCC and the private sector currently
to solve those issues?
Ms. Sutter. I can tell you it wasn't easy then and it is
not easy now. So that hasn't changed.
The difference between then and now is, I think, that we
went through a very serious economic crisis in 2008, 2009, and
2010. And what that did was to take many companies that were in
the broadcast space of lending and they left the business. So
we have fewer financial institutions that are considering and
have experienced loaning to broadcasters, which makes it more
difficult, which is why if we can demonstrate to banks that it
is a profitable situation because the bigger companies get
financing. The bigger companies have bank deals but they also
have more concentration to be able to pledge.
So for us, the tax certificate is an answer to so many
issues that affect women and minorities, but the thing that I
think is the best is we know it works. We have statistical
history. We may not have statistics on everything, but we have
a statistical history that says that increased the number of
minorities by 550 percent. I think that is a great track record
that we ought to begin to use again.
Mr. Long. Right. Yes, that is quite a statistic.
Ms. Sutter. Yes, sir.
Mr. Long. And I believe my bill will give us a better
picture of the state of the marketplace by requiring the FCC to
consider market entry barriers for socially disadvantaged
individuals.
Other than access to capital, what are some of the other
barriers to entry?
Ms. Sutter. Well, certainly, the access to deal flow. And
we have touched on that but getting the major companies to talk
to smaller broadcasters is also a challenge. Just being able to
get into, being able to know what stations are for sale,
because the deals frequently are never publicized. They don't
even go to brokers. It is one person talking to another person
and, next thing you know, a deal has happened for which you
were not even able to present your case.
So the tax certificate, in essence, incentivizes all
sellers to look for, to identify, and to speak to women and
people of color who can then be helpful to them by providing
the tax benefits.
Mr. Long. OK.
Ms. Sandoval, do you want to add something?
Ms. Sandoval. Thank you very much, Congressmember.
Another dimension I wanted to add to this, as Ms. Sutter
mentioned, broadcast is a cash flow business. And one of the
practices that really undermines cash flow continues to be an
issue for minority broadcasters is the practice of what is
called minority discounts. And this is something that was
documented in another chapter in this book and also in the 1999
study, we commissioned at the FCC called, When Being Number One
is Not Enough. The practice of both no urban dictates and no
Spanish dictates where advertisers wouldn't advertise with
minority-owned or -serving stations, no matter what their
actual ratings were.
The FCC banned that practice in 2008; it took nine years to
do that. But minority discounts, where broadcasters get paid
less when your audience is the minority, continues to be a
problem. I am sure Jim Winston from the National Association of
Black Owned Broadcasters and the Spanish Broadcasters could
talk about that. And that is something which undermines both
access to capital, and finance ability, and undermines service.
And I think Congress could also speak to discrimination in
advertising.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Long. OK, thank you.
Mr. Doyle. The Chair now recognizes Mr. O'Halleran for 5
minutes.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Chairman Doyle and Ranking
Member Latta, for holding today's hearing on ensuring every
voice is heard in our media marketplace.
Diversity and the free expression of such viewpoints is a
bedrock of our democracy. It is important that we increase
opportunities for diverse ownership within the media
marketplace, especially in rural communities, such as those in
my district that may lack this type of diversity.
I have a tremendous amount of Hispanic population. There is
no radio station. Native Americans have a couple of radio
stations but I have 12 tribes and a lot of those don't have
them.
This is a bipartisan goal of this committee and I thank our
witnesses for their testimony on this important matter.
Ms. Sutter, I appreciate the work of the Broadcasting
Leadership Training Program to promote diversity in the media
ownership through hands-on training and mentorship.
You identify a lack of access to capital as a barrier to
diverse ownership, including a case in which it took program
graduates as long as three years to secure financing to acquire
radio and television broadcast stations. How should potential
valuation of a FCC license for a radio or television station be
taken into consideration by lenders when considering providing
capital to aspiring media owners?
Ms. Sutter. Thank you for your question.
The issue of the broadcast license, as I have referenced
before, is that it is our greatest asset, but we are not
allowed to collateralize it because, technically, it is
something that we don't own. It is given to us for a period of
time.
I would suggest that working with the SBA, we, at the BLT
program and the NAB, have worked with the SBA. Perhaps there
are ways that we can get some greater consideration in there
looking at it because broadcasters, smaller broadcasters
especially, use the 7(a) SBA Program as a way to be able to do
smaller deals. They lifted the limit from $2 million to $5
million, which now makes it something that can be useful for
broadcasters. And so we eventually were able to do a 7(a) loan
for the individual that I referenced in here.
But I think that the SBA would be a place that we could
certainly look to be an example by perhaps changing some of the
requirements of how they looked at a broadcast license and that
would, perhaps, assure other banks because you know the SBA
licenses--or the SBA loan is guaranteed over $350,000--over
$150,000. It is guaranteed for 75 percent.
So the banks that loan under the SBA Program have a 75
percent guarantee from the SBA. So that is one way that is very
specific that I think we could look at a place where Congress
could make a difference, where the SBA, I think, would be open
to something like this, and the NAB has an ongoing relationship
and conversation with them.
Mr. O'Halleran. How can the FCC's Incubator Program for
aspiring radio broadcasters help address common barriers to
ownership, such as experience or access to capital? In your
opinion, how could this Incubator Program be improved to
include television, which was discussed earlier?
And I would like to know a little bit more about the
mentorship program and how that works.
Ms. Sutter. Yes, sir.
The Incubator Program, as it was designed, was a way,
again, not unlike the tax certificate, to give incentives to
larger companies to want to work with a new entrant, be it a
woman, or a person of color. That the idea is that they would,
in fact, mentor to be an incubator for someone who was
interested in buying one of their properties. And they would
identify a property. They would have that person work there
and, in essence, act as its operator in an ownership-like
position, and they would provide them with financial
incentives. They would provide them with expertise and training
from other people on their team and their staff. And at the end
of that period, that there would be an opportunity to perhaps
acquire that station. And for that, the incubator would have
the opportunity to perhaps get credit toward owning a station
in a market where they might not be able to do so.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you. I just want to point out I have
worked with a number of contracts that require diversity within
the chosen people. And this is one of the most difficult
processes I have come across, as far as being able to
capitalize the process and move it forward.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes Mrs. Brooks for 5 minutes.
And Mrs. Brooks, before you start, I will say to the
witnesses, when you see that red light is flashing, that means
you should stop speaking, too. OK? We have had a couple of
times when we have gone over a minute--except the witness from
Pittsburgh. You can speak.
Mrs. Brooks, you are recognized.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And actually, thank
you all so very much for being here.
I represent Indianapolis, Indiana, Indiana's 5th
Congressional District, and so I was really pleased, Ms.
Sutter, that you talked about DuJuan McCoy and his role, which
is, I think a very exciting role, not only for Indianapolis,
his new ownership of two significant television stations, but
his leadership role with Circle City Broadcast for a number of
years. And of course, Deon Livingston, who is our regional and
general manager for--I still refers to it as Radio One--it will
always--and they are going to have a while before we don't call
it Radio One. But you know there is significant leadership in
our community.
And I am curious and I applaud the work of your leadership
foundation. What will you do, since he was in your class, Mr.
McCoy----
Ms. Sutter. As was Deon. Deon is a graduate also of the BLT
Program.
Mrs. Brooks. So they have been in your class. How are you
using the graduates of your class? So they went through your
long program and it sounds like it was excellent. How are you
utilizing what they have learned throughout their incredibly
distinguished careers? And now the success that they are
having, and the difficulties, and the barriers that it took to
get there----
Ms. Sutter. Yes.
Mrs. Brooks [continuing]. How are you using their stories?
And what should we, back in Indiana, and people like me, be
talking about relative to their leadership?
Ms. Sutter. Of the 325 graduates that we have, we have--of
that, six have come back to become actual sponsors of the
program. So they have given back to the program that has given
to them and been paid sponsors, so that others could go through
the program.
And DuJuan is one of those. He was actually the first to
come back as a sponsor of the program itself.
In addition to that, both Deon and DuJuan have come back as
faculty members for the program, as have over a dozen other
members of the program who have graduated and become either
owners, CEOs--I referenced Jordan Wertlieb from Hearst
Television. Jordan comes back every year to speak to the class
as a BLT grad.
All of the BLT grads that have been part of the program
have, in many cases, to be part of it but all stay in touch
with the program.
We have matched, in many cases, people who are looking for
stations in markets where we have BLT grads. We have put them
in touch with one another. We have an app for all of our
graduates that shows them where they are, how to reach them
with contact information, so that we can keep that as a
network, if you will, to use.
And also, DuJuan and several other of our graduates have
become associate deans for the program.
Mrs. Brooks. Outstanding. Thank you so much for sharing.
Yes?
Ms. Coley. If I could say a little bit about DuJuan. MMTC,
as I have mentioned, we have a nonprofit brokerage run by David
Honig and Suzanne Gougherty. And DuJuan, I guess after he
graduated, he is a client and regular member and speaker at our
conferences. And what the brokerage does is that it helps to
get entrepreneurs into the deal flow because you know certain
deals come to us and then we are able to share.
I haven't met Deon yet but I would imagine that he will be
a client.
Ms. Sutter. They were both in the same class. That was
quite a year.
Mrs. Brooks. Well and I guess I would ask--I am curious
whether or not your two organizations work together.
Ms. Coley. Yes.
Ms. Sutter. I am on the Advisory Board for MMTC.
Mrs. Brooks. OK.
Ms. Sutter. And MMTC is very much involved in coordinating
efforts with what we do in the terms of the BLT Program. And
there is considerable overlap in terms of point of view.
Mrs. Brooks. OK.
Ms. Coley. And one of the things that, if I may, there was
a period after the tax certificate--the brokerage was formed
after the tax certificate was gotten rid of. And so one of the
things that occurred in order to help some diversity to happen,
the brokerage was the recipient of several station donations
from Clear Channel, who is now iHeartRadio. And through that
process of donating the stations to MMTC, we were able to help
minority buyers to first, you know serve as managers and then,
ultimately, buy the station.
So that is another thing. We didn't really mention that
before but----
Ms. Sutter. And you do want to mention to whom you sold two
of those stations. Perhaps a BLT grad.
Ms. Coley. Yes.
Ms. Sutter. I just wanted to share that.
Mrs. Brooks. Well thank you for sharing and thank you for
your incredible work. And I really appreciate the incredibly
important role that those stations play in the central Indiana
community.
I yield back.
Mr. Doyle. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Butterfield for 5 minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and let
me again thank the four witnesses for your testimony today.
Mr. Chairman, I have sat here patiently from the gavel. I
heard every question and every conversation that has taken
place. And so I am not one to go through questions that have
already been asked and most of the questions that I had
prepared have already been asked of the witnesses.
And so I am going to forego most of this but I will ask
Professor Sandoval something very simple.
How does diverse media ownership serve the public
interests? I know we have made the business case for it and how
it gives women and minorities an opportunity to engage in
business activities and to acquire wealth but what is the
public interest?
Ms. Sandoval. So as I mentioned, and as the courts--the
Supreme Court has recognized as well, that media ownership
diversity is important because owners have the opportunity to
decide what content gets aired, which editorials get aired,
which commercials get aired or rejected, and also who gets
employed.
So this is important. For example, I wrote a book chapter
on the Native American Reservation electricity and
infrastructure gap and am planning to go back to the Yurok
Reservation in California, where there is a large electricity
gap, in March.
And for some time, I have been trying to pitch the station
to--some of our local TV stations, who eventually interviewed
me about electricity issues and the PG&E bankruptcy, to come
with me to the Yurok Reservation, with the cooperation of the
Yurok, tell the story about this gap, this unbelievable gap
where people in California do not have electricity. And it has
been a really hard sell to get somebody to come and cover this
story.
And so at this point, I am thinking you know, I have a
former graduate who went to film school. So I am going to ask
him if he can come with me so that we, along with the Yurok,
can create this story. People need to know about this but yet,
the mainstream broadcasters are not covering it.
Mr. Butterfield. That is very helpful.
Ms. Sandoval. And so these are stories that also, as you
have issues that we talked about with a disaster, you know
getting out information, another important message, that ICE is
not going to do enforcement at shelters, is absolutely critical
to keeping people in my community safe during fires, and
ensuring that they are not in a danger zone, and that they are
not putting first responders in danger.
Having broadcasters who are willing to air that story and
understand the importance of airing that story is the
difference that also media ownership diversity makes for
everyone.
Mr. Butterfield. OK. I needed to get that into the record.
I am going to yield the balance of my time to Ms. Clarke of
New York.
Ms. Clarke. I thank my colleague and I thank our panel for
your expert witness today.
I want to drill down on EEO enforcement. Mr. Odom, given
the goals to reestablish Form 395 EEO data collection, is there
any reason why the FCC could not issue an order to restart the
collection of this data from the record before it in this
proceeding?
And Ms. Sandoval, what are your thoughts regarding the lack
of data on the diversity of media ownership?
Mr. Odom. Thank you for your question. It is a very simple
answer: Nothing is stopping the FCC. In fairness to Chairman
Pai, he has articulated a general concern about the
constitutional implications of enacting the program or
beginning to collect the data again.
The National Urban League, along with our partners at MMTC,
and a number of other civil rights organizations, have said
there is really no constitutional or legal impediment to doing
so and, although we respect the cautious litigation stance of
the FCC, we believe the FCC has a very strong legal case to
enact those record collection requirements immediately.
Ms. Coley. And if I may just add, the MMTC has also----
Ms. Clarke. Your mike.
Ms. Coley. MMTC has also advised the FCC that that--in
order to have the data, to have the most conservative point,
you could have the data anonymized, and that would further
insulate it, if there are concerns on the Commission. And we
are trying to work with the Commission to use that approach as
well.
Ms. Sandoval. Thank you very much for your question.
EEO data was collected for decades by the FCC and, in fact,
there are was also EEO enforcement that was very active. And so
what your bill would call for is just starting up the data
collection again, which actually the FCC is already mandated to
do by Congress. This is already a statutory mandate, which the
FCC does not have the discretion to ignore.
And creating this data is also important because
broadcasting is an industry that is infused with the public
interest. They hold their licenses as trustees for the public
interest. So as a matter of transparency, corporate governance,
as well as research and understanding by policymakers, this
data is absolutely critical, absolutely collectible, and should
be released.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you. And you will be next afterward if you
want to--you will have another 5 minutes, if you want it, after
Mr. Flores, who is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
panel for being here today and thank you for the tangible and
meaningful work that you have done to improve diversity in the
media space.
I want to talk about the Broadcast Leadership Program or
the BLT Program that the NAB has helped sponsor in terms of
being an initiative. It has brought real impact, and diversity,
and inclusion in the broadcast industry and I am pleased to
note that Gray TV, a broadcasting company with a strong
presence in central Texas, is an active partner in this
program. And I have had the pleasure of working with Gray TV
stations countless times during my tenure in Congress. They
produce quality local programs and their broadcast company
spends an incredible amount of time giving back to the
community, not only their time in resources and valuable air
time.
Mister--Ms. Sutter--excuse me--the BLT Program focuses on
promoting the fundamentals of purchasing, owning, and running a
successful operation of broadcast stations. How has the
competition from tech platforms impacted Wall Street's
willingness to provide capital to broadcast stations for
investment and diverse programming sources?
Ms. Sutter. Well, certainly, one of the challenges that we
have is that the competition in the media space has grown
exponentially. And so, I think the challenge for all of us is
to be able to recognize what makes us different and what makes
us unlike those other organizations that are national; and that
is, that we have the ability to be local and represent our
communities. And because of that, that is the unique difference
that we try to convey when we speak with financial institutions
and help them understand that we play a different and more
central role in the communities that we serve. And that is why
we try to go to local banks for financing. The challenge we run
into is the one I have addressed previously in our
conversations----
Mr. Flores. Exactly.
Ms. Sutter [continuing]. Is the lack of collateral.
But again, with the SBA, we have been able to make that
happen in some cases with a guaranteed loan from the SBA.
Mr. Flores. OK, thank you.
Mr. Odom, I was glad to read in your testimony that the
National Urban League is working closely with communication
companies like Comcast/NBC, Charter, and T-Mobile to develop
and promote diversity inclusion plans. This is especially
important as we see a growing trend of entertainment
consumption in the media marketplace growing outside the
traditional broadcast model and into over-the-top services,
such as YouTube, et cetera.
How can we expand the initiatives to the over-the-top-
providing programmers to help improve diversity in that area?
Mr. Odom. Thank you for your question and it is an
excellent question, one that we have given a lot of thought to.
As we said earlier, there are some of us on the panel who
are members of the FCC's Diversity Committee. And one of the
things that we have undertaken recently is a study of the
diversity practices of older, more established media companies
and telecom companies versus those of younger companies. One of
the conclusions that we have been able to draw from that study,
from that research, and this is from sitting down with some of
the tech companies and trying to understand their practices, is
that younger companies may not have the same ethos for
diversity as older companies that have had the time to work
through these issues, understand the importance of deepening
the ties with the community, with having a diverse workforce
that yields a discernable difference in their outcome.
So we think that this is something that may--it will,
hopefully, improve over time, but it improves with the
leadership of these companies. And the companies, themselves,
and the CEOs of all of those companies have to eventually do
what other companies have done and say this is important. We
will tie, in some cases, our compensation to executives to
their meeting their goals. We will set goals for ourselves to
do more business with women, and people of color, and
businesses owned by those individuals.
But it is a matter of leadership and when leadership
decides it is going to take it seriously, it can be done. These
are the same folks that are finding cures for cancer, that are
finding ways to change our lives in innumerable ways. I don't
believe that this is going to be that difficult a task if the
leaders of these organizations decide it is.
Mr. Flores. OK. I only have a few seconds left. And, in
that regard, from a policy perspective, if we are looking at
legislation to deal with the diversity issue, and try to
improve diversity, should we consider the new media space as
part of that legislation?
Mr. Odom. We have not given any thought to this, but I will
tell you, as someone who has been around this industry for 30
years, whatever happens in the license area, eventually happens
in the unlicensed area, either through these companies merging
or through--think about political advertising. There is now a
call to regulate political advertising for companies that have
not been regulated by this government. It is a show that is
coming to them and I think, at some point, Congress will and
has looked at these issues.
Mr. Flores. OK, thank you.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Flores. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Doyle. Ms. Clarke, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Clarke. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank our
panelists once again.
I wanted to drill down on the issue of diversity and
localism. This question is directed to Ms. Coley. Today, there
are markets where the same entity controls two, three, or
sometimes four local radio broadcasting stations or network
feeds.
Ms. Coley, do you think that is good for diversity and
localism? And does this threaten a community with a lack of
diverse voices in a local market?
Ms. Coley. Thank you for your question.
And absolutely, I think that is one of the key issues that
surround all of what we are talking about today, the whole
issue with the tax certificate and then the fact that the tax
certificate breeds ownership. If there is a concentration of
ownership, then it limits the number of opportunities that are
available for diverse entrepreneurs to get into that space and
diversify voices.
And then the other thing is that the--in the broadcaster,
in particular, there is not a lot available and so it makes it
even more hard for new entrants to get into that space.
So yes, I think there is a correlation.
Ms. Clarke. Yes, we are dealing with that in New York City,
as a matter of fact.
Having said that, I would like to yield the balance of my
time to the gentleman from Illinois.
Mr. Doyle. Ms. Clarke, Mr. Rush is waiving on the committee
and by rules----
Ms. Clarke. Oh, OK.
Mr. Doyle [continuing]. Cannot speak to everyone on the
committee.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. I yield back the balance of my time,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Doyle. The gentlelady yields back.
Mr. Johnson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Sutter, I have got a lot of broadcasters in my
districts. It is a very rural district and so local
broadcasters are near and dear to my heart because, in rural
America, they are the main source of information to people that
don't have access to broadband. So they don't have the online
access to news and information.
So, in your opinion, how do you compare the regulatory
burdens imposed on broadcasters with other providers of local
news and content, like print and online?
Ms. Sutter. Well, if I am not mistaken, they don't have
any. So that regulation doesn't exist for others.
I think broadcasters want to be able to do the best that
they can to provide the information for their local
communities. And so being able to do that is where the
resources ought to be placed, toward providing the best
programming, doing the things that we can to make sure that the
community is well-served, well-informed, and has access to
information, entertainment, and news that is important to them.
So the hope and goal are that we won't make it so that the
smaller broadcasters, especially, many of whom are graduates of
the BLT Program in these small markets, are able to put their
resources toward the place that can benefit their community.
So I would simply--and I think that is one of the things
the FCC has attempted to do, is to try to reduce some of the
things that they perceive are not essential, in terms of
regulation, that take away resources way from the core of what
it is we do, which is serve our communities. So that is
important.
Mr. Johnson. Great. OK.
Well, you know much of the debate surrounding diversity
centers on past and current ownership statistics but we need to
be more forward-thinking. Local radio and television
broadcasters are striving to integrate online and app-based
technologies to improve their outreach to their communities.
What type of programs do the broadcasting industry conduct
to grow and promote new entrants and leaders seeking to
innovate in broadcasting?
Ms. Sutter. Broadcasters understand that their content is
what makes them unique and special. And looking for as many
places to deploy that content is what creates the innovation, I
think, that we have seen in our industry.
The question about over-the-top, OTT, many broadcasters are
looking to get their content distributed OTT as well. So for
broadcasters, it is about, once we have created the content,
how do we find as many different screens, as many different
opportunities? I think we are utilizing our digital channels in
television, as well as in radio, to try and find more ways to
provide additional information and our content to get it to
people as they want it.
Mr. Johnson. Great.
Mr. Chairman, I don't want to get yelled at. So, I am going
to yield back.
Mr. Doyle. I thank the gentleman for that.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Cardenas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
Ranking Member. I appreciate the opportunity for us to discuss
this very important issue that, if we get it right and we make
the progress that almost everybody here agrees that we should
be making, it is really, really good for business, and it is
amazingly good for democracy, and it is important to make sure
that inclusion is done in a way that is not about affirmative
action. It is not about affirmative action with me. It is just
about good action. It is just about doing what is right across
the spectrum, to make sure that inclusion is felt in the hearts
and the minds of everybody in this country, to make sure that
we are taking advantage of all of the amazing talents that
comes in women, in men, in people of color, and even white men.
Everybody deserves to be included because of their talent and
because of what they can contribute.
I want to thank my colleagues for coming together to have
this thoughtful discussion today on the need for improving our
diversity in media ownership. And more and more of our
constituents are seeing the benefits of seeing diverse voices
and perspectives in our programming, which, in turn, reflects
the diversity of our great country and embodies the First
Amendment values of our democracy.
And I welcome this discussion, not only today but in the
future as well, at every level, both in Congress, on the
streets of America, and certainly when it comes to our
regulators.
I also want to give a shout-out to my colleague, Katherine
Clark, and my colleague, Judy Chu. We have been chairing a
caucus that focuses on diversity in media. And it is really
important that we increase this awareness at every level.
Ms. Coley, in your written testimony, you mentioned that
some media companies have developed diversity and inclusion
plans that represent commitments by these individual companies
to improve the racial diversity in the Boards of Directors, in
the c-suites, among staff, procurement, and community
investment. Can you discuss what some of those plans and
commitments look like?
Ms. Coley. Yes, thank you for your question.
Mr. Odom mentioned a couple of those, the National Urban
League, MMTC have worked with NAACP, and National Action
Network in helping companies to come up with commitments. We
call them the Diversity MOUs. And then the commitments on
Comcast/NBC Universal. T-Mobile recently entered into one.
Charter Communications entered into one. And they are very
comprehensive voluntary commitments to address diversity at the
employment level, at the c-suite and Board diversity level, and
also in procurement, and also in community outreach activities.
And what we have learned is in Comcast's case, for
instance, they entered into an MOU to launch a number of
diverse programming networks. And a lot of times, what you
learn is that we are living in America in 2021 and a lot of
these networks are very good business. And so what you find is
that some companies actually exceed some of the requirements
under the MOU because they see that this is actually really a
good----
Mr. Cardenas. Are those companies who are succeeding, or
are they going bankrupt? Are they suffering from these efforts
or are they doing well?
Ms. Coley. Yes, right. Comcast hardly--no, I think they are
doing very good. And it creates an environment in which we are
working with the companies. They are doing something that
benefits them. It benefits us and the community, as well. And
it helps America look like you know America. And I think that
we are going to continue to do those kinds of things on a
voluntarily basis.
On the data collection, we have worked with NAMIC, the
National Association of Multi-Ethnicity in Communications, and
Women in Cable and Telecommunications. They commissioned and
produced an amazing study with Mercer. And they actually have
been voluntarily collecting this data, employment data, for the
past ten years and they set benchmarks.
And then I was at their conference this past September and
they had a huge celebration of how they exceeded the benchmarks
they set.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you. In the interest of time, I just
wanted to thank Ms. Sandoval, who is a former CPUC
commissioner, one of the few, if not the only--first Latina
commissioner, I think, in the history of California to be on
the Public Utilities Commission.
And it is really important that we get a perspective across
the board. And I want to thank all of you for your continued
work and all the efforts that you are putting forth to drive
not only this issue, but for many good issues across America.
So thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman yields back.
Seeing no committee members present, it now gives me great
pleasure to welcome my good friend, Bobby Rush, who chairs our
Energy Subcommittee, who is waiving on the committee today. And
Bobby, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman and it is a
delight to me, once again, on this very key committee in
Congress.
Serving most of my time as a Member in Congress as a member
on this subcommittee, for years, and years, and years, I have
been consistently on this subcommittee. And I think this is the
first time--first term, rather, that I have not been on this
subcommittee. But that said, I want to thank you for holding
this important hearing.
As I look into the parties, I see faces that I have seen
over the years of people who have been concerned about the
issue of minority participation in media, and the various two-
minority participation in many years, for many, many years that
I, on the one hand, well, I am very appreciative of you holding
this hearing, but I am also disappointed that we are having
these kinds of hearings that we have had many, many, many times
before.
And it is kind of disheartening that we still are having
some of the same arguments, taking some of the same positions
that we have taken for decades now.
Mr. Chairman, I was a part of this committee when the Tax
Certificate Program ended back in 1995. And I agree that it was
one of the most successful economic development opportunities
that existed for minorities, particularly for African
Americans, in decades, if not centuries, and granted
broadcasters to finally grant minorities a voice, a recognized
voice in their communities, and touch our nation as a whole,
and it increased minority access to capital in the broadcasting
industry.
Mr. Chairman, I just have to say for the record that back
in 1994 that there were 64 black-owned banks that could loan
money, that could provide capital, to minorities and today,
there are 21 black-owned banks. So we are headed in the wrong
direction. We are headed in a downward spiral.
Mr. Chairman, I read somewhere recently that the net worth
of white Americans in this nation is somewhere around $137,000;
the net worth of African Americans is $11,000--headed in the
wrong direction.
Mr. Chairman, back in 2003, I introduced the
Telecommunications Ownership and Diversification Act, which was
aimed to reinstate the Tax Certificate Program. And we weren't
successful--changing administrations and what have you, we
weren't successful.
The situation is even more desperate than it was and
different than it was in 1995, when the Tax Certificate Program
ended.
We heard a lot of discussions today about the problem with
diversity as it relates to broadcasters. And it is a problem,
but I believe that the problem is even greater than just this
one problem. The problem that we are confronted with is
pervasive throughout the media and the telecommunications
industry, particularly. And to address this much greater
problem is why I am working on legislation that would address
the lack of diversity in a more robust, effective, and
comprehensive way.
My time is up, Mr. Chairman, and I don't have an
opportunity to ask questions of the witnesses, but this is a
problem----
Mr. Doyle. That is because you talked for 5 and a half
minutes.
Mr. Rush. I know, Mr. Chairman, but this is a problem that
is serious to my soul.
Mr. Doyle. I understand.
Mr. Rush. A very serious problem. And thank you for
allowing me to be a part of this subcommittee.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman yields back, and I thank him for
being on the committee today. He is always welcome here.
I want to request unanimous consent to enter the following
documents into the record: a letter from the Leadership
Conference on Civil and Human rights; a letter from the LPTV
Spectrum Rights Coalition; a letter from the National Hispanic
Media Coalition; a letter from Public Knowledge; a 2019
National Association for Multi-Ethnicity in Communications and
Women in Cable Telecommunications Diversity Survey; a statement
in support of Expanding Broadcast Opportunities Act; a
September 2019 letter from MMTC to the FCC; a December 2019
letter from MMTC to the FCC; a September 2019 comments filed
with the FCC; November 2019 comments filed with the FCC; and
NTIA-MTDP Minority Broadcast Ownership report; a journal
article by David Honig; and written remarks of Chairman Pai at
MMTC's 9th Annual Broadband and Social Justice Summit.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Doyle. I want to thank the witnesses for participating
in today's hearing. We appreciated your testimony and your
answering the many questions that were put in front of you.
I would remind Members that, pursuant to committee rules,
they have ten business days to submit additional questions for
the record to be answered by the witnesses who have appeared.
And I would ask that each witness who has appeared respond
promptly to any such questions that you may receive.
At this time, the committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:33 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Anna G. Eshoo

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing.
An independent and diverse media that reflects the
population it serves is critical for the health of our
democracy and society. This should be the starting point for
today's hearing. The Declaration of Rights of the Commonwealth
of Virginia, which served as inspiration for our First
Amendment's press freedom, states directly that ``the freedom
of the press is one of the great bulwarks of liberty, and can
never be restrained but by despotic governments.'' This is an
eloquent statement underscoring why we need a free press.
However, our constitutional right to a free press is a
foundation we must build upon. Our goal ought to be a media
ecosystem that reflects the make-up of our country, and on this
goal, we're failing.
Looking at traditional broadcast stations, which the FCC
collects robust data on, we see myriad problems. To reflect the
population, women should own about half of the broadcast
stations. The FCC's most recent report on broadcast ownership
finds that, in fact, women own less than ten percent of full
power TV, AM, and FM stations.
The Census estimates that 18.3 percent of Americans are
Hispanic or Latino, yet they own five percent or less of full
power commercial TV, AM, and FM stations. The situation is
similarly problematic for African Americans, Asian Americans,
Native Americans, and Native Hawaiians. Things get much worse
when the intersection of gender and race is considered. Exactly
one full power TV station is owned by an African American
woman, according to the FCC's most recent report.
I support legislative efforts to increase diversity in
ownership of broadcast stations, cable and satellite TV
distributors, as the legislation before us aims to do. This is
why I've cosponsored two pieces of legislation we're
considering:

H. Res. 549, Reaffirming the commitment to media
diversity and pledging to work with media entities and diverse
stakeholders to develop common ground solutions to eliminate
barriers to media diversity, which clearly articulates that
media diversity is an important goal; and

H.R. 3957, the Expanding Broadcast Ownership
Opportunities Act of 2019, which reinstates a tax certificate
to encourage ownership of broadcast media by women and people
of color.
Finally, I want to say a few words about issues that are
not part of the scope of today's discussion, but impact media
diversity and ought to be priorities for our Committee. The
consolidation of ownership within the largest broadcast
networks and cable companies in our country is a growing
challenge that intensifies the lack of media diversity. Beyond
ownership, media companies employ too few employees, especially
those `on air,' who are women or people of color. The media
that young Americans are flocking to--YouTube, Instagram,
SnapChat, TikTok, and other apps--democratized content creation
in many ways but have not made as much progress on diversity as
was once hoped. Too often, top content creators on these
platforms don't reflect their viewership, and to achieve a
truly diverse media marketplace, we'll need to consider all of
these issues and more.
I thank the witnesses for being with us today, and I look
forward to a productive hearing.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
