- OUT OF CONTROL: THE IMPACT OF WILDFIRES ON OUR POWER SECTOR AND THE ENVIRONMENT

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OUT OF CONTROL: THE IMPACT OF WILDFIRES
ON OUR POWER SECTOR AND THE ENVIRONMENT

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 28, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-91

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-685 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              GREG WALDEN, Oregon
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York             FRED UPTON, Michigan
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           PETE OLSON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California           DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico            H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PAUL TONKO, New York                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York, Vice     BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chair                            BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa                 LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts                    MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California            RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California                TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DARREN SOTO, Florida
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
------

Professional Staff

JEFFREY C. CARROLL, Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Deputy Staff Director
MIKE BLOOMQUIST, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Energy

BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Chairman
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          FRED UPTON, Michigan
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania               Ranking Member
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
JERRY McNERNEY, California, Vice     CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair                            PETE OLSON, Texas
PAUL TONKO, New York                 DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa                 ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               BILL FLORES, Texas
Massachusetts                    RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                TIM WALBERG, Michigan
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)
------

Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change

PAUL TONKO, New York
Chairman
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York           JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
SCOTT H. PETERS, California            Ranking Member
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California    CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware       BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
DARREN SOTO, Florida                 BILLY LONG, Missouri
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              BILL FLORES, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
JERRY McNERNEY, California           JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California, Vice Chair    GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     3
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................    13
Prepared statement...........................................    15

Witnesses

William D. Johnson, CEO and President, PG&E Corporation..........    16
Prepared statement...........................................    19
Answers to submitted questions...............................   177
John J. MacWilliams, Senior Fellow, Center on Global Energy
Policy, Columbia University....................................    30
Prepared statement...........................................    32
Anthony S. Davis, Ph.D., Interim Dean, College of Forestry,
Oregon State University........................................    40
Prepared statement...........................................    42
Brandon M. Collins, Ph.D., Research Scientist, Center for Fire
Research and Outreach, Berkeley Forests, University of
California.....................................................    50
Prepared statement...........................................    52
Dave Markham, President and CEO, Central Electric Cooperative,
Incorporated...................................................    61
Prepared statement...........................................    63

Submitted Material

Article of January 9, 2020, ``As Australia burns, the same
ingredients for disaster fare found in New Jersey,'' from The
New Jersey Advance Media, by Michael Sol Warren, submitted by
Mr. Pallone....................................................   123
Letter of January 28, 2020, by Scott Drury, President, SDG&E, to
Mr. Rush, et al., submitted by Mr. Rush........................   127
Letter of January 28, 2020 from Edison Electric Institute, to Mr.
Pallone and Mr. Walden, submitted by Mr. Rush..................   130
Letter of January 28, 2020 from Jupiter, to Mr. Rush, et al.,
submitted by Mr. Rush..........................................   135
Letter of January 27, 2020, from Western Governors' Association,
to Mr Rush, et. al., submitted by Mr. Rush.....................   140
Article of October 10, 2019, ``For the Most Vulnerable,
California Blackouts? Can Be Life or Death', '' by Thomas
Fuller, New York Times, submitted by Mr. Rush..................   160
Article of November 19, 2019, ``California's Preemptive Blackouts
Put a Strain on People With Home Medical Needs,'' by Mark
Kreidler, National Public Radio, submitted by Mr. Rush.........   163
Article of January 12, 2020, ``Australia's indigenous people have
a solution for the country's bushfires. And it's bee around for
50,000 years, from CNN, by Leah Asmelash,'' submitted by Mr.
Shimkus........................................................   169
Letter of November 14, 2019, by Josh Harder, United States
Representative (CA-10), to Mr. Pallone and Mr. Walden,
submitted by Mr. Rush..........................................   175

OUT OF CONTROL: THE IMPACT OF WILDFIRES ON OUR POWER SECTOR AND THE
ENVIRONMENT

----------

TUESDAY, JANUARY 28, 2020

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy
joint with the
Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Bobby L. Rush (chairman of the Subcommittee on Energy)
presiding.
Members present: Representatives Rush, DeGette, Doyle,
Matsui, Sarbanes, McNerney, Tonko, Clarke, Loebsack, Schrader,
Kennedy, Ruiz, Peters, Dingell, Veasey, Kuster, Kelly,
Barragan, McEachin, Blunt Rochester, Soto, O'Halleran, Pallone
(ex officio), Walden (subcommittee ranking member), Upton,
Shimkus, Latta, Rodgers, McKinley, Kinzinger, Griffith,
Johnson, Long, Bucshon, Flores, Mullin, Hudson, Walberg,
Carter, and Duncan.
Also present: Representatives Eshoo, Cardenas, and
Gianforte.
Staff present: Jeffrey C. Carroll, Staff Director;
Catherine Giliohann, FERG Detailee; Waverly Gordon, Deputy
Chief Counsel; Tiffany Guarascio, Deputy Staff Director; Omar
Guzman-Toro, Policy Analyst; Zach Kahan, Outreach and Member
Service Coordinator; Rick Kessler, Senior Advisor and Staff
Directory, Energy and Environment; Brendan Larkin, Policy
Coordinator; Jourdan Lewis, Policy Analyst; Elysa Montfort,
Press Secretary; Joe Orlando, Staff Assistant; Lino Pena-
Martinez, Staff Assistant; Alivia Roberts, Press Assistant;
Nikki Roy, Policy Coordinator; Medha Surampudy, Professional
Staff Member; Rebecca Tomilchik, Staff Assistant; Tuley Wright,
Energy and Environment Policy Advisor; William Clutterbuck,
Minority Staff Assistant; Jordan Davis, Minority Senior
Advisor; Tyler Greenberg, Minority Staff Assistant; Peter
Kielty, Minority General Counsel; Mary Martin, Minority Chief
Counsel, Energy and Environment and Climate Change; Brandon
Mooney, Minority Deputy Chief Counsel, Energy; Brannon Rains,
Minority Legislative Clerk; and Peter Spencer, Minority Senior
Professional Staff Member, Environment and Climate Change.
Mr. Rush [presiding]. The Subcommittee on Energy and the
Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change will now come to
order.
The Chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes for the
purposes of an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Good morning again.
Today, the committee convenes for a joint subcommittee
hearing to conduct oversight of an issue ravaging communities
and plaguing the environment. Fires often occur within the U.S.
An average of 73,000 wildfires burn seven million acres of U.S.
land each and every year. Though these fires are, in some
cases, part of the healthy ecosystem, their destruction has
devastated communities both here at home and around the world.
For the Members of Congress present, there are
representatives from each of these areas that have been
recently hard hit by wildfires among you, including my
colleagues from California, Oregon, Washington, and Colorado. I
might add that we are also joined by a member of my staff who
is here from Australia and whose community is still feeling the
impact of recent wildfires in his nation.
According to the Fourth National Climate Assessment, the
annual area burned in our nation's western states alone could
increase two to six times the current areas by the middle of
this century. Factors contributing to this predicted uptick
include climate change, urban development, poor vegetation
management, and issues related to power lines.
Last year, California experienced historically catastrophic
fires resulting in a tragic loss of life and unimaginable
destruction to homes and property. One-half of the causes of
California's most disastrous fires are linked to electric
utility infrastructure. High winds, in particular, blow nearby
vegetation into power lines and aging electric infrastructure
causes live wires to fall and igniting the fires. Since 2007,
California regulators have permitted the use of public safety
power shutoffs by electric utilities to prevent the ignition of
wildfires during high-wind events. However, long-term solutions
like microgrids and the hardening of our grid infrastructure
are necessary considerations, as blackouts pose a risk to more
and more populations and other ratepayers.
I want to thank our witnesses for their participation in
today's hearing, and I look forward to identifying concrete
solutions to these daunting problems.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rush follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Bobby L. Rush

Good morning, today the Committee convenes for a joint
subcommittee hearing to conduct oversight of an issue ravaging
communities and plaguing the environment.
Often occurring on our nation's west coast, an average of
73,000 wildfires burn seven million acres of U.S. land each
year. Though these fires are, in some cases, part of healthy
ecosystems, their destruction has devastated communities, both
here, at home, and around the world.
In this room alone, we have representation from areas
recently hard hit by wildfires. This includes my colleagues
from California, Oregon, Washington, and Colorado.
Additionally, we are joined by a member of my staff from
Australia whose community is still feeling the impact of recent
wildfires.
According to the Fourth National Climate Assessment, the
annual area burned in our nation's western states alone could
increase two to six times the current average by mid-century.
Factors contributing to this projected uptick include climate
change, urban development, poor vegetation management, and
issues related to power lines.
Last year, California experienced historically catastrophic
fires resulting in a tragic loss of life and unthinkable
destruction to homes and properties. Of the known causes of
California's most disastrous fires, one half are linked to
electric utility infrastructure. High winds, in particular,
blow nearby vegetation into power lines and snap aging
electrical infrastructure causing live wires to fall and ignite
fires.
Since 2007, California regulators have permitted the use of
Public Safety Power Shut-offs by electric utilities to prevent
the ignition of wildfires during high wind events. However,
long-term solutions, like microgrids and the hardening of our
grid infrastructure, are necessary considerations as lengthy
blackouts pose a risk to vulnerable populations and other
ratepayers.
I thank our witnesses for their participation in today's
hearing and look forward to identifying concrete solution to
these daunting problems. And now, it is my district honor to
recognize, for the purposes of an opening statement, my friend
from the great State of Michigan, With that, Mr. Upton.

And now, it is my distinct honor to recognize for the
purposes of an opening statement my friend from the great State
of Michigan, Mr. Upton.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, my friend and chairman, for
holding today's joint hearing to examine the impact of the
recent wildfires and certainly to discuss ways to improve
forest management and maintain electrical equipment to prevent
fires and reduce risk to human health as well as to the
environment.
There are many of us that believe there is no question that
the biggest driver of the recent wildfires is decades of
mismanagement of our nation's forests. Yes, climate change is,
indeed, playing a role, but the evidence suggests that our
direct impact to the land and the ways that we manage our
forests has a lot to do with the situation that we are facing
today.
So, I plan to use today's hearing to discuss what we can do
to improve forest conditions, prevent sparks on electrical
lines, remove brush and trees from utility corridors, and, yes,
strengthen planning and preparedness at every level.
Wildfires are not a new phenomenon. Before the pioneers
settled in the West, wildfires were much more widespread and
they burned many more acres than they burn today. However,
today's wildfires are burning hotter and with more intensity as
a result of decades of fire suppression and the buildup of
brush and dead trees.
So, with population growth and urban sprawl, more people
than ever before, especially in the West, are living in
wilderness areas that are prone to wildfires. I look forward to
hearing from our forestry experts, Dr. Collins and Dr. Davis,
to expand on the trends influencing wildfires and share
suggestions to improve forest conditions that can reduce the
risk of fires. There are many steps that we can take
immediately, including the thinning of brush, prescribed burns,
and allowing some wildfires to run their course naturally.
But, as we know from some of our prior hearings on
wildfires, these issues are particularly acute in California
and Oregon, which have both suffered devastating wildfires in
recent years. So, I look forward to hearing from Mr. Johnson
and Mr. Markham about what utilities can do to manage hazardous
trees on their right-of-way and maintain their equipment to
prevent sparks.
I am also interested to learn more about how utilities can
improve preparation with more accurate forecasting, more
proactive maintenance and tree clearing, more sensors and
automated equipment to improve visibility on their systems.
There is a big role in technology here. So, we need to be
thinking about how do we innovate and drive these new ideas
into practice.
Members of this committee are also interested in gathering
lessons learned on the regulatory side, especially at the state
level. If there are permitting challenges that prevent
utilities from clearing hazardous trees, we need to address
them. Much of the focus of today's hearing will certainly be on
California and the challenges that they are experiencing with
their electric utilities.
While the fires themselves are devastating, millions of
residents in California also have been suffering through these
public safety power shutoffs in an attempt to prevent wildfires
from being started by electrical equipment during strong winds
and dry weather. These blackouts have resulted in cascading
effects, causing widespread interruptions affecting public
safety, health care, transportation, and other government
services.
These proactive blackouts are simply not sustainable. It is
crazy to think about living in a modern society where one must
constantly worry about whether the lights are on or whether
they can come back on, whether the freezer defrosts, let alone
worry about whether 911 is going to work in an emergency.
The bottom line is that we need to make sure that our
utilities and government regulators are taking an all-hazards
approach. Now more than ever, we should be focused on grid
reliability and resilience. I believe that we should treat
wildfires like severe weather and cyberattacks. We need to be
more focused on those threats and make sure that we have the
tools in place across the board to protect, respond, and
recover from wildfires wherever they might occur.
With that, I look forward to today's testimony and
continuing the conversation with colleagues on both sides about
some legislative solutions. I would note that we have got a
number of bills that address grid reliability and pipeline
security, which would strengthen the Department of Energy's
ability to respond to natural disasters like wildfires. So,
let's get these bills to the floor soon. They are but one of
the many steps that we need to take.
With that, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding today's hearing to
examine the impact of the recent wildfires and discuss ways to
improve forest management and maintain electrical equipment to
prevent fires and reduce risks to human health and the
environment.
There is no question that the biggest driver of the recent
wildfires is decades of mismanagement of our nation's forests.
Yes, climate change is playing a role, but the evidence
suggests that our direct impact to the land and the way we
manage our forests has much more to do with the situation we
are facing today.
I plan to use today's hearing to discuss what we can do to
improve forest conditions, prevent sparks on electrical lines,
remove brush and trees from utility corridors, and strengthen
planning and preparedness as the State and local level.
Wildfires are not a new phenomenon. Before the pioneers
settled the West, wildfires were much more widespread, and they
burned many more acres than they burn today. However, today's
wildfires are burning hotter and with more intensity as a
result of decades of fire suppression and the buildup of brush
and dead trees.
With population growth and urban sprawl, more people than
ever before, especially in the West, are living in wilderness
areas that are prone to wildfires. I look forward to hearing
from our forestry experts, Dr. Collins and Dr. Davis, to expand
on the trends influencing wildfires and share suggestions to
improve forest conditions and reduce the risk of fires. There
are many steps we can take immediately--including thinning of
brush, prescribed burns, and allowing some wildfires to run
their course naturally.
As we know from some of our prior hearings on wildfires,
these issues are particularly acute in California and Oregon,
which have both suffered devastating wildfires in recent years.
I look forward to hearing from Mr. Johnson and Mr. Markham
about what utilities can do to manage hazard trees on their
rights-of-way and maintain their equipment to prevent sparks.
I am also interested to learn more about how utilities can
improve preparation with more accurate forecasting, more
proactive maintenance and tree clearing, and more sensors and
automated equipment to improve visibility on their systems.
There is a big role for technology here, so we need to be
thinking about how to innovate and drive these new ideas into
practice.
Members of this Committee are also interested to gather
lessons-learned on the regulatory side, especially at the State
level. If there are permitting challenges that prevents
utilities from clearing hazard trees, we should address them.
Much of the focus of today's hearing will be on California, and
the challenges they are experiencing with their electric
utilities.
While the fires themselves are devastating, millions of
residents in California have also been suffering through
``public safety power shutoffs'' in attempt to prevent
wildfires from being started by electrical equipment during
strong winds and dry weather. These blackouts have resulted in
cascading effects, causing widespread interruptions affecting
public safety, healthcare, transportation, and other government
services.
These proactive blackouts are simply not sustainable. It is
crazy to imagine living in a modern society where one must
constantly worry about whether the lights are going to come on
or whether the freezer defrost, let alone worry about whether
911 is going to work in an emergency.
The bottom line is that we need to make sure our utilities
and government regulators are taking an ``all hazards''
approach. Now, more than ever, we should be focused on grid
reliability and resilience. I believe we should treat wildfires
like severe weather and cyber-attacks. We need to be laser
focused on the threat, and make sure we have tools in place
across the board to protect, respond, and recover to wildfires
when they occur.
With that, I look forward to today's testimony and
continuing the conversation with my colleagues about some
legislative solutions. I would note that we have several bills
addressing grid reliability and pipeline security, which would
strengthen the Department of Energy's ability to respond to
natural disasters like wildfires. I hope to get those bills to
the floor soon, but they are one of many steps we can take.
Thank you, I yield back.

Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Tonko, who is the chairman of the Subcommittee
on Environment and Climate Change. Mr. Tonko is recognized for
5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Chairman Rush, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here this morning.
In recent years, we, unfortunately, have become accustomed
to the destructive power of wildfires. The growing number of
these disasters poses significant health, ecological, and
fiscal risks. We know the consequences of these fires can be
devastating. But simply quenching them without addressing their
root cause is incomplete and irresponsible.
These dramatic increases in wildfires are a symptom of an
ailing planet, and climate change is contributing to the
growing severity of these fires. Across the country, climate
change is raising temperatures, exacerbating the drought,
drying soil, and killing trees. These conditions prime the
landscape for long, dangerous burns.
In previous hearings, we have heard that our forests
capture and store significant amounts of carbon, which can
reduce climate pollution and help meet emissions reduction
goals. Wildfires reverse that benefit. Not only do fires
generate harmful air pollution and smoke, causing tremendous
public health challenges, they are turning forests, potential
climate solutions as carbon sink, into sources of emissions.
Simply put, climate change is worsening fires, which cause more
climate damage.
We also know that our wildfire response requires greater
resilience, adaptation, and planning. This is especially true
in the context of the power sector. Today, we will seek to
understand what is necessary to design and operate an
electricity system that is more resilient and acknowledges that
fire poses a risk to, and can be caused by, our energy
infrastructure.
I hope we will hear more about the strategies being
proposed to ensure high-risk areas can continue to have both
safe and reliable service and we are enabling the investments
in grid modernization and management necessary to, indeed,
harden our systems.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonko follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Paul Tonko

Thank you, Chairman Rush and thank you to our witnesses for
being here this morning.
In recent years, we unfortunately have become accustomed to
the destructive power of wildfires. The growing number of these
disasters poses significant health, ecological, and fiscal
risks.
We know the consequences of these fires can be devastating,
but simply quenching them without addressing their root cause
is incomplete and irresponsible.
These dramatic increases in wildfires are a symptom of an
ailing planet, and climate change is contributing to the
growing severity of these fires.
Across the country, climate change is raising temperatures,
exacerbating drought, drying soil, and killing trees. These
conditions prime the landscape for long, dangerous burns.
In previous hearings, we have heard that our forests
capture and store significant amounts of carbon, which can
reduce climatepollution and help meet emissions reduction
goals. Wildfires reverse that benefit.
Not only do fires generate harmful air pollution and smoke,
causing a tremendous public health challenges, they are
turningforests--potential climate solutions as carbon sinks--
into sources of emissions.
Simply put, climate change is worsening fires, which cause
more climate damage.
We also know that our wildfire response requires greater
resilience, adaptation, and planning. This is especially true
in the context of the power sector.
Today we will seek to understand what is necessary to
design and operate an electricity system that is more resilient
and acknowledges that fires pose a risk to--and can be caused
by--our energy infrastructure.
I hope we will hear more about the strategies being
proposed to ensure high-risk areas can continue to have both
safe and reliable service, and we are enabling the investments
in grid modernization and management necessary to harden our
systems.

With that, I will yield 1-minute of my remaining time to
Mr. Cardenas.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you, Chairman Tonko.
First, I want to take a moment to thank the thousands of
firefighters and first responders throughout California and
across the country who are on the front lines risking their
lives to protect us from these devastating fires.
These fires are all too common in my district and across
the State and across the country. It is alarming how wildfires
have grown in intensity, frequency, and ferocity in recent
years. A big wildfire in California used to be maybe tens of
thousands of acres, maybe or 100,000. Now we are talking a
million acres or more. These wildfires threaten American lives,
homes, property, and business. From January to October 2019, we
had over 40,000 wildfires that burned over 4.4 million acres.
As we hold this hearing, Australia burns. Raging fires have
swept across Australia, devastating land, property, and
wildlife; and more than 30 people have been killed, over a
billion animals have died, and more than 3,000 homes have been
burned down.
Ladies and gentlemen, we can do more, and one of the
biggest contributors to this phenomenon is human activity.
I yield back to Mr. Tonko.
Mr. Tonko. I now yield the remainder of my time to the
gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. I thank the Chair.
I requested today's hearings in part because our current
energy infrastructure in this country is not adequate to
today's challenge. Our energy grid serves as the backbone of
our economy, touching every aspect of our lives. A reliable
grid system is also crucial for our national security and for a
clean energy future.
Over the past few decades, a combination of actions at the
federal and state levels have rendered our energy grid ill-
prepared to withstand the physical impact of wildfires and
other modern risks. This poses a major challenge, as wildfires
and other extreme weather events are expected to continue to
increase in severity due to climate change.
But in order to secure utility wildfire resilience and
encourage grid modernization, we, first need to understand if
and when infrastructure investment began to taper off and why.
I also want to get a clear picture of what the Federal
Government can and should do to prevent wildfires, including
increasing investment in energy infrastructure and in the
development of resilience and fire-preventing standards at the
state levels.
I thank the witnesses for attending, and I yield back to
the Chair.
Mr. Tonko. And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back the
remainder of my time.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, and the
ranking member of the Subcommittee on Environment and Climate
Change.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing will review the risk and harms of wildfires
and what may be done to address the risk. The general focus
concerns the role of the electric power structure, which has
been linked to destructive fires, especially in California in
the recent years.
Orienting our focus around the power sector should be
useful for the subcommittees, both from energy and environment
policy perspectives. It should help inform a better
understanding of what it takes to reduce wildfire risk and
improve the resiliency when wildfire risks are especially
high--as has been the case in California and the Pacific
Northwest for a number of years now.
It also will help us focus on the future risk in a
practical way. When we talk about addressing long-term climate
risk, for example, a big part of the discussion must involve
what is needed to provide for adaptive capacity of communities
to reduce, respond, and recover from the impacts of those
risks.
Part of the capacity involves ensuring the economic
wherewithal of communities to respond to risk. Another part
involves ensuring effective information and permitting for
timely decisions that enable cost-effective, resilient
infrastructure. Overall, adaptive capacity is about flexibility
to respond to risks, whatever they may be. I understand, for
example, that one of the benefits of PG&E's exercise in
communications and outreach during the power outages has been
to better prepare the communication and response for
catastrophic events like earthquakes.
During the 115th Congress, I chaired two subcommittee
hearings on wildfires. We examined the air quality impacts of
wildfires with a focus on stakeholder perspectives. We also
examined the mitigation and management strategies for reducing
air quality risk from wildfire smoke. Generally, these
strategies involve efforts to reduce the intensity and
frequency of wildfires that threaten communities. The
strategies also involve managing the inevitable smoke impacts,
whether from wildfires or from what is known as prescribed
burning. And they involve ensuring that effective actions are
credited appropriately in air quality planning, air quality
monitoring, and compliance activities, so states and localities
are not punished for taking action that will improve public
health.
The EPA has issued guidance over the past year aiming to
reduce penalties for prescribed burns and wildfires. This
process requires significant coordination, planning, and
approvals. More may be done in terms of the agency recognizing
large regional fire events that impact multiple states. It is
bad enough for communities to experience choking wildfire
smoke, but for states to be further penalized for these
exceptional events does not make sense.
Today's hearing should provide additional perspective to
help understand the importance of these strategies to the
larger goal of reducing the harmful impacts of wildfires.
Additional information on the value of preventative measures
such as prescribed burns, mechanical thinning, and related
practices would be useful today.
Two of our witnesses today, Dr. Brandon Collins and Dr.
Anthony Davis, can talk about the value of these practices from
their fieldwork in California and the Pacific Northwest. And we
welcome you here.
During the past two wildfire hearings, we learned about the
experience in the Eastern United States, which has a long
culture of more active fire management than in the West. There
are many reasons for this, some involving topography and other
unique factors of the West, but the underlying fact is that
more can be done today to reduce the risk.
It will be useful to examine the measures most necessary to
respond to recover from wildfire events. For electric
providers, the most pressing issues concern restoration of
power or ensuring communities have the electricity when they
need it most, and increasing their technological ability to
ensure reliability during hazard events.
For federal and state policymakers, there is also a need to
ensure forests recover and are resilient to inevitable fire
events and other hazards. Having basic facts on this can go a
long way to improving our energy, environment, and public
health policies.
Let me welcome the panelists. I look forward to
understanding the challenges and opportunities you face and
what we can do to ensure our policies accommodate what is
necessary to reduce the risk and ensure the adaptive capacity
of communities going forward.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time, and I thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follow:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. John Shimkus

Today's hearing will review the risks and harms of
wildfires and what may be done to address these risks. The
general focus concerns the role of the electric power
infrastructure, which has been linked to destructive fires,
especially in California in recent years.
Orienting our focus around the power sector should be
useful for the Subcommittees, both from the energy and
environment policy perspectives. It should help inform a better
understanding of what it takes to reduce wildfire risks and
improve the resilience when wildfire risks are especially
high--as has been the case in California and the Pacific
Northwest for a number of years now.
It also should help us focus on future risks in a practical
way. When we talk about addressing long term climate risks, for
example, a big part of the discussion must involve what is
needed to provide for the adaptive capacity of communities to
reduce, respond, and recover from impacts of those risks.
Part of this capacity involves ensuring the economic
wherewithal of communities to respond to risks. Another part
involves ensuring effective information and permitting for
timely decisions that enable for cost-effective, resilient
infrastructure.
Overall, adaptive capacity is about flexibility to respond
to risks, whatever they may be. I understand, for example, that
one of the benefits of the PG&E's exercising the communications
and outreach during its power outages has been to better
prepare the communication and response for catastrophic events
like earthquakes.
During the 115th Congress, I chaired two subcommittee
hearings on wildfires. We examined the air quality impacts of
wildfires, with a focus on stake holder perspectives. We also
examined the mitigation and management strategies for reducing
air quality risks from wildfire smoke.
Generally, these strategies involved efforts to reduce the
intensity and frequency of wildfires that threaten communities.
The strategies also involve managing the inevitable smoke
impacts, whether from wildfires or from what is known as
prescribed burning. And they involve ensuring that effective
actions are credited appropriately in air quality planning, air
quality monitoring, and compliance activities, so states and
localities are not punished for taking action that will improve
public health.
The EPA has issued guidance over the past year aiming to
reduce penalties for prescribed burns and wildfires, but this
process requires significant coordination, planning and
approvals. More may be done in terms of the agency recognizing
large regional fire events that impact multiple states. It's
bad enough for communities to experience choking wildfire
smoke, but for states to be further penalized for these
exceptional events does not make sense.
Today's hearing should provide additional perspective to
help understand the importance of these strategies to the
larger goal of reducing the harmful impacts of wildfires.
Additional information on the value of preventive measures such
as prescribed burns, mechanical thinning and related practices
would be useful today.
Two of our witnesses today, Dr. Brandon Collins and Dr.
Anthony Davis, can talk about the value of these practices from
their field work in California and the Pacific Northwest.
During the past two wildfire hearings, we learned about the
experience in the eastern United States which has a long
culture of more active fire management than in the west. There
are many reasons for this, some involving topography and other
unique factors of the west, but the underlying fact is that
more can be done today to reduce risks.
It will also be useful to examine the measures most
necessary to respond and recover from wildfire events. For
electric providers, the most pressing issues concern
restoration of power (or ensuring communities have the
electricity when they most need it) and increasing their
technological ability to ensure reliability during hazard
events.
For federal and state policymakers there is also the need
to ensure forests recover and are resilient to inevitable fire
events and other hazards. Having basic facts on this can go a
long way to improving our energy, environmental and public
health policies.
Let me welcome the panelists. I look forward to
understanding the challenges and opportunities you face, and
what we can do to ensure our policies accommodate what is
necessary to reduce the risks and ensure adaptive capacity of
communities going forward.
Thank you.

Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Pallone, the chairman of the full committee, for
the purposes of an opening statement. Mr. Pallone is recognized
for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Rush.
This is an important hearing today. And as we examine the
impact of wildfires on our energy infrastructure and the
environment, wildfires are becoming more frequent and more
dangerous and more destructive due to the impacts of climate
change. And it is not only the United States that is affected
by these fires. Catastrophic wildfires continue to rage in
Australia, which has been the focus of media attention, and
they claims lives and property and decimate unique wildlife and
habitats. And the costs of these events are tremendous and they
continue to rise.
Mr. Chairman, I just wanted, if I could, to ask unanimous
consent to enter into the record an article in my local
newspaper talking about how the types of wildfires that have
raged in Australia could very well happen in my home State of
New Jersey in the Pinelands, which is an area that in many ways
has a similar phenomena to the brush that has caught fire in
Australia.
And fire is, and has been, a part of the life cycle of many
ecosystems, but inadequate management coupled with the
expansion of communities and infrastructures in the fire-prone
areas has increased fire risk. Failure to address these risks
is contributing to more wildfires getting started, and when
they do start, climate change, and the extended droughts and
high temperatures associated with it, results in fires that
burn hotter over more extensive areas.
Since the seventies, the average annual number of large
wildfires in the Western United States has tripled and the area
burned six times greater. Last year, nearly 50,000 wildfires
burned nearly 4.6 million acres throughout the United States,
and these wildfires are particularly destructive in the Western
States. And California has borne the brunt of the damage and
devastation over the last several years.
While climate change is making wildfires more severe and
more frequent, most wildfires in the United States are caused
by human activity. The 2018 Camp Fire in California was the
deadliest wildfire in nearly a century. It was started by
transmission lines owned by PG&E. Clearly, electric utilities
have to do more to ensure their systems are modernized and
maintained to prevent sparking fires, and the safety of the
communities they serve depends upon responsible equipment
management and maintenance. And when more drastic preventive
measures must be taken, such as the planned power shutoffs that
affected millions of PG&E customers last year, utilities must
minimize the impact on customers in areas without power.
We have to reduce fire risks associated with infrastructure
located in fire-prone areas. We have to do a better job of
habitat management and we must address climate change to avoid
ever-worsening droughts and elevated temperatures that
intensify fires once they start.
This is critical because the Fourth National Climate
Assessment projects that the frequency of wildfires could
increase by 25 percent and the number of very large fires could
triple if we don't act. The devastation and suffering caused by
wildfires can only be curtailed by moving forward with an array
of policies to accomplish these goals. There is no singular
solution to the problem.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

This is an important hearing today as we examine the impact
of wildfires on our energy infrastructure and the environment.
Wildfires are becoming more frequent, more dangerous, and more
destructive due to the impacts of climate change.
It is not only the United States that is affected by these
fires. Catastrophic wildfires continue to rage in Australia,
claiming lives and property and decimating unique wildlife and
habitats. The costs of these events are tremendous, and they
continue to rise.
Fire is and has been part of the lifecycle of many
ecosystems. But inadequate management, coupled with the
expansion of communities and infrastructure into fire-prone
areas, have increased fire risks. Failure to address these
risks is contributing to more wildfires getting started. And
when they do start, climate change--and the extended droughts
and high temperatures associated with it--results in fires that
burn hotter over more extensive areas.
Since the 1970s, the average annual number of large
wildfires in the western United States has tripled and the area
burned is six times greater. Last year, nearly 50,000 wildfires
burned nearly 4.6 million acres throughout the United States.
These wildfires are particularly destructive in the western
states, and California has borne the brunt of the damage and
devastation over the last several years.
While climate change is making wildfires more severe and
more frequent, most wildfires in the United States are caused
by human activity. The 2018 Camp Fire in California was the
deadliest wildfire in nearly a century. It was started by
transmission lines owned by PG&E. Clearly, electric utilities
must do more to ensure their systems are modernized and
maintained to prevent sparking wildfires. The safety of the
communities they serve depends upon responsible equipment
management and maintenance. And when more drastic preventive
measures must be taken--such as the planned power shutoffs that
affected millions of PG&E customers last year--utilities must
minimize the impact on customers in areas without power.
We must reduce fire risks associated with infrastructure
located in fire-prone areas. We must do a better job of habitat
management. And we must address climate change to avoid ever-
worsening droughts and elevated temperatures that intensify
fires once they start. This is critical because the Fourth
National Climate Assessment projects that the frequency of
wildfires could increase by 25 percent, and the number of very
large fires could triple, if we don't act. The devastation and
suffering caused by wildfires can only be curtailed by moving
forward with an array of policies to accomplish these goals--
there is no singular solution to this problem.
We must act.

I would like to yield now at least a minute to
Representative Matsui, and, if time remains after that, to Mr.
Peters. And so, I yield now to Ms. Matsui.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to say, while the most recent and devastating
wildfires have not occurred in my district, but above and
around my district, we are getting the downwind effects of this
devastation. Therefore, I want to highlight the risk my
constituents face because of wildfire smoke containing harmful
chemicals, like carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, and
dangerous levels of particulate matter.
Today's hearing can bring much-needed attention to this
issue. It is our responsibility to press policy and industry
experts for answers to difficult questions about public health
and safety, grid reliability, and in the face of rapidly-
changing climate, how utilities are accounting for worsening
natural disasters. We must take this opportunity today to
demand accountability and push for answers as to how we can
avoid past mistakes and plan for a safer future for our
constituents.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses and
constituents, and I yield the rest of the time to Mr. Peters.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Ms. Matsui and Mr. Pallone.
There is a vicious feedback loop that exists between
wildfires and climate change. So, you have these longer periods
of drought caused by climate change that dry out trees and
vegetation. That leads to more frequent, unpredictable, and
intense wildfires. And then, that, in turn, leads to the
release of heat-trapping carbon dioxide and black carbon back
into the atmosphere, which perpetuates the cycle. And burned-
out forests accelerate that cycle, as forests lose almost all
their capacity to sequester carbon.
So, I want to know what Congress needs to do about this.
And it is tempting to focus on the points of ignition, but what
we see is, whether this is caused by a power line--and our
electric utilities have to do better--or whether it is caused
by a cigarette, the reason these fires are so intense has to do
with climate change. And I hope today's hearing will illuminate
how we should respond to that as Congress.
And I appreciate the time and yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back.
The subcommittees have a unanimous consent request from the
full committee chairman. Are there any objections? Seeing no
objections, so ordered.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Walden, who is the ranking
member of the full committee, for the purposes of his opening
statement. Mr. Walden, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Well, thank you very much, Chairman Rush. We
appreciate you and others holding this hearing jointly between
the two subcommittees.
I want to welcome Dr. Davis from Oregon State University,
School of Forestry, and Dave Markham especially from central
Oregon. And we will talk more about them coming up. We are glad
you and the other panelists are here today.
This is really an important topic, an important topic for
those of us in the West. It is the third hearing. When I
chaired this committee, we had two hearings on air quality and
the effects of wildfire smoke on human health conditions. So, I
am really appreciative of the fact that we are continuing this
sequence of hearings.
When we last held a hearing on this topic in September of
2018, my home State of Oregon, for the second year in a row,
was battling near-record wildfires. Communities in the
district, my district, experienced some of the worse air
quality in the world--in the world--while also suffering
significant economic impact as tourists went elsewhere.
Oregonians told me those with breathing disorders actually had
to leave the State, go over to the Oregon coast, go somewhere
else, to find air that they could breathe. Just two months
after the hearing, California, tragically, suffered the fatal
Camp Fire, devastating the town of Paradise.
In the wake of that and other harmful events, California
and Oregon have moved toward requiring utilities to strengthen
emergency plans, including de-energizing lines in areas of high
risk. My hometown, serviced by PacifiCorp, was told this year
we would be in that zone. If there is a problem, they will de-
energize our entire town.
This last year, we witnessed how this risk-reduction
practice put two million people in the dark just as windstorms
were threatening new wildfires. The news reports suggest this
may become the norm in coming years. But we also know this
strategy is not without negative consequences, especially for
people who have special medical needs that may require
electricity without interruption. Just think about that;
somewhere along the way, your power goes down in your entire
community and you are left trying to figure out how to breathe.
Meanwhile, government red tape continues to stand in the
way of common-sense hazard tree removal or grid safety
improvements and utility rights-of-way. This is a fact. This is
a fact. In fact, I have got a slide, if we could put it up on
the screen here, Dave Markham of Central Electric Cooperative
in Redmond provided for me. Central Electric's service
territory is 56 percent on federal land. This is partially a
federal land management problem, and I know he will speak to
these challenges later. But he gave me this photo. It is behind
us. I don't know if we can put it on the side screens or not.
Last April, Central Electric applied to move this power
pole--you see it in the distance, an aged power pole--20 feet,
20 feet, so they could mitigate against the threat of wildfire.
That was in April. The new location would be safer, it would be
more accessible. The Forest Service didn't get around to that
application until October, seven months later. By then, it was
too late in the work year to go move one pole--one pole.
This is why we have got to reform the federal rules and
laws that prevent utilities from doing what they know needs to
be done to protect our great national forests and the
communities around them. Delays in this sort of maintenance
efforts can have deadly consequences, especially when combined
with our poorly-managed federal forests that, frankly, are
overstocked and waiting to burn.
While climate change plays a role--and it does, and it has
extended the fire season in the West by upwards of 30 days,
according to some researchers--the evidence remains
overwhelming that increasingly-intense fire seasons are also
driven by the way we have managed or mismanaged or not managed
our federal forestlands. They are overstocked with trees.
For example, OSU Forestry Professor John Bailey testified
before this committee two years ago that tree stand densities
in the driest areas of my district would naturally be as low as
20 trees per acre. That is what Nature had planned. That is how
it used to be. Then, we suppressed fire. We did all these other
things. Those forests today have upwards of a thousand trees
per acre, not 20 as Nature intended, but because man has
interfered, we have upwards of a thousand. Think about that for
a minute. And so, when fire strikes, that excess ends up as
smoke and carbon in our atmosphere.
We know the Forest Service and EPA have data that, in 2015,
in my State of Oregon, we burned 685,000 acres. That emitted
the equivalent of emissions for three million cars or three and
a half coal plants. Nationwide, since 2015, we have burned 39
million acres in the United States, following the same pattern
that would be emissions roughly equivalent to 170 million cars
or nearly 200 power plants.
Taking sensible steps to improve NEPA and increase the pace
and scale of forest management activities, and thin our
forests, and then, go back and keep thinning them--it is not a
once and done--would be a win for climate; it would be a win
for our communities, and it would be a win for public safety.
A 2014 study by the U.S. Forest Service, Sierra Nevada
Conservancy, and Nature Conservancy found that fuel treatment
projects can reduce the size and intensity of fire between 30
and 76 percent. That treatment also helps reduce carbon
emissions from these fires by up to 85 percent. We need to do
more active management. We have legislation to do that.
And I would also love to hear in the end from our
scientists about the emissions that come from post-fire debris,
because I am told by some in the Forest Service that can be
upwards of 75 percent of the carbon emissions come from the
decay of the debris that is left after a fire and not cleaned
up.
Mr. Chairman, you have been most generous. My time has
expired, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Today's joint subcommittee hearing on wildfire impacts
returns to an important topic for the Committee-and vitally
important for tens of millions of people, especially
Oregonians, Californians, and those across the West who have
been experiencing massive devastation from these catastrophic
fires.
When we last held a hearing on this topic in September
2018, my home state of Oregon for the second year in a row was
battling near record wildfires. Communities in my district
experienced some of the worst air quality in the world, while
also suffering significant economic impact as tourists went
elsewhere.
Just two months after the hearing, California suffered the
tragically fatal Camp Fire, devastating the town of Paradise.
In the wake of that and other harmful events, California
and Oregon have moved toward requiring utilities to strengthen
emergency plans, including de-energizing lines in areas of high
risk.
This past year we witnessed how this risk reduction
practice put two million people in the dark just as windstorms
were threatening new wildfires. And news reports suggest this
may become the norm in coming years. But we also know this
strategy is not without negative consequences for people who
have special medical needs that require electricity without
interruption.
Meanwhile, government red tape continues to stand in the
way of common-sense hazard tree removal or grid safety
improvements in utility right of ways.
We're joined today by Dave Markham of Central Electric
Cooperative in Redmond Oregon. Central Electric's service
territory is 56 percent on federal land. I know he'll speak to
the challenges that presents later, but I want to share this
photo he showed me earlier.
Last year Central Electric applied to move the power pole
in this photo 20 feet to mitigate against wildfire. The new
location would be safer and more accessible. The Forest Service
didn't get to their application until October, and then Central
Electric missed the short window to move the pole.
Delays in these sorts of maintenance efforts can have
deadly consequences, especially when combined with our poorly
managed federal forests waiting to burn. Something has to
change.
While climate plays a role, I think the evidence remains
overwhelming that increasingly intense fires seasons are driven
by the decades of poor management that has left our federal
forests overstocked with trees.
For example, OSU forestry professor John Bailey testified
before us two years ago that tree stand densities in the driest
areas of eastern Oregon would naturally be as low as 20 trees
per acre, but those forests today could have upwards of a
thousand trees per acre. Think about that for a minute--20
trees versus 1,000 trees.
When fire strikes, that excess ends up as smoke and carbon
in our atmosphere. We know from Forest Service and EPA data
that in 2015 in Oregon we burned 685,000 acres, which emitted
the equivalent of three million cars, or 3.5 coal fired plants.
Nationwide since 2015, we've burned 39 million acres.
Following the same pattern that would be emissions roughly
equal to 170 million cars or 199 coal fired plants.
Taking sensible steps to improve NEPA and increase the pace
and scale of forest management activities that thin out our
forests is a win for our forests, the climate, and the health
of our communities and citizens.
A 2014 study by the U.S. Forest Service, the Sierra Nevada
Conservancy, and The Nature Conservancy found that fuel
treatment projects can reduce the size and intensity of fire
between 30 and 76 percent.
Treatment also helps reduce carbon emissions from these
fires by up to 85 percent. This is among the reasons why the
UN's climate panel recommends forest management as a key tool
for addressing climate risks.
The good news is, we have measures like the Resilient
Federal Forests Act that we can enact right now, this year to
help propel smarter forest management practices, reduce the
risk of wildfire and ensure that we clean up after fires and
replant our forests for future generations.
Rather than pursue grand climate schemes that cannot become
law, we should focus this Congress on practical measures, like
forest management where we have made some bipartisan progress
in recent years, but plenty of meaningful work remains.
Turning back to energy infrastructure, we should look also
look today at technology and practices that can reduce inherent
risks in the power sector and increase reliability and
resilience during fire emergencies.
Our panel offers an array of experience that can help work
through core issues like fire management, resilience, the
intersection of our electric infrastructure with fire risks and
public safety, the prospects of advancing technology to
minimize risks, and to more rapidly respond and recover from
wildfires.
I look forward to your insights.

Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair would like to remind Members that, pursuant to
committee rules, all Members' written opening statements shall
be made part of the record.
Now I would like to welcome our witnesses for today's
hearing. Our witnesses are Mr. William Johnson, who is CEO and
President of PG&E Corporation; Mr. John MacWilliams, Senior
Fellow, the Center on Global Energy Policy at Columbia
University; Dr. Anthony Davis, the Interim Dean of College of
Forestry at Oregon State University; Dr. Brandon Collins,
Research Scientist, the Center for Fire Research and Outreach,
Berkeley Forests, University of California at Berkeley, and Dr.
David Markham, President and CEO of the Central Electric
Cooperative, Incorporated.
I want to thank each of you for joining us today. We look
forward to your testimony.
But, before we begin, I would like to explain the lighting
system. In front of you is a series of lights. The light will
initially be green. The light will turn yellow when you have 1-
minute remaining. Please begin to wrap up your testimony at
that point. The light will turn red when your time expires.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Johnson, you are recognized now for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF WILLIAM D. JOHNSON, CEO AND PRESIDENT, PG&E
CORPORATION; JOHN J. MACWILLIAMS, SENIOR FELLOW, CENTER ON
GLOBAL ENERGY POLICY, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY; ANTHONY S. DAVIS,
Ph.D., INTERIM DEAN, COLLEGE OF FORESTRY, OREGON STATE
UNIVERSITY; BRANDON M. COLLINS Ph.D, RESEARCH SCIENTIST, CENTER
FOR FIRE RESEARCH AND OUTREACH, BERKELEY FORESTS, UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY, AND DAVID MARKHAM, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
CENTRAL ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE, INCORPORATED

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM D. JOHNSON

Mr. Johnson. Good morning. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I am Bill Johnson, the CEO and President of PG&E
Corporation.
I appreciate the committee's interest in wildfire impacts
and resilience and commend the California delegation for their
engagement on this topic, because California is, indeed, ground
zero for these issues, having had the State's most destructive
and deadly wildfires in its history in 2017 and 2018. And PG&E
equipment played a significant role in several of these fatal
fires, for which we are deeply sorry. And we are taking action
to help those communities rebuild and recover and to prevent
events like this from ever happening again.
But, as we have heard this morning, this is not an issue
limited to California. It is an issue across this nation, and
recent events in Australia indicate it is a global problem.
PG&E is addressing the wildfire challenge comprehensively
and increasing the resilience of our system. We are intensely
focused on safety for our customers, our communities, our
workforce, and providing our customers with the reliable,
affordable, and clean energy they expect and deserve. But we
also know this: climate change will continue to increase the
intensity of the environmental conditions contributing to
wildfire and other risks.
Just seven years ago, about 15 percent of PG&E's service
area was designated as having an elevated fire risk. Today,
that number is over 50 percent and is growing. In other words,
the risk has more than tripled in under a decade.
In response, and through utilizing best practices and
lessons learned from our peers like San Diego Gas & Electric
and Southern California Edison, PG&E is implementing a
comprehensive wildfire safety plan that addresses ignition risk
drivers and the consequences of those ignitions from electric
infrastructure.
Last year, we inspected every element of our electric
system within the high fire threat districts, examining almost
25 million components in only four months, and repaired any
safety conditions we found on a priority basis. We are
bolstering situational awareness and emergency response by
deploying weather stations, high-definition cameras, as well as
using satellite data and modeling techniques to predict
wildfire spread and behavior. We are hardening our system in
the areas where the fire threat is highest by installing
stronger and more resilient poles and covered power lines, as
well as undergrounding. And we are increasing vegetation
management in high-risk areas, incorporating analytical and
predictive capabilities, and expanding the scope and
intrusiveness of our inspection process.
But we are also turning off power for safety during severe
wind events, which has significant impacts for vulnerable
customers, critical infrastructure, and first responders. Now
this plan is working in reducing the risk of catastrophic
fires. Last year, there was no loss of life from PG&E electric
infrastructure due to fire.
But shutting off power is not the way we want to serve our
customers. It creates its own set of safety risks and customer
impacts. So, before the next wildfire season begins, we will
improve the execution of these events, narrow their scope, and
shorten their duration. We are deploying customer-centric
solutions such as microgrids and resilient zones to mitigate
the impact of the power shutoffs. And ultimately, all of these
efforts will increase grid resilience to any hazard.
As we go about this work, we will continue to seek and
collaborate with external partners, including those at the
federal level. We believe that Congress can help reduce the
wildfire threat and increase overall grid and climate
resilience through actions that include enacting a market-
based, economy wide climate policy that encourages innovation
in both carbon mitigation and adaptation technologies; by
directing the Energy Department to develop a framework and
process for cost-benefit analyses of resilience investments; by
increasing eligibility and funding for energy assistance and
community resilience programs to offset cost to low-income
customers, and support research and development of new
technologies and forward-looking climate data.
Specific to addressing the wildfire threat, we believe the
federal government should continue its efforts to fund forest
management and fire suppression activities; implement the
forest and vegetation management legislation advanced by
Congressmen Schrader and LaMalfa; ensure access to federal
lands for prevention and response; incentivize pre-disaster
mitigation planning and build greater resilience for our
infrastructure in communities, and authorize federal agencies
to share satellite data for wildfire detection.
PG&E is urgently addressing the wildfire threat and
increasing the resilience of our systems. We appreciate
Congress' partnership in that effort.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. John MacWilliams for 5 minutes
for the purposes of an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JOHN J MacWILLIAMS

Mr. MacWilliams. Thank you, Chairman Rush and Chairman
Tonko, Ranking Members Upton and Shimkus, for the invitation to
testify today.
I am John MacWilliams. I am a Senior Fellow at Columbia
University's Center on Global Energy Policy.
The California wildfires and resulting bankruptcy of one of
the nation's leading utilities are important as a case study
for how we are going to appropriately allocate the inevitable,
enormous, and increasing costs of climate change to our
nation's critical infrastructure among numerous stakeholders,
including ratepayers, investors, and federal and state
taxpayers.
In August 2019, the Center on Global Energy Policy
published a research paper, ``PG&E: Market and Policy
Perspectives on the First Climate Change Bankruptcy''. In that
paper, my coauthors, Sarah La Monaca and James Kobus, who are
here with me today, and I noted that climate change played a
material role in the wildfires and PG&E's subsequent
bankruptcy. And this is because climate change has created
conditions in California and elsewhere that make fires more
intense, more damaging, and more likely to occur.
Now, the scientific literature almost universally projects
significant climate change-driven increases in wildfire
activity and intensity across the United States. The United
States Government's Fourth National Climate Assessment notes
that, ``by the middle of this century, the annual area burned
in the Western United States could increase from two to six
times from the present''.
Wildfires pose a major threat to reliable electricity
service. While the fires themselves can disrupt electricity
service, a new and emerging trend has further underscored this
problem, which has been discussed, preventative power shutoffs
that have affected millions of customers. These events
highlight the escalating costs and the difficulty of providing
reliable electricity service in a country that is rapidly
becoming more vulnerable to the negative effects of climate
change. The bottom line is that, if customers are going to
continue to demand the near 100 percent reliability of electric
service that they have become accustomed to, large
infrastructure investment will be required to modernize the
grid to make it more resilient.
We have seen the potential damages from wildfires may be
large enough to threaten the financial viability of the
utilities, but, in any event, they will materially increase the
cost to utility sector stakeholders, drive up electricity
rates, and importantly, crowd out essential investment in
renewable energy and grid upgrades.
So, what should the federal government do? First and
foremost, Congress should focus on the broad impact of climate
change and the effect it is going to have, is having on our
environment, our people, and on our economy. And the California
wildfires are just a vivid example of the devastation that
climate change will increasingly bring. We are encouraged by
the efforts of this committee to bring together public and
private sector leaders to address climate change and U.S.
greenhouse gas emissions, including the CLEAN Future Act
Framework.
Second, challenges of this magnitude can't be solved
without large amounts of private sector investment, and
Congress should examine ways to encourage such capital flows.
One mechanism that my former colleagues at the Department of
Energy and I have advocated in the past is the creation of a
national infrastructure bank. Given the magnitude of these
challenges, I would strongly encourage Congress to take a fresh
look at this possibility. The recent proposal to create a
National Climate Bank is a positive step in this direction.
Third, FERC could incentivize greater fire prevention and
grid hardening. It has utilized specialized profit incentives
and accelerated cost recovery mechanisms in the past, and such
mechanisms could be used to provide incentives for utility
companies to prioritize resiliency and fire prevention.
And finally, Congress should support increased research,
development, demonstration, and deployment funding for wildfire
prevention methods and technologies. The Department of Energy
and its 17 National Labs provide enormous technical
capabilities. From my work as a senior advisor to Lawrence
Livermore National Lab, I am very aware of the great work that
they and the other Bay Area labs are doing. Promising research
is being conducted on sensor technology, high altitude wind
forecasting, high-performance computing for fire simulation and
prediction. And other National Labs, including Idaho National
Lab and National Renewable Energy Lab in Colorado, have
valuable expertise to contribute and experience. INL was
evacuated last summer when it was threatened by a wildfire.
In conclusion, I would like to thank you for holding this
hearing, Mr. Chairman. The California wildfires should be a
call for action regarding the adverse impacts of climate
change. And as tragic as these events have been, one only needs
to look at Australia to see the potential for even greater
devastation to come.
Thank you, and I would be pleased to take your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. MacWilliams follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. MacWilliams.
Dr. Davis, you are recognize for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF ANTHONY S. DAVIS, Ph.D.

Dr. Davis. Chairman Rush and Chairman Tonko, Ranking Member
Upton and Ranking Member Shimkus, thank you for the opportunity
to testify today on the issue of wildfire in our western
landscapes. I would also like to thank Representatives Schrader
and Walden from Oregon for their attention to this issue.
I am Anthony Dean, Interim Dean of the College of Forestry
at Oregon State University.
Our society invests more time, energy, and resources
fighting fires than we do in taking proactive steps to reduce
wildfire severity and foster the resiliency of our forests and
communities. Past management, current climate, and shifts in
land use have left us with a landscape that has more trees and
more contiguous forested areas inhabited by people than ever
before. To respond, we must apply our evolving knowledge of
fire behavior and forest management to deal with the new fire
reality.
The economic and social impact of wildfire is staggering
when one includes post-fire costs such as health care, loss of
business revenue and property, and, too often, the loss of
human life. And perhaps the highest risk comes in the form of
drinking water. Many cities benefit from water filtration that
our forest systems provide every day, and wildfire places a
risk on our water systems, globally valued at more than $4
trillion per year.
In addition to watersheds, another key area of risk is
smoke. Recent levels of wildfire smoke in the Pacific Northwest
have been unprecedented, regularly resulting in conditions that
would have been classified as non-attainment under Clean Air
Act standards. Wildfire smoke differentially affects vulnerable
groups such as those with preexisting respiratory and cardiac
conditions, the elderly, the young, and pregnant women. Smoke
impacts may be greater among poorer populations due to exposure
as a result of lack of access to indoor environments with air
filtration systems. And beyond individual impacts, wildfire
smoke significantly affects all segments of the outdoor
economy, threatening small businesses that already operate on
thin margins.
To address this complex fire challenge and its impacts, we
must first better understand fire. An important consideration
is that wildfires are not new and that they are necessary. They
renew numerous ecological processes while also regulating and
reducing the total amount of fuel available for burning.
Looking back, the history of fire on our landscape offers
important lessons towards addressing future fire behavior, from
how indigenous peoples used fire as a management tool to the
natural frequency and intensity of wildfire burning.
We must also consider our past success in fire suppression
and the impact year after year of effective fire control. This
success has led to an increase in continuous biomass available
to burn across the forest landscape, which is a prime
contributor to our current challenge.
Looking forward, managed fire and effective treatments on
our landscapes will be critical in addressing wildfire and its
impacts, but the scale of the problem does not allow us to
simply cut our way out of this challenge. We can prioritize
fire resilience and preparedness in important areas such as
critical watersheds in population centers, but this will not
address the presence of smoke in communities.
As we look for solutions, we must also recognize two
issues. Climate is a primary driver, and people choose to live
in fire-prone areas. Changing climate drives us towards novel
conditions that require research and corresponding adaptive
measures. Fire severity and total area burn are largely
determined by a combination of climate, weather, topography,
and fuels. And compounding this, more people live in the
wildland-urban interface than ever before, presenting not only
a greater human area needing protection, but also more
potential sources of ignition. In Oregon in 2018, two-thirds of
fires were started by humans.
To take action, we must work to demystify public
perceptions of some of the elements around the fire in Western
systems. Fire will never be eliminated from Western forests. It
is part of our future and it is an important part of the
ecology of our forests. But, with a better-informed public, a
commitment among scientists, policymakers, and practitioners to
collaborate across administrative and geographic boundaries,
and consideration of both fire history and novel climate
conditions, we can develop solutions. Failing to act now will
only increase the cost and lengthen the time before we see a
meaningful change.
Thank you again for the opportunity to offer this
testimony. I look forward to answering any questions you may
have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Davis follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Rush. Thank you, Dr. Davis.
And now, the Chair recognizes Dr. Collins for 5 minutes for
the purpose of an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF BRANDON M. COLLINS, Ph.D.

Dr. Collins. So, thank you to the chairpersons and all of
the members, frankly, of the subcommittees. This is an
important issue, obviously, to many people, and we come at it
from different angles.
From my perspective as a scientist, I think that this is
the ultimate goal of research, is to inform this type of
process and, also, give information to the forest managers. So,
this is a true honor for me to be here. Thank you.
So, I am going to echo some of the comments that have been
said before. I will try to do it quickly, but, then, get to
some of the punch lines that I have to offer.
Fire has been a part of Western forests for millennia, and
I think we have come to realize that excluding it, it is not
going to happen. It is impossible. So, the next question is how
to sort of work with fire.
One perspective could be that wildfires that are happening
now or that have been happening over the last several years are
just simply the return of a naturally consistent process that
we have kept out for so long. The problem is that the effects
of these fires are not natural at all. And when I talk about
effects, I think so many people emphasize the size of
wildfires, that they have grown twofold, fivefold, whatever,
but it is not that. The size isn't really the issue. It is the
size of the patches with nearly complete or complete tree
mortality. Those patches right now are probably on the order of
five to ten times bigger than what they were historically.
And as a result, our forests are not adapted to that. The
tree species cannot regenerate naturally following that type of
disturbance, as we call it in ecology. So, I think that is the
one thing to focus on, is the size of large patches and how we
can reduce that.
And let me say quickly, too, some of the cascading effects
of the sizes of these patches. One is, obviously, the really
delayed, if at all, the lack of regeneration from trees. But
you can think about the effects on habitat, the effects on
carbon sequestration when you shift from a tree-dominated area
to a shrub-dominated area.
So, we have talked about what some of the drivers of this
are, and I think there is sort of a debate as to climate versus
forest management. My perspective--and it is supported by a lot
of data--is that it is forest conditions that are the primary
driver, with climate being sort of an exacerbating effect. If
you think about what climate does, it really opens the window
of opportunity for fires to spread, and spread beyond our
capacity to put them out. We are very, very good at putting
fires out. We can put out 90-95 percent of all ignitions. It is
the ones that are burning on those warmer, windier days that
exceed our capacity to put them out, and those are the ones
affecting the landscape. So, the climate opens that window up,
but it is really the forest conditions that allow them to
continue and burn over tens of thousands of acres.
So, what I would like to say here is let's think about just
the drivers for the moment of what that forest change is. One
is, obviously, the elimination of fire, right? Folks before
have talked about sort of the increases in tree density. We
have, however you want to count trees--if you want to count up
the smallest or just count sort of medium-sized trees and
bigger--we are looking at a five- to tenfold increase in trees,
in tree density relative to historical conditions.
Fuel loads have doubled, if not tripled. And that is the
dead surface, dead material on the surface. And then, also,
there is just greater continuity. We have forest cover, sort of
wall-to-wall trees, over giant landscapes. And as a result,
when fires get up in the crowns of these trees, we have very
limited capacity to put them out.
So, on the side of mitigation, what can we do here? We have
been studying this for a couple of decades now in terms of what
you can do to restore forest structure and to reduce wildfire
hazards. There is no single answer here. The answer is sort of
all of the above.
It is thinning. It is thinning the right way, which from a
federal standpoint, there are many statutes in place to sort of
protection from the, quote-unquote, logging that so many people
are concerned about. But, then, there are also a lot of things
in the way in terms of how readily thinning can get inhibited.
But we know that thinning can't happen everywhere.
We have some really inaccessible parts of the landscape
where we need to do a lot of burning, either prescribed burning
or, frankly, managing natural wildfires under conditions where
we could have put them out. And I know that sounds terrible for
some folks. Wildfire is the enemy, but, frankly, we are going
to have to embrace it to a certain extent and do our best to
manage it.
So, I am going to close with this. I think it is a time at
this point--if it is not clear already; it should be--that we
need to prioritize forest management. For the past several
decades, we have prioritized other resources, and for a good
reason, right? They were compromised. But at this point, I
think it is pretty darn clear that forests are pretty
vulnerable and they need to be prioritized, so that all the
rest of the things that cascade from forests or that forests
depend on are there for future generations.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Collins follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Dr. Collins.
The Chair wants to remind our spectators that we welcome
you here to the committee hearing and we ask that you really
refrain from any displays or commentary on the witnesses or any
of the members as they engage on this committee. We hope that
you will follow suit.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Markham for 5 minutes for the
purposes of an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DAVID MARKHAM

Mr. Markham. Good morning, Chairmen Rush and Tonko, Ranking
Members Upton and Shimkus, and members of the subcommittees.
I am Dave Markham. I am the CEO of Central Electric
Cooperative, and we are headquartered in Redmond, Oregon. We
provide nearly 100 percent carbon emission-free electricity to
more than 38,000 members throughout central Oregon. I also
serve as chairman of PNGC Power, a generation transmission
cooperative that is headquartered in Portland and owned by 15
Northwest electric distribution cooperatives. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify today on the impact of wildfires on the
power sector and the environment.
Oregon's 18 electric cooperatives serve over 500,000
Oregonians across 65 percent of the land mass of the State. And
often, that is in some of the most heavily forested areas in
the United States. In fact, Central Electric, the area we serve
is more than 56 percent federal land.
Now it is a challenging job, but electric cooperatives, we
are very committed to keeping our rights-of-way cleared and
keeping our electric systems maintained. Oregon electric
cooperatives, we are proactively addressing increased wildfire
risk by instituting wildfire mitigation plans, which really
they just formalize the actions that we have been taking
voluntarily for years.
For example, Central Electric, we upgraded 23 miles of
transmission line, much of it through heavily forested areas,
and we replaced wood poles with much more expensive steel
structures. Now we are in the process of conducting maintenance
on 13 miles of distribution line on national forestland. We are
replacing 4-foot cross arms with wider 8-foot cross arms that
allow power lines to be spaced further apart, so that it
reduces the potential for a wildfire ignition from a falling
tree limb. And these are just two examples of the many measures
that we are taking to reduce wildfire risk.
But I think you all know that even the very best maintained
electric systems, they have had pole fires, downed wires, and
equipment failures that cause fires. But, I will tell you, we
can also do more, and we are going to need the cooperation of
the Federal Government to do so.
And I have had the privilege of twice testifying before
Congress about the need to streamline vegetation management
practices and eliminating delays when performing routine
maintenance and upgrades of our system on federal lands.
America's electric cooperatives, we were pleased that in 2018
Congress passed vegetation management legislation to improve
system reliability and reduce wildfire risk. And I would
personally like to take a moment and thank Central Electric's
Congressman Greg Walden and Oregon's Congressman Kurt Schrader
for their extensive leadership passing that legislation.
However, more work needs to be done, and the regulations
and the guidelines for vegetation management, they must closely
align with the underlying law. Congress made it very clear that
we need to eliminate the time-consuming regulatory processes
because months are still slipping away before permits are
issued to perform routine work.
Last year, Central Electric identified 30 dead and dying
trees on heavily forested federal land. And they needed to be
removed or trimmed before the wildfire season. We submitted a
request to the federal land agency to remove these trees on
February 4th, 2019. Now we didn't hear anything until I raised
the issue in a meeting with the CEQ when I was back here in
Washington, DC, last April. Within one week of my return, we
had an issue of a Notice to Proceed. So, while three months
passed before receiving approval, it took only three days to
get our crews in there and remove those 30 trees that posed a
wildfire threat. And then, in nearly an identical situation
with the neighboring Land Management Agency District, Central
Electric requested the removal of more than 50 trees, and we
received almost immediate permission to proceed.
And you see, this situation, it highlights the inconsistent
application of policies by our Land Agency District Offices.
Unfortunately, the delays, they are not an isolated incident to
Central Electric and they are a threat to public safety.
Now my intention is not to denigrate the hard-working land
management professionals. Rather, I am here to discuss
solutions where the Federal Government can support and approve
certain policies and practices. And we support the reform of
the National Environmental Policy Act because it ensures
clarity and certainty, and it eliminates costly project delays
for electric cooperatives.
In Oregon, we are also taking a very unique approach to
implementing the National Cohesive Wildland Fire Management
Strategy. Electric coop and land agency leadership, we are
coming together and we are going to craft agreements, so that
we can identify increased actions that we can take together to
reduce wildfire risk. And while these agreements, they will be
signed at the local level, it is critical that Congress urge
the Departments of Interior and Agriculture to support these
agreements.
While significant challenges remain, we look forward to
working with Congress to build upon the steps that electric
cooperatives have taken as national leaders in wildfire
mitigation. And thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Markham follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Rush. I want to thank all of the witnesses.
We have concluded the opening statements, and before we
move to member questions, I want to be really clear to you, Dr.
Collins. My previous comments, they weren't directed toward
you. Behind you is someone who was raising a sign, and you
didn't see them, but the committee saw them. And so, I was just
admonishing that individual to not raise any signs. So, my
comments were not directed at all toward you, and I wanted to
be clear on that. All right?
As I stated, we have concluded the opening statements and
we will now move to members' questioning. Each member will have
5 minutes to ask questions of our witnesses. And I will start
by recognizing myself for 5 minutes.
Wildfires and climate change-related disasters are having a
great impact on the power sector and an even greater impact on
those who rely on its services. Mr. MacWilliams, as the
Department of Energy's former Chief Risk Officer, your
testimony is noteworthy in today's discussion. In your recent
report on ``Market and Policy Perspectives,'' you discussed the
implications of climate change on the utility market, cost-
sharing, recovery of costs, and investments in grid resilience.
When you highlight the importance of these investments, how
might utilities and regulators address these implications while
keeping down the cost to ratepayers?
Mr. MacWilliams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, as I mentioned in my opening statement, this really
goes back to the fact that enormous infrastructure is going to
be required to deal with this really complex set of issues.
There are various estimates out there, which I am sure you have
seen, but they range globally from $2.4 trillion to $3.5
trillion to meet our objectives to keep temperature rise to 1.5
degrees C and to meet the Paris targets. So, that is an
enormous amount of money. There is a lot of capital,
institutional capital, out there that wants to invest in these
kinds of projects, but we have got to find ways to incentivize
that.
In the paper, as you alluded to, my coauthors and I were
trying to look at whether the financial markets are really
taking the costs and these risks into account yet. And the
answer is that, in the immediate aftermath of PG&E's
bankruptcy, we did see some in certain aspects of markets, but,
then, markets rebounded. So, markets in general, are not
pricing-in immediate bankruptcies by other utilities because of
these issues.
But, at the same time, what we are seeing, looking at
markets broadly, is that investors are becoming concerned with
these issues. Insurance companies are starting to price these
things in. You have seen recent remarks by leading asset
managers talking about climate change risk. So, as a risk
officer, I do think these are very relevant. I am happy to
expound more, but I don't want to take more time.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you.
Mr. Johnson, in your capacity as CEO of PG&E, would you
agree with the comments of Mr. MacWilliams? And I understand
that your company has conducted de-energization events and
provided resource centers to protect public safety. However, I
am concerned by press reports of all of this placing a strain
on people with medical needs and disabilities. As mentioned by
my colleague, Mr. Walden, some people can't breathe without
electricity. With this in mind, what improvements has PG&E made
to its safety plan?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and you hit on a
question that is of particular importance to me, which is
medical need people, folks like this who need help in the best
of times, and when we turn the power off, how do we deal with
that? And so, we have made some significant improvements in
that.
First of all, we spent a lot of last years notifying
everybody in California in our service area about the potential
to have these PSPS events, and power shutoffs. When we have an
event, we notify every medical baseline customer. If we can't
get them on the phone or electronically, we go to their house.
We, then, make sure that the local agencies, the communities,
the counties--we all have a common list of these people. We
open up customer resource centers where we have air
conditioning, water, ability to charge medical devices. And we
have also reached out to the NGO and community-based
organizations to help us identify the needs that these folks
have that we can help with before the next fire season.
Mr. Rush. The Chair's time is up, and the Chair now
recognizes Mr. Upton for 5 minutes for the purposes of
questioning the witnesses.
Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of
things.
Dr. Collins, I think many of us here recognize that the
time to prioritize forest management is long overdue to try to
reduce these risks. A couple of questions, and then, I am going
to yield some time to my friend, Mr. Walden.
Mr. Markham, when you said that you had identified 30 trees
and submitted to the forest. Do they actually come back and,
then, check your work to make sure that they are dead or dying?
I mean, do you mark them with a big ``X'' on the trunk? What is
the normal process?
Mr. Markham. Well, in this case, if there were one or two
dangerous trees, we can go out and remove them. But where we
are dealing, with, there were 30 trees identified; we take a
picture of those. We submit their geographical location of
them. We submit it and, basically, until we hear back from
them, we cannot proceed.
Mr. Upton. You can't do it until they----
Mr. Markham. Yes.
Mr. Upton. And they have been more responsive in recent
months than they have been in the past?
Mr. Markham. We are working through, and that is what these
agreements do that we are putting together, that we are working
to put together. So that we can identify these kinds of issues.
We can take advantage of categoric exclusions. We cannot have
to wait.
I personally believe that we have to make things like this
a priority with the federal land agencies over approval of a
driveway. This is much more important.
Mr. Upton. Yes, yes. So, as you talk about that, then, Mr.
Johnson, in your testimony, you indicate that--I am looking at
page 1--``Between 2010 and 2018, according to the Forest
Service, over 147 million trees in California alone have died
from drought and invasive beetles. PG&E estimates there are
more than 100 million trees adjacent to its overhead power
lines with the potential to either grow into or fall into the
lines.'' So, how are you working with the Forest Service to
prioritize those 100 million trees on somewhat of a timely
basis, as you are at the center of the controversy?
Mr. Johnson. About 30 percent of our territory is in or
around federal lands, and I think we operate in something like
14 different national forests. So, we have a lot of interfaces
with the federal agencies.
I have only been there about nine months, but what I am
told is that, in recent months, particularly after the bill
passed last year by Mr. Schrader and Mr. LaMalfa as the
sponsors, they have been much----
Mr. Upton. He is here, by the way. He is at the end.
Mr. Johnson [continuing]. Much more attuned to this
process. For example, we signed a 30-year agreement with the
Forest Service. We don't have to renew permits every year. We
have a 30-year way to do it. We are funding some of the work.
So, I think the situation had greatly improved from where it
was before I got there, but I think it still needs to make sure
that these things are funded. There are some pilot projects
going on that need to be made permanent. But I think it is in
better shape than it was.
Mr. Upton. Thank you.
I yield my remaining two minutes to Mr. Walden.
Mr. Walden. Thank you very much, Mr. Upton.
Mr. Markham, Mr. Johnson talked about the percentage of his
system that is on federal land. What is the percentage of your
system on federal land?
Mr. Markham. Fifty-six percent, Representative.
Mr. Walden. Fifty-six percent? How many miles of line do
you have to oversee and maintain?
Mr. Markham. We have several thousand miles of transmission
and distribution lines.
Mr. Walden. Something like 3900 miles of transmission and
distribution line? Do you have any idea how many poles you
have?
Mr. Markham. We have 45,000 poles.
Mr. Walden. So, when I put up that photo--maybe we can put
it up again--that is one pole you wanted to move, and it took
seven months. And then, that put you outside the work window,
right?
Mr. Markham. Yes, we have a short work window. We have
three months that we can work out in this area because of
wildlife habitat and wildfire risk.
Mr. Walden. All right. Thank you for that.
I want to go to Dr. Davis. Thank you again for being here.
In our home State of Oregon, in 2017, State fire-protected
lands and Forest Service lands received roughly the same number
of fire starts, whether it was the State-protected lands or the
Forest Service-protected lands. And yet, the Forest Service
lands accounted for 95 percent of the acres burned. And this is
a pattern. I have seen it. I assume you have seen it in your
research. Climate affects both. Can you speak to what the
differences are? And then, I have a got a question about woody
biomass as well. But I have only got 27 seconds. So, go.
Dr. Davis. Briefly, as several people have mentioned,
federal lands tend to have more trees per acre than State or
private lands, in the State of Oregon. Those stands, those
federal lands are often also in more remote and more contiguous
blocks of forest. So, it is the multitude of drivers as well as
those dry conditions that enter into those forests.
Mr. Walden. And how the fires are fought?
Dr. Davis. How the fires are fought, but, also, the
location of those forests.
Mr. Walden. Right.
Dr. Davis. The east side of the forests is drier than the
west side, where there is a dominance of private land.
Mr. Walden. All right. My time has expired. Thank you.
Mr. Rush. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Tonko for 5 minutes.
So, the Chair now recognizes Ms. DeGette for 5 minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
I really want to thank this panel for coming today. I know
the focus of this hearing has been on the wildfires in
California, but I am from Colorado and we are seeing the same
kinds of devastation all throughout the West, not just the
Pacific Northwest and the West Coast.
I want to talk for a minute about the Hayman Fire. People
forget about it. Some of our witnesses are nodding. It was in
2002, and it was the biggest forest fire we have had in
Colorado. I think it was exacerbated, as many of our witnesses
have said, by the effects of climate change.
And I just want to point out a couple of the issues that
several of our witnesses had mentioned. This fire, it resulted
in the death of a civilian, the indirect deaths of five
firefighters, $39.1 million in suppression costs, and $40.4
million in property losses.
My congressional district is the city of Denver and
suburbs. What the Hayman Fire did is it dramatically, and for a
long period of time, impacted the water quality in Denver
because a lot of the fire was directly around one of the
reservoirs that serves Denver. And I have spent a lot of time
talking with Denver Water about the impacts that the runoff
from that fire had in our aquifers.
Dr. Davis, I know you mentioned very briefly in your
statement about the impacts on water. I am wondering if you can
expand briefly on what you are seeing on that.
Dr. Davis. Yes. As I mentioned briefly, the risk to our
watershed--every day we drink clean water, and in the Western
U.S., in particular, Colorado as well, that water is filtered
through our forests. And that filtration value before it gets
to municipal sources is a tremendous economic contribution or
benefit for the public good. As many of those forests are
overstocked, they are at risk of burning. Making sure that
those are priority areas to avoid having a wildfire come in and
burn at high intensity should be a priority.
Ms. DeGette. And the other problem--and I think, Dr.
Collins, you referred to this, too--is now, with climate
change, the heat is so much greater, that the destruction is so
much greater, and it is much harder for those forests to
regenerate themselves and protect against this toxic runoff.
Dr. Collins, you talked about three methods of reducing
wildfire risk--prescribed fires, mechanical treatment by
removing mid-sized trees, and wood-chipping, and also, a
combination of both. Obviously, everything doesn't work
everywhere, is that right?
Dr. Collins. Right. And I think one of the things, it is
funny you mentioned the Hayman Fire. That is the first fire I
worked on when I came to Colorado in 2002, and I know the
Cheesman Reservoir and all that happened there. One of the
interesting things there is they had done thinning projects,
and I think even a little bit of prescribed burning.
Ms. DeGette. Right.
Dr. Collins. But it was the scale of the thinning relative
to the scale of the forest problem there. The thinning was
happening in really discrete areas right along roads and it was
blown over pretty easily.
Ms. DeGette. Yes, because of the intensity of the fire.
Dr. Collins. Right. And so, with regard to sort of not
being able to do everything everywhere, I think we are limited
oftentimes in terms of slope, you know, the slope that
mechanical equipment can operate on, for good reason, right?
For protecting the reservoir and things like that. But I was
saying that there is no one-size-fits-all sort of thing.
Ms. DeGette. Yes.
Dr. Collins. We need to do all of those things wherever
possible.
Ms. DeGette. Well, and the other issue--and this is true
throughout the West; I see it in my State--is, we have millions
of acres of trees. So, if you said you were going to go in with
mechanical treatment and try to thin all of these forests, it
would be impossible, isn't that correct?
Dr. Collins. Well, I wouldn't say impossible.
Ms. DeGette. How much do you think it would cost?
Dr. Collins. Well, it depends if you can set up a market
for the material, right? I mean, woody biomass was mentioned.
It is not new, right?
Ms. DeGette. Right.
Dr. Collins. But the key is, can we incentivize woody
biomass utilization? Can we have other products? Oriented
strand board that uses small----
Ms. DeGette. But you still couldn't do it throughout the
whole West?
Dr. Collins. No, not on every acre. No, not at all.
Ms. DeGette. Right. Yes. OK. Thank you.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentle lady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Shimkus for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. David, Dr. Collins, thank you for being here.
And I also, too, want to highlight Doug LaMalfa from
California, who is sitting in and listening to us, and his
legislation, along with our good friend, the Democrat from
Oregon, who has been mentioned. So, good work on that and we
appreciate that.
I am not trying to be flippant, but prior to the industrial
age, were there forest fires in the West, Dr. Davis?
Dr. Davis. Absolutely.
Mr. Shimkus. And, Dr. Collins?
Dr. Collins. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Again, I am not trying to be flippant. I
also, many of us, accept the premise that climate change is
occurring, and I think as some of the people out West, it is
extending the season a little bit longer, and then, you have
drier stuff. And then, you can count this buildup.
For people on this committee, this will be no surprise, but
I want to talk to Mr. Johnson a little bit. Before I do that, a
nuclear power plant, how much CO2 does it emit, Mr. Johnson?
Mr. Johnson. Zero, I believe.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. MacWilliams, you know the answer.
Mr. MacWilliams. That is correct, yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. You all know zero. OK. Nuclear power plants
emit zero.
So, I want to focus on Diablo Canyon, if I may, for a few
minutes. My friends from California know I have focused a lot
on California because of just the challenges that are there. It
is still operating, but it is planned for closure; is that
correct?
Mr. Johnson. It is operating with a planned closure date,
one unit in 2023, and the other in 2025.
Mr. Shimkus. So, how much megawatts of electricity is it
generating?
Mr. Johnson. So, each unit is roughly 1250 megawatts.
Mr. Shimkus. That is where my calculations were a little
bit off. I thought it was 1100, and I calculated it would
service about 1.1 million homes, I think. But with the larger
megawatt outage, you predict--if we are doing it on homes, how
many homes is that?
Mr. Johnson. A million and a half homes, somewhere in that
range.
Mr. Shimkus. Per reactor?
Mr. Johnson. Yes, per reactor.
Mr. Shimkus. So, three million in total?
I would encourage my colleagues that, as we move on this
debate, just for electricity cost, just for clean generation,
nuclear power has to be part of the portfolio. You just can't
get there without that, and I would encourage that.
But we have additional problems, don't we, Mr. Johnson? So,
why are you closing? If it is cleaner burning; no CO2
emissions, which everybody wants, a baseline major generation,
why are you closing it?
Mr. Johnson. Well, as I said, I have been here nine months,
and the decision had been made by the time I got there. But I
think the decision was a policy one based on the desire not to
have nuclear in California.
Mr. Shimkus. And whose decision was that?
Mr. Johnson. I assume the policymakers, whoever they were.
Mr. Shimkus. You know who they were.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Johnson. Well, I would think it is the governor and the
legislature, those folks.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. All right.
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. So, they don't want it, but there are probably
some good reasons, too, I think. I mean, Diablo Canyon is
located where?
Mr. Johnson. On the Pacific Ocean a couple of hours south
of San Francisco.
Mr. Shimkus. And so, we all know California. I lived there
for a year and a half, serving in the United States Army. I
experienced a few earthquakes. It is prone to earthquakes,
right?
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. So, there are credible reasons why
Californians may think that maybe a nuclear power plant on an
earthquake region might not be the best thing to do. I mean, I
think that makes sense.
First of all, who pays for the decommissioning of this
power plant?
Mr. Johnson. The customers of PG&E.
Mr. Shimkus. The ratepayers? OK.
Mr. Johnson. The ratepayers.
Mr. Shimkus. That would be these three million homes-plus,
whatever.
The next question is, the plant is all level to the ground;
then, you can walk away? You have no problems, right.
Mr. Johnson. No, you can never walk away.
Mr. Shimkus. And why?
Mr. Johnson. Well, you have radioactive materials there for
some period of time. You have to decontaminate and decommission
the plant.
Mr. Shimkus. What radioactive material do you have
remaining?
Mr. Johnson. Well, you have the vessel.
Mr. Shimkus. OK.
Mr. Johnson. You have taken the fuel and probably moved it
offsite, but you still have a lot of pieces----
Mr. Shimkus. Is there a plan to move fuel offsite?
Mr. Johnson. I don't think there is a plan yet. You have to
take it out of the reactor and store it.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, that is why we are working with Mr.
Peters and Mr. McNerney, and all my friends in California, and
Ms. Matsui, to develop a place for regional and, then, long-
term storage. So, we get that off the books. Because who is
going to pay for the storage of that nuclear waste on your
property?
Mr. Johnson. The same people who are paying for everything
else.
Mr. Shimkus. It is going to be the Federal Government----
Mr. Johnson. Sooner or later----
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. Is really the answer to that one,
after you litigate with us.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
You also have a lot of power plants in the Chicago land
area, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rush. Very interesting.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Doyle for 5 minutes.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank you
for holding this hearing.
Obviously, we are here to focus on the devastating effects
of wildfires, but I think it is also a good opportunity to talk
about the larger threat of climate change and the challenges it
presents. As Mr. Johnson testified, in under a decade, PG&E's
service area went from 15 percent elevated fire risk to 50
percent designated as high fire threat. Much of that is due to
a warming climate that has brought record temperatures,
drought, and an unprecedented amount of dead trees.
But it is not only wildfires affecting communities around
the country. We have seen record flooding in the Midwest,
massive hurricanes in the Southeast, and in Pittsburgh, where I
live, record rainfalls leading to flooding and landslides. So,
while climate change does not cause any individual disaster, it
certainly plays a role in making the conditions worse. And as
we have seen all over the country, not being prepared for these
new conditions and the risks they bring can have deadly
consequences. So, even as we work to reduce our carbon
emissions and limit future warming, we still have to adapt to a
world that is already being impacted by climate change.
Mr. Johnson, you talked about one of the more drastic
measures, the PSPS program, where you turn people's power off.
And the transmission or distribution equipment is a main issue
both in starting the fires and determining who gets their power
shut off. What role do you see energy storage and microgrids
playing in making communities more resilient, reducing the
amount of people affected by the PSPS program, and reducing the
overall need for more transmission infrastructure?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you for that great question. Just to put
this in context, less than ten percent of fires are caused by
electric infrastructure. Of that number, a great many, 70
percent or more, caused by distribution, the little wires. So,
that is the causation.
And so, yes, I think a lot of things are going to play a
role in reducing it, including microgrids, materials, new
technology, sensors, covered wires, but microgrids, some form
of storage with a smaller footprint, so you are not relying on
that thousand-mile-long corridor in the forest. I think all of
those things; in fact, we are planning to do many of those
things ourselves starting this year.
Mr. Doyle. That is good to hear.
Mr. MacWilliams, as you know, the CLEAN Future Act would
create a National Climate Bank, and this bank would invest in a
number of clean energy, transportation energy efficiency, and
grid modernization projects. And so, while we are investing and
making a cleaner future, we need to adapt to the current world
that we live in. What suggestions do you have for how we can
specifically incentivize public-private partnerships to fund
resilience and adaption projects?
Mr. MacWilliams. Well, thank you, Congressman.
And as you mentioned, the threats here really are broader
than wildfires. I recognize it is not the direct subject of
this testimony, but in my written testimony I referred to that,
and for that matter, very similar threats from cybersecurity
and physical security, as Mr. Johnson knows from the Metcalf
incident a few years ago.
So, essentially, what we need to be doing is investing in
our infrastructure. In this country, we essentially operate our
government on a cash basis, not an accrual basis. And so, as a
result of that, we don't have a concept of accumulated
depreciation. And if you ran a company like that, you would be
in trouble pretty quickly.
And so, what is happening in this country is we are facing
this large wall that we are about to hit in our infrastructure,
and certainly in our energy infrastructure, but also in other
areas such as our national security infrastructure, which is
why in the past I and others have argued for a national
infrastructure bank. Now what is being talked about here, which
I think is very positive, is a climate bank, a very similar
concept. But, essentially, what we need is a public-private
entity to be able to support infrastructure investment. Or I am
afraid, unfortunately, if we just use our traditional methods
of infrastructure investment, we will never get there, given
the billions and billions of dollars that are required.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. MacWilliams. I want to thank all
of our panelists for your testimony today. It has been quite
informative. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Latta for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much for
holding today's hearing.
And thanks to our witnesses for appearing before us today.
We really appreciate your testimony.
Mr. Markham, if I could start my questioning with you, one
thing is, I have the largest number of rural coops of anybody
in the State of Ohio. So, I appreciate the work that you do out
West.
I am also a co-chair of the Grid Innovation Caucus with my
good friend, the gentleman from the 11th District from
California. One of the goals of the Caucus is to discuss
solutions to the many challenges facing the electric grid,
including resiliency and how advanced technologies can be
utilized to enhance the grid. It is important that we are
looking to protect the grid, not just from cyberattacks, but
also physical threats like wildfires, hurricanes, and
tornadoes.
In your testimony, you speak about efforts to install new
technologies such as taller steel poles that would enhance
reliability and resiliency. Will you go into more detail about
other technologies that are being deployed to respond to
physical threats to the grid?
Mr. Markham. Yes. Yes, you bet. Thank you, Representative.
We are pursuing right now looking at a pilot program. This
is probably the most significant, is the opportunity to use
digital waveform analytics technology, and it has the
capability of detecting a problem on the line before it becomes
a fault and can ignite a wildfire. That is probably one of the
biggest things that we are looking at now.
The other things that we are pursuing and looking at in our
long-term plan is demand response and how we manage the heavy
loads that come onto our transmission lines, being able to
reduce power from significant events or weather events, things
like that.
We also have fully deployed advanced metering
infrastructure. It allows two-way communication with our
meters. It gives us a lot of information.
And then, we are moving towards electronic closures in our
substations, a lot more advanced things. The more information
we get, the better technology, the more that we can get data
and better respond and be in front of the issues.
Mr. Latta. Let me just kind of follow up with my friend,
the ranking member, who was sitting next to me a little bit
ago. In your testimony, you are talking about quite a bit of
issues you have had with the permit approval times, the
inconsistent application policy, and the delays involved. But I
would like to go back, again, to this.
In your testimony, you talk about the application you filed
back on April the 17th of last year. And in that, you were
talking about what you are trying to get done and the window of
opportunity in Camp Sherman to perform the job before the fire
season remains limited due to the heavy winter snow and the wet
spring months. But eight months, as Mr. Walden had pointed out,
had elapsed before the federal agency decided to even post the
proposed action to get those public comments for that two-week
period. Where are you at on that right now?
Mr. Markham. Right now, it is still receiving input from
the public. I will commend the Forest Service Ranger for
applying categoric exclusions to reduce the timeframe of doing
this. But, again, I don't know if it is resources available to
our federal land agencies that it has to take this long, but in
that instance we have three months to complete a job--in
October, November, December. If we have heavy snows in November
and December, we can't do it. So, we are down to one month,
October. That is how critical it is where we are at.
Mr. Latta. OK. And again, when you are looking at that
critical period of time, are you finding that, in talking to
other electric coops out West, that they are experiencing the
same delay, that it is taking this long to get something done?
Mr. Markham. Absolutely, yes. And we are working to improve
that, the relationships. Again, central Oregon and throughout
the State, we are working with our federal land agencies to get
agreements together, so we can get some accountability, some
consistency, and get some of these issues resolved.
Mr. Latta. We were talking a little bit beforehand, Mr.
Walden and I, and the question that came up was SHPA. Are you
still having a problem with SHPA? And maybe you could explain
what this is.
Mr. Markham. Yes, Representative, State Historic
Preservation Office. And so, out where we are working to
replace the 113 poles, Congressman Walden showed the one pole.
That is under a State Historical Preservation Site, Historical
Site. We actually have to have an archeologist there when we
relocate and begin digging for the new pole. In fact, there
are, I believe, 29 poles where the archeologist has to be
present while we do our digging. Now, again, I commend the
Forest Service because they could have required a full survey,
but they are only requiring that archeologists be there. So,
yes, we deal with SHPA.
Mr. Latta. Does it take very long to get the archeologists?
Mr. Markham. What's that? I am sorry.
Mr. Latta. Does it take long to get the archeologists?
Mr. Markham. You know, I am not involved in part of that. I
just know that, if that is part of why the delay of nine
months, I am not sure if that is part of it or not.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. My time has
expired, and thank you for your indulgence.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Tonko for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Chairman Rush.
Yes, Mr. MacWilliams, I really appreciate the image in your
testimony that shows wildfires are projected to be worse in
many parts of the country, well beyond California, by mid-
century. These climate-related conditions may be appearing
first in the West, but make no mistake, many other regions will
be impacted. So, can you give a little more explanation on the
factors driving this increased risk?
Mr. MacWilliams. Thank you for the question.
Yes. And as my colleagues here to the left who are
scientists, which I am not, clearly, the conditions that we are
seeing caused by climate change are exacerbating the intensity
and the frequency. And when combined with forest management
issues that have been discussed, we are in the situation that
we are seeing.
But one of the things we tried to indicate there in the
paper, as you indicated, was that this is, while severe in
California, this is a problem across the country. And as I
previously testified, we have seen similar problems with
flooding and other climate change-related issues as well.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you for that.
And do you believe there are lessons we should be taking
from the response to recent Western fires and applying them
more broadly?
Mr. MacWilliams. Yes. I spoke a few minutes ago about the
need for infrastructure. My concern is that we really need to
treat this as a call to action and that we need to really get
on this. We have enormous infrastructure needs.
And secondly, I think, you know, there is really
encouraging work being done on the technology front. And so, as
I mentioned in my opening statement, I would really encourage
Congress to be funding, and looking carefully, but funding
technology development because, in short, essentially, when you
look at the enormous amount of data that is being generated
from all these sensors, you combine them with advanced data
analytics and high-performance computing advances in deep
learning, there is an enormous amount that can be done there.
Mr. Tonko. So, are those tasks that you would assign to the
utilities arena, or are there other steps that utilities in
future high-risk areas should begin in terms of reducing these
long-term risks?
Mr. MacWilliams. I mean, my understanding--and others can
speak to this as well--my understanding is that it is really a
combination of efforts. I am familiar with the efforts, as I
mentioned, that Livermore Lab and some of the other National
Labs are doing working with the CPUC, working with utilities
such as PG&E. Perhaps Mr. Johnson can add to that. But it is,
obviously, a combination of effort here, but I think technology
combined with infrastructure, that we can do a lot.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And, Mr. Johnson and Markham, to the extent federal
investments support grid modernization, do you believe there
should be additional focus on how grid modernization can
support resilience?
Mr. Johnson. Absolutely, I do. We used to think about
reliability all the time. I think now it is time to think about
reliability and resilience as discrete things. And so, anything
that helps with resilience, given these challenges, would be
helpful.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Markham?
Mr. Markham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, absolutely. Resilience just, for example, over the
next 20 years, we are investing $300 million into hardening our
system. That is a tremendous amount of money for an electric
cooperative.
I talked about the pilot project where we would like to use
the digital waveform analytics. That is not inexpensive. And
any sort of assistance we can get to provide resiliency, it
just helps speed up the process.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And it seems that new sensors and microgrids and other
smart technologies may be helpful, but you are also working on
more traditional hardening approaches: an increased focus on
vegetation management, replacing wood poles with metal, and the
coating of wires. Do you have any thoughts on the role for some
of these lower-cost and perhaps lower-tech solutions as part of
a more resilient electricity system? Any of you?
Mr. Markham. Absolutely. As far as for me, there are three
things to mitigate wildfire risk. The most important step is
hardening your system, vegetation management, and technology.
We just talked about technology. Hardening the system, $300
million. Vegetation management, and I want to hit on that
because that is more traditional.
I commend PG&E, $3.8 billion they have spent on vegetation
management since 2009. I wanted to contrast that with one of
our smallest electric cooperatives in the State. The $3.8
billion comes to $22 annually per customer per year. And at
West Oregon Electric Cooperative, they spend $300 a year for
vegetation management. So, you have to do those traditional
forms, not just technology, but those, too, to prevent
wildfires.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And when you relate that fiscally to the damage that may
occur, it seems like it is a very sound preventative device.
Mr. Markham. Absolutely.
Mr. Tonko. So, I thank you all.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from West Virginia, my friend, Mr.
McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
having this hearing on this.
This is important because it really focuses back on forest
management, and I thought that it seems to be that a lot of
premise of where we were moving on this was that would be our
primary objective, because that is something we can set policy.
We can work on, forest management. But you have heard
throughout the hearing so far that there have been efforts to
distract us, to divert us over, by adding into some of the
issues, I guess, of climate change.
I don't disagree that climate change is out there. But my
concern--and eventually, I'll get, Dr. Collins, to a question
to you--but I am concerned about we don't control the climate
in America. If you look back on it, there was an MIT study that
came out just recently that said, regardless of anything the
United States does to decrease its emissions--regardless--until
China and India reduce their emissions, the result will be
climate catastrophe. In that period of time, China and India
have both increased their CO2 emissions by over 200 percent. We
are vulnerable in America for droughts, wildfires, rising sea
levels, all based on what is happening around the world.
Earlier this year, the Financial Times came out with they
are increasing the use of coal in China. Actually, they are
under construction now. For the next five years, they are going
to be producing brand-new coal-fired power plants equivalent to
all the capacity of Europe, and the European Union. So, the
world is still continuing to use fossil fuels, and it is
impacting us in America. So, yes, we can do all the right
things. That is why I am hoping we can get back to focus on
forest management, because we can't control what the other
countries are doing on this.
And then, there were some interesting reports that came out
that conflict me with this testimony that came out here today.
Here the Royal Society in London came out with a report that
said global area burned appears to have overall declined over
the past two decades.
The Washington Post, in June of 2017, said that fires have
consumed--the amount of land being burned in wildfires is
declining. That conflicts with what we are hearing. So, I am
concerned about it. I don't know all the aspects of this. But
you see this conflicting data on this.
So, my question to you, Dr. Collins, would be, if we were
to follow Congressman Pallone and others on the other side of
the aisle and go for decarbonization of America--we can do
that; that can happen--if we were to do that, by year 2050,
would we still experience droughts, wildfires, severe weather
storms, and rising oceans? Can you elaborate on that?
Dr. Collins. I will say this: I am not a climate scientist.
So, on that respect, I probably had better decline to answer
that. My guess as a forest scientist is that fire is going to
be around for a long time; drought is going to be around. And
so, my take on it is that we need to plan for its
inevitability. And to do so means to do and large-scale forest
management, large-scale reductions in tree density for dealing
with these expected droughts.
Now whether or not our policies--let's say from a
standpoint of forests, I think it is a good goal to look to
forests to do some of the sequestering, but not at the expense
of exposing forests to further disturbance from drought and
fire. There is sort of a resilient capacity that the forests
can take in terms of carbon, but we can't just keep packing it
in there. I don't know if that answers your question.
Mr. McKinley. Well, so the answer is you still think, from
forestry, there would still be wildfires, even if we totally
decarbonized our economy in the United States?
Dr. Collins. I think so, yes.
Mr. McKinley. Yes. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Pallone for 5 minutes for questioning our
witnesses.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Rush.
It is clear from the testimony today that wildfire risk in
the American West is extreme, and it is also clear that
wildfires are not exclusively a Western State problem. In fact,
Alaska, not California, saw the most acreage burned last year,
and high-intensity wildfires occurs recently in east Texas, and
the Smoky Mountains, the Shenandoah Valley. And as Mr.
MacWilliams' testimony shows, fire will likely increase
nationwide over the next 50 years. And I mentioned in my
opening statement wildfire threats exist in my home State of
New Jersey.
And I know we have heard from our witnesses today that
climate change is driving the nationwide increase in fire
severity. So, I wanted to ask Mr. MacWilliams or Dr. Davis, can
you explain the specific aspects of climate change that are
driving this increased risk? I would start with Mr.
MacWilliams, if I could.
Mr. MacWilliams. Yes. Again, I am not a climate scientist,
but I have spent much of my career in this area. I mean,
essentially, the science behind climate change has been around
for 100 years. And we essentially have a one-way mirror that,
as CO2 is put into the atmosphere, CO2 comes down to earth, and
the wavelengths change. And as it is reflected back in, it
bounces back off and comes back down to earth. That is causing
heating. It is causing thermal expansion of water and
intensifying storms and other weather effects, and obviously,
wildfires. So, that is the essential effect.
And I also did not mean in any way to--I think putting
opposition between climate change and forest management is a
false dichotomy. We obviously need both to solve these
problems, and the low-hanging fruit in some ways is forest
management practices because that is the fuel. What we have to
look at is the conditions over time across the country and
other places in the world that are creating more fuel and
exacerbating the wildfires, which, as has been stated, have
been a natural part of forests really forever.
Mr. Pallone. And these changes are not unique to California
or even the American West?
Mr. MacWilliams. No, those are global effects, and we are
seeing them; as we have talked about, we are seeing them
everywhere, including Siberia, for that matter.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Dr. Davis, did you want to comment?
Dr. Davis. Certainly. I would like to add that one of the
elements that changing climate brings to this is that we
shouldn't expect traditional methods to yield traditional
responses. And that is where the forests that we have, the
rangelands that we have, may behave differently, even if we go
in with the expectation that what has worked in the past won't
work more. In the West, we see our fire season is about 30 days
longer now than it was three decades ago. That increased length
means there is more opportunity for those areas to burn each
year and more areas at risk each year, coupled with people
choosing to live in that wildland-urban interface.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Mr. Johnson, from what we have heard today
and from what we know about climate change, climate-related
threats to the grid are diverse. Wildfires, hurricanes, and
rising sea levels are just a few examples.
So, your company is struggling with it now. I just wanted
to ask, how can utilities keep up with the threats? And have
you learned any useful lessons from other utilities in your own
State or elsewhere that have dealt with these questions
already?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you for the question.
California is an interesting place here. It is one percent
of global emissions. It's the fifth or sixth biggest economy in
the world, and it is suffering some of the most significant
climate change effects already, despite being such a small
contributor. So, we are sort of hyper-attuned to this issue.
Decarbonizing electricity and then, moving to
electrification is probably the greatest step we can take to
deal with this challenge of carbon. And I think if you look at
the utility industry over the last decade, you have seen pretty
good progress on that front in decarbonizing. I think that is
the most important thing we could do.
Mr. Pallone. I appreciate it. As was already mentioned, I
think we have to take some bold action to stem the worse
impacts of catastrophic climate change. We are announcing today
on the Democratic side that we are going to put forward the
actual legislative text for the CLEAN Future Act, which seeks
to have carbon-neutral by 2050, and the power sector seeks to
establish that standard. So, I appreciate your comments.
And thank you, Chairman Rush, for having this hearing
today. I think it is really important for all of us, including
my State. Thank you.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from West Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And it is good to be from western Virginia, where we have
lots of trees, and we try to manage our forests.
Mr. Rush. The Chair stands corrected.
Mr. Griffith. That is all right.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman from Virginia.
Mr. Griffith. I am so close to West Virginia it might as
well be the same, but I do appreciate it.
And I will say, Mr. MacWilliams, I agree with you that
trying to say it is either climate or forest management is a
false dichotomy. I am going to focus in my questions on forest
management, but climate change is clearly part of the issue as
well. We have to focus on both, and I agree with that comment
you made a minute or two ago.
Dr. Collins, what a fascinating area that you have to
study. So, I want to ask some questions, and I am going to
start with your comment in your written testimony about
``large-scale tree mortality from bark beetles and possibly
other yet-unseen insect and pathogen outbreaks,'' because that
can be a significant portion.
My question is you talked about tree density previously.
Does the density of the trees lead to a faster spread of both
the bark beetles and possibly other pathogens?
Dr. Collins. It does. It does partly because, in the case
of bark beetles, they communicate with each other by
pheromones. And the closer trees are to each other, the more
readily accepted the pheromones are.
Mr. Griffith. They reproduce more rapidly?
Dr. Collins. Yes, and then, they can, also, what they call
mass attack.
But the other effect it has is on individual tree vigor,
right? As there are more trees, they are competing for the same
amount or less water and nutrients. And so, there is decreased
vigor; hence, their defenses are lower and they cannot defend
themselves from bark beetles or other pathogens.
Mr. Griffith. Yes, and we have to pay attention to these.
And I certainly am no expert, but I love this kind of area of
science. And so, I had one of my team go pull up out of the
archives the May 2007 National Geographic where it references
the red marsh worms and the common nightcrawlers that
apparently were brought over by the Europeans and devastated
the leaf litter in the previously-wormless northern woods of
what is now the United States, drying out areas such as the
pines and making it more susceptible to any of the problems
that you might have with drier areas, because previously it was
all wet.
That being said, I was interested in your comments about
the fact that we are burning all the trees, instead of having
patchy. Because, historically--and many of our species have
adapted to--there is a fire, but inside of the fire area there
are areas that did not get burned. And so, you have the red-
cockaded woodpecker that used to live in Chairman Pallone's
pines in New Jersey but don't live there anymore. That is not
necessarily the reason. But we could reintroduce them if we had
some living trees and some burned-out trees, because they feed
on the dead trees and they live in the living trees.
Do you see examples similar to that? Because I am more
familiar with the eastern birds. Do you see more examples like
that in the western forests?
Dr. Collins. In terms of maybe what some of the impacts of
forest change have been on species?
Mr. Griffith. Well, that, and the fact that they need to
have some fire, but not where it burns everything.
Dr. Collins. Absolutely. I think there are cases of a few
woodpeckers that are what they call ``burn specialists,'' and
they thrive in burnt forests; although they can still live in
green forests, but they do best in burned forests. The thing is
that it took that sort of patchy landscape that you described
where they could rely on sort of constant burned forests,
although they shifted around to different areas. Now, with
these giant patches of burned forests, you have a feast for a
short time, and that time period is maybe a few years after the
fire, and then, you have famine because you have a giant area
that is deforested. So, we do have these examples.
Mr. Griffith. And they don't have any place to live
because, normally, they live in the living trees?
Dr. Collins. Sure. Yes, it is sort of a population dynamic
where they move between green and burned forests.
Mr. Griffith. Right. Right. That is a significant problem.
Are you seeing anything else in regard to, whether it be
insects or birds, the impact of this? And I am assuming that
the reason we are having this huge burn is not just that we are
hotter and drier, but because all these trees are so close
together, your fuel. You mentioned that in your opening
statement, too, if you want to talk about that some more, about
how the crowns are so close together, the trees, when the fire
gets up in there, there is no way to retard it.
Dr. Collins. Sure. I think about it in terms of something
we call continuity, where let's say in the historical forest
condition there were a lot of breaks, and not only just in the
tree crowns, but on the surface as well. So, we have really not
to say lost continuity, you know, that we have lost that, but
we have really homogenized forests. And we have greater
continuity not even just in the tree crowns, but on the
surface. I mean, there is not a lot stopping the spread of fire
right now, except for when we can get in there with crews and
cut the fuel away.
Mr. Griffith. So, what we need is a diversity of species
and a number of places where we don't have so many trees close
together, and some patches of prairie or open land in between?
Dr. Collins. Sure. We call it a mosaic on the landscape.
Mr. Griffith. I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentle lady from California, Ms. Matsui, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank all the witnesses for being here today
on this very important topic.
Under the authority of the Clean Air Act, the Federal
Government has a responsibility to monitor and set standards
for national ambient air quality. Included in the list of
pollutants to monitor is particulate matter--or, as we call it,
PM--which are small, inhalable particles that can cause serious
health risks.
Dr. Davis, more specifically, what are the health risks to
those who are exposed to wildfire smoke, whether this is direct
exposure from communities where these fires are occurring or
indirect exposure for communities who are downwind?
Dr. Davis. Thank you for the question.
And I am not a medical expert. I am a forester by training.
So, I will speak to this from the forestry perspective and my
own experience.
Ms. Matsui. Certainly.
Dr. Davis. The people who spend time outside in the smoky
season do inhale different sizes of particles. And there are
some important distinctions in terms of particles from wildfire
versus particles from prescribed burn or controlled burns.
Those are often different sizes.
One of the areas that are expanding in study across the
U.S. and around the world is both the acute short-term exposure
to smoke and what that causes in terms of a daily response,
but, also, for people who live in smoke-prone areas, that
prolonged chronic exposure. We don't actually know what some of
those effects are, but we see them as similar to other types of
smoke that people inhale.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Do our constituents have tools to monitor
this smoke and, more specifically, elevated levels of PM in the
event of a large wildfire?
Dr. Davis. We collectively do not have great tools to be
able to inform what different levels of smoke mean. People may
be aware that it is smoky, but not what that particular matter
is. If suspect we were all asked what a particular level of
smoke meant to us, we would not know those numbers. That is
also disproportionately more likely to affect people in lower-
income brackets who are exposed to smoke chronically and, then,
also, to those who simply do not have a choice to opt-out of
being exposed to smoke.
Ms. Matsui. Right. Well, what we find, also, is that, since
it is around an urban area, which could be my city of
Sacramento or even areas like San Francisco, the particulate
matter was such that they had to cancel schools and everything
else. And it is a type where everybody thinks they can wear a
mask, but the masks aren't effective, and it stays there for
the longest time.
Mr. MacWilliams, you laid out in your testimony a number of
federal policy recommendations, including how entities like
FERC or NERC can become more engaged players in encouraging
grid upgrades and developing financial mechanisms for private
utilities to utilize. Does the federal government currently
have standards for transmission lines to prevent fire risks?
Mr. MacWilliams. Thank you for the question.
What I was trying to focus on in the testimony there, as I
mentioned, is that I think we have got to provide incentives
for utilities, as well as accountability, but incentives for
utilities to be able to invest in all these necessary upgrades
in infrastructure and technologies. And one of the concerns is
that some of the current regulatory structures--and I recognize
much of that is governed by state law--do not necessarily
incentivize utilities to do that.
So, the reason I mentioned the FERC is, as you mentioned;
obviously, FERC has regulatory authorities over transmission
lines, although many of these issues have been caused by local
distribution lines. And therefore, in the past, as you are
aware, the FERC has agreed to incentives for certain
transmission-related areas, and I think those could be applied
here. So, that is why I indicated that I think FERC could be
doing some very positive work in this area.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Thank you.
Earlier this week, a member of CAL FIRE communicated to my
office that the devastating fires of the Camp Fire and the
Kincade Fire were the result of historic wind events, some of
which reached 100 miles per hour for sustained periods of time.
If these wind events are happening every year and are causing
wildfires to continue to rank amongst the worst in State
history, they are obviously not historic or isolated events
anymore, but the new norm. As such, should we be focusing our
resources on research and developing more accurate prediction
models, and on infrastructure upgrades to take these new norms
into account?
Mr. MacWilliams, again, you referenced ongoing research
being conducted at laboratories around the country on this. Is
the latest research to better predict dangerous wind events
that can lead to wildfires?
Mr. MacWilliams. Yes. The research that I was referencing,
which I am familiar with--and obviously, there is a lot more
being done--is that, particularly in California, there is a lot
of work being done. We are putting enormous amounts of sensors
in, which needs to be done. Those sensors are providing or
creating a lot of data. And it is everything from high altitude
winds to local effects, to try to be able to, first of all,
warn when situations are likely to cause wildfires. But, to me,
some of the more interesting things are using big data, high-
performance computing, and some of the advanced simulation
technologies that we are developing to be able to simulate and
look at creating prevention models.
Ms. Matsui. Well, that is good, and I would like to follow
up later on that.
Mr. MacWilliams. We would be pleased to.
Ms. Matsui. And thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have
gone over my time. I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentle lady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Walden, the ranking member of the full
committee, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We appreciate it. And
again, thanks for hosting this hearing as well.
And I want to thank all of our witnesses for your
testimony. We have another hearing going on upstairs. So, I
have had to go back and forth.
Talking about air quality, at one of the prior hearings we
did in the prior Congress, I had a constituent from Medford
that sent me a photo of his CPAP filter from his breathing
device. After a couple of days, it was literally black, and we
put it up on the screen. And so, to my friend from the
Sacramento area, Ms. Matsui, we have suffered the same sort of
things. And you get into Medford and some of these areas, they
are in a bowl, and the smoke gets in there. Literally, it will
settle in there for a month at a time. It is awful. Somebody
told me it was the equivalent of your kid smoking a pack of
cigarettes every day. So, they closed schools. They cancelled
festivals, the Bread Festival. The Ashland Shakespearean
Festival had to cancel outdoor performances. It has a huge
economic impact, and a huge human health impact.
I want to talk about the forest management component of
this. As climate changes, we know there is more stress on the
trees; we know there is more density, because we have managed
fire to the best of our ability. And we have got to do
something about it. I mean, you have got to reduce the fuel
loads, in my opinion.
Now, when you talk in these terms, there are groups that
say, ``Oh, you're just for industrial logging and you're going
to clear-cut everything and rape and pillage the land.'' But if
you go back to nature, a lot of these environments had natural
fire events. They thinned it out.
And I want to ask about the issue of woody biomass because
there are organizations that treat that like it were the evil
of the land. And yet, we know you can take that woody biomass,
get a market for it, and produce it. It is used as a fuel
source. Some would argue it is a zero carbon overall. And I
wonder, Dr. Collins, do you want to speak to that? Mr.
MacWilliams maybe? You seem to be nodding, Dr. Collins. Woody
biomass?
Dr. Collins. Sure, I will take a stab at it. So, yes, and I
think there is an argument that could be made there that, if
you assume that that biomass will ultimately burn in a
wildfire; and you balance that out with the opportunity to
remove it, and then, burn it and make energy, then, yes, you
could argue it is a zero-balance on the carbon.
Mr. Walden. All right. Mr. MacWilliams, do you want to----
Mr. MacWilliams. Yes, just to add, there is interesting
work being done now. I think there is a report coming out
shortly on the subject from the National Labs at Livermore, in
particular, looking at biomass gasification when complying with
CO2 sequestration, which it turns out California has some very
good areas in the Central Valley to sequester CO2.
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. MacWilliams. But, then, ultimately, turning that into
hydrogen.
Mr. Walden. Oh, interesting.
Mr. MacWilliams. If that could be made to work, of course,
that is a good thing.
Mr. Walden. And part of this is the funding issue, which
some of you spoke to, and we battle over that in Congress.
There is never enough. We are going to be a hundred years
behind probably at the rate we are going to keep up because the
forests keep growing and dying, and everything else.
But you have got this woody biomass that remains on the
forest floor. And aren't I correct that that adds to the
intensity of the fuel and the destruction of the soils, and
often you get a second fire that goes back through that? Dr.
Davis? Dr. Collins? Does anybody disagree with that notion?
Dr. Collins. No, I don't disagree.
Mr. Walden. All right. Good. I am doing basic science here.
All right. More fuel, more intensive fire.
And so, what we are trying to figure out is, how do we get
back in balance with nature here? And can you use this
material? And meanwhile, Mr. Markham over here is struggling
for seven months to get approval to move one power pole out of
the way of what he thinks will be a more fire danger area into
a safer area.
Now I know my colleague, Mr. Latta, and I was talking about
the issue involving the approval process that may include the
Historic Preservation Office. Did you all talk about that while
I was upstairs?
Mr. Markham. Yes, I filled them in on that. SHPA has to be
involved because it is a historic site.
Mr. Walden. And the historic site is because of what?
Mr. Markham. Actually, I believe it goes back many years
and that at some point, the tribes were occupying that area.
Mr. Walden. OK. All right. So, you are looking for any
tribal sort of issues there?
Mr. Markham. Yes, yes.
Mr. Walden. But, when you are looking at this overall
approval process, the example that I used, the seven months,
how often does that happen to you?
Mr. Markham. You know, Representative, it is getting
better, but, historically, we have timelines that we have to
meet with budgets, with the need to get things done, small
windows. And so, it is pretty common that it takes that long.
Mr. Walden. All right. And, Mr. Johnson, I want to go to
you for a final question and comment. Given the horrible
tragedies of these fires, given the backlog of maintenance to
thin out or cut out and improve your right-of-way, do you have
landowners that try to stop you from trimming trees you believe
in your right-of-way need to be cut?
Mr. Johnson. Yes, in fact, we do, which is hard to
understand, given the circumstances we face. I will say people
have gotten a lot more willing to have things cut, but there
are a number of people who just do not want their trees, or not
even their trees, cut.
Mr. Walden. And if those trees end up causing a fire, who
is liable?
Mr. Johnson. In California, if your equipment is involved
in the fire in any way, you are liable.
Mr. Walden. So, even if the private owner of the tree says,
``Don't cut it,'' and you are in a fight over that, if that
tree gets into your line and starts a fire, you have the
liability, is that accurate?
Mr. Johnson. That is inverse condemnation in California,
yes, sir.
Mr. Walden. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for your indulgence. I
yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes another fine Representative from the state of
California, Mr. McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the Chair for that shout out
there.
And I thank the witnesses. Your testimony has been very
helpful; a lot of good suggestions or recommendations. PG&E
showed what was already being done. So, I appreciate those
comments.
Mr. MacWilliams, has there been a decline in the nation's
energy infrastructure in the past decades?
Mr. MacWilliams. Yes, as I referred to earlier, I think our
infrastructure in many areas, including critical energy
infrastructure and, also other areas such as national security
infrastructure, is in decline and badly in need of investment.
Mr. McNerney. So, what factors led to that decline?
Mr. MacWilliams. Well, as I was saying earlier, I think
part of the issue is just the way the government approaches
infrastructure investment being essentially on a cash basis as
opposed to accrual. So, we don't have a sense of accumulated
depreciation. So, we are not preparing for the reinvestment.
And as a result, we are essentially facing a wall in
infrastructure investment that we are facing, unfortunately, at
the same time that we have all these new demands on our
infrastructure, particularly the grid, as we need to make it
more intelligent and more resilient.
Mr. McNerney. So, the Federal Government has a role, then,
in improving the situation?
Mr. MacWilliams. Absolutely. It is a nationwide issue.
Mr. McNerney. Absolutely.
One thing that many people don't realize, Mr. Johnson, is
how broad the risk or threat of climate change poses to our
energy infrastructure and how much it is going to cost to make
that more resilient. Can you speak to the importance of federal
investment and advancing research development and deployment of
technologies that will make our grids more resilient?
Mr. Johnson. Yes. So, one of the great things about our
country is the National Laboratory system, where many good
things come out. And it is a good investment, in my view, in
those institutions. There is a lot of work being done in those
institutions on things that will help with fire prevention and
suppression--sensors, sectionalizing devices, all kinds of
things. So, I think investment in those National Labs is a
great idea in this space.
Mr. McNerney. Well, what about local governments? What
should the state and local governments be doing?
Mr. Johnson. Well, I think the states have to take their
part in the forest management pieces of state lands. And I
think on the local level, that is mostly a coordination/
communication to make sure that people who are affected by
these things, like power shutoffs, are well taken care of. So,
I think the local thing is more about taking care of the local
people.
Mr. McNerney. Could you talk a little bit about the grid,
the new sensor technology and microgrid resilient zones?
Mr. Johnson. Sure There is a couple of things going on. The
essential problem for fire and electric equipment is a piece of
vegetation hits the line. There is a spark. It causes a fire.
It is really that simple.
So, if you can cover your line with some material that it
won't spark, that is helpful. Historically, that line, when it
breaks, we can't see it break. So, we need a sensor that will
shut off the power to that line as soon as it breaks, right?
And so, things like rapid earth fault current limiter, which
has been used in Australia--we are piloting it here--that is
exactly the kind of thing that will do distribution fault
anticipation. There is maybe some artificial intelligence that
will tell us when we are likely to have a fault on a line, a
lot of radiofrequency sensors, these kinds of things. So, there
is a lot of technology work going on here.
Mr. McNerney. Dr. Collins, you indicated that proper
thinning is needed, but what about improper thinning? I mean,
if we pass authorizations to do thinning, what is the
propensity that that will result in improper thinning and what
would be the consequence of that?
Dr. Collins. Are we talking about federal land?
Mr. McNerney. Federal land.
Dr. Collins. Yes, I think it is pretty unlikely, given the
set of regulations that are in place already, at least for the
Forest Service in California. I mean, I suppose if we were to
raise what we call diameter limits for cutting, then it could
be improper thinning where you are cutting the largest trees.
But that seems like something that is not really on the table,
at least from what I understand.
Mr. McNerney. Dr. Davis, what caused the large increase in
tree density? What specifically caused that? I mean, we heard a
lot about that today. What has caused that?
Dr. Davis. Simply suppression of fires. And where
previously fires for millennia would burn through at different
intensities, that would actually clear out what would burn in
the future. As we started to put out fires more and more
effectively, and we did that at a point where it was wetter and
cooler, then those trees all grew, and they grew into that
continuous forest that Dr. Collins mentioned before, where the
ability for flame to travel over greater distance increased.
Mr. McNerney. So, fire suppression has caused fire
explosion?
Dr. Davis. Yes.
Mr. McNerney. All right. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Johnson from Ohio for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson of Ohio. I want to thank both committee chairs
for holding this hearing today.
I know we are discussing an issue defined by recent
wildfires out West, but this issue is certainly relevant to
Ohio as well, as I have about 2500 acres of the Wayne National
Forest in my district, where the carefully burned process,
which is what you folks would call prescribed burns, took place
last year to clear out some of the problem areas.
As I mentioned, the Wayne is in southeast Ohio. It is a
patchwork of public and private lands, and these burns are one
of the important ways to protect human property and to reduce
damages from wildfires. Additionally, they encourage plant and
animal biodiversity and help ensure that our native oaks remain
prevalent within the forest.
We have been largely spared in Ohio from the devastation of
wildfires, and I do share my colleagues' concern that something
has to be done. Regardless of this debate, we are having today
about why they are occurring; we have got to figure out a
solution.
So, this question, Dr. Davis, you have noted in your
testimony that more people are living in forests than ever
before. So, to both you and Dr. Collins, has public acceptance
of prescribed burning or active forest management become an
issue?
Dr. Davis. I think that education of people who live in the
wildland-urban interface is one of the great opportunities we
have to be able to accept those treatments that we use, whether
it is through thinning treatments appropriately conducted or
through managed fire and prescribed fire. I don't think we are
there yet.
Mr. Johnson of Ohio. Yes. Dr. Collins?
Dr. Collins. In California, I will tell you that it seems
like acceptance is growing, at least in those communities that
are immediately adjacent to some of the wildlands. And that is
partly just because of what we have experienced. I think people
are pushed to that acceptance, I will say.
Mr. Johnson of Ohio. I have an analogy because in Ohio we
live on the Ohio River. So, we have flooding issues and
watershed issues. And so, we have manmade retainments that are
put in place, and have been put in place, to control water
retention and those kinds of things, to protect from flooding.
Over the years, residents have come in and built up around
those manmade lakes. And now, in order to manage the watershed,
you have to reduce the water in those manmade lakes. And so,
people get upset because, wait a minute, now we can't run our
boats and all that kind of stuff in our lake, not realizing, of
course, what the intended purpose was.
So, it seems to me that prescribed burning and public
acceptance of it is a big challenge because folks build
property and they set up their homesteads there. They begin
raising their families there. And then, all of a sudden, now
they have got to face this prescribed burning.
Does the media report this issue accurately, you think?
Either one of you? Both of you?
Dr. Collins. I am seeing, at least in California, I am
seeing some media attention on the prevention side, and it is
neat to see. The thing that is always the dilemma here is that
you can have public acceptance, but the implementation is kind
of a different story, right? When you are talking about small
parcels of land, each with their own unique considerations on
what you would have to account for on a prescribed burn, you
almost just can't do that at scale. People might want it, but,
then, from an implementation side, you can't do it. So, I am a
little concerned about that.
Mr. Johnson of Ohio. Dr. Davis?
Dr. Davis. So, I think that one of the challenges we have
is that right now we are concerned about the wildfires in
Australia. Last year, it was the wildfires in Brazil. Before
that, it was the wildfires in California or in Oregon. And the
fire itself garners a lot of attention, but that smoke issue I
referred to earlier affects residents hundreds or thousands of
miles away, even from where those treatments might need to take
place. And there is a disconnect between someone who
experiences smoke from a fire a hundred or a thousand miles
away and someone who experiences the threat of the actual fire.
So, it is a space where we have to do more work.
Mr. Johnson of Ohio. Yes. So, how do we develop community
support for prescribed burning? How do we do that differently?
Dr. Collins. One thing we are seeing--and we are kind of
adopting this from the Southeast--is that there are these
prescribed burn associations where there are individuals,
landowners, some sort of maybe ex-fire-types from agencies,
that get together and want to do something locally on their
land. And I think they are getting more support for that where
even some of the agencies like CAL FIRE would even back that,
but it is not totally ready to turn over. I mean, CAL FIRE is
not ready to just hand the reins of burning off to some
association.
Mr. Johnson of Ohio. Yes. OK. All right.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Kennedy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I apologize for
bouncing back and forth, as some others have been as well.
But I thank all the witnesses for being here, for your
thoughtful testimony.
And, Chairman Rush and Chairman Tonko, and Ranking Members
Upton and Shimkus, thank you for convening this hearing and for
taking the threat of wildfires as seriously as it deserves
Few natural disasters so clearly and painfully illustrate
the reinforcing cycle of climate change and the cost of our
continued inaction as wildfires. Climate change leads to rising
temperatures, invasive species, frequent droughts, and extreme
winds, which contribute to historic wildfires, which cause
skyrocketing carbon emissions, which exacerbate climate change,
which causes fires; and that cycle continues until we commit to
ending climate change.
Every single day that we wait only makes it harder to
finally come up with a solution and end it. We can debate and
discuss mitigation factors today, and I appreciate the
suggestions that have come forth and the testimony, but those
mitigation factors will mean little if you are not willing to
have an honest conversation about one of the driving factors to
it, obviously, climate change.
Some of our colleagues will say that the science isn't as
clear as I claim it is. In response, I would point to a recent
NASA report, released just a few months ago, that said that,
quote, ``Where warming and drying climate has increased the
risk of fires, we have seen an increase in burning.'' End
quote. A Pentagon study, released a year ago, before historic
fires scorched California, warned that, if we did not address
climate change, more than 40 U.S. bases around the world would
be threatened by wildfires in the next two decades.
There are other colleagues that will acknowledge that
climate change is real, but that it is just too complicated or
too late or too early or too expensive to confront. But if we
listen to the testimony from our witnesses today, we will
understand how disingenuous that argument often is.
We are already paying for climate change. We are paying for
it when climate change forces energy utility companies to file
for bankruptcy. We are paying for it when ratepayers are forced
to contribute $10.5 billion to an insurance fund to cover
climate costs. We are paying for it when entire species are
wiped off the face of the earth. We are paying for it when
devastated families have to open GoFundMe pages to rebuild
homes. We are paying for it when Americans die trying to escape
fires and when brave first responders sacrifice their lives for
others.
So, to begin, to Dr. Davis and Dr. Collins, you both spoke
at some length about the mitigation factors we can take to
prepare for wildfires and contain the damage. And I would say,
I think from the testimony that I have heard, you would agree
this is not an ``either/or'' about mitigation or climate
change, but definitely a ``both/and''.
To start that conversation--again, some of these questions
might have been referenced earlier--could you quantify if we
have already spent billions, if not hundreds of billions,
collectively, on climate change? To start, Dr. Davis?
Dr. Davis. I think we have spent a lot responding to and
learning about how these novel climate situations interact with
our forests and rangelands, which represent much of the West.
Moving forward, we have to realize that the treatments that we
will put into place that worked before will not work the same
way, absolutely. We have to recognize that the dry conditions
that we have are leading into what causes fuels to dry out and
increases that burn susceptibility. The drought condition that
has prolonged the Western U.S. is something that leads into
forest mortality. It also affects our agricultural producers as
well.
These responses are collective together in response to both
historical management practices and changing climate
conditions. It is going to be a multi-billions of billions of
dollar solution and take decades to actually arrest the trend
that we have seen in our forests.
Mr. Kennedy. Dr. Collins?
Dr. Collins. So, in California, I can't quote you on the
numbers, but our investments have been pretty significant with
regard to trying to mitigate climate change. And we have had
this debate for ten years, it seems like, and it seems like
maybe we have gotten over it in terms of whether or not it pays
to do forest treatments, whether it is prescribed burning or
thinning, from a carbon standpoint to mitigate some of the
effects of climate. And I think we have collectively agreed,
especially after the last couple of years, that it does.
Because, frankly, what you are talking about is removing
carbon, either burning it with prescribed burning or removing
it by thinning, which, of course, is a negative on the ledger,
but, then, it is the foregone emissions when a wildfire comes.
So, I think that one of the things that are important to
consider is that we can't just keep packing carbon into these
wildlands, that the wildfire threat is pretty real, and that
has its own carbon implications.
Mr. Kennedy. And very briefly, because I have got ten
seconds, to you both, if we continue on the current path, do
forest fires become more prevalent or less frequent? Dr. Davis?
Dr. Davis. The models show us that they will be more
prevalent.
Mr. Kennedy. Dr. Collins?
Dr. Collins. The same.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Long, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And five months into my term as a Congressman, in Joplin, a
Missouri town of 50,000 people, we lost 161 souls to a tornado.
Tornadoes are extremely scary and worrisome. Hurricanes, the
same thing. But in each of those instances, a lot of times you
will have some type of warning. I cannot imagine anything that
would strike more fear into someone than a wildfire. And you
see this footage on TV.
Our youngest daughter was a student at Pepperdine, and she
was in the broadcast journalism department there. And Stefan
Holt, Lester Holt's son, was a couple of years ahead of her,
and he was reporting from out there. I never will forget, he
announced that Pepperdine had said that they had a mandatory
evacuation of their faculty and staff, but didn't say anything
about the kids. So, I never did understand that program, how
they evacuated the faculty and staff, but didn't evacuate the
students. But, with that being said, like I said, especially as
a parent of someone on campus, and seeing the fires, there is
nothing more frightening.
Mr. Markham, you mentioned in your testimony that you have
an upcoming meeting with the Oregon electric coops, State,
regional, and district land management agencies on actions to
reduce wildfire risks. What are the specific goals the coops
are hoping to accomplish through those meetings?
Mr. Markham. Representative, we are very optimistic that,
by being able to come together, we can resolve some of these
inconsistencies that we are having between our federal land
agency district offices--and this isn't just in central Oregon;
it is throughout the State--that; we can agree on why it takes
in one place four months to get a permit to go remove dead
trees and in another district we get immediate approval. If we
can do these agreements that were similar to the sage-grouse
with insurances, I think we can hash this out, and it will be a
huge approach to implementing the cohesive strategy and
mitigating wildfire.
Mr. Long. How have the federal land management agencies
supported the Oregon coops in implementing your cohesive
strategy to prevent a wildfire?
Mr. Markham. They are being very supportive, as we proceed
with working on applying the principles of the cohesive
strategy and coming together. I am very pleased with the
support we are getting.
Mr. Long. I know that much of your coop territory covers
federal lands. So, you work with the U.S. Forest Service, the
Bureau of Land Management, and other federal agencies on
preventing these wildfires. If a wildfire were to break out on
federal land, who is the lead agency in charge? Who does your
first call go to?
Mr. Markham. The first call on federal land, that is a good
question on that. I am not sure I can answer if that is the
Forest Service that takes over, depending on where it is at;
the BLM, or the state forestry.
Mr. Long. Say that again, the last part?
Mr. Markham. The state forestry department, Oregon State
Department of Forestry. You have got the BLM, the Forest
Service, and the Oregon Forestry Department.
Mr. Long. OK. Some have described federal lands as powder
kegs because of all the easily combustible brush and deadwood
that has been allowed to accumulate on the ground, as we have
talked about several times here today. How did this occur and
how does it contribute to the severity of these wildfires?
Mr. Markham. It obviously can be devastating. I was looking
earlier at the Oregon State University statistics, or it was
U.S. Forest Service statistics, where their inventory, there
are more trees dead on the ground than there are standing, and
that is concerning when it comes to wildfire risk.
Mr. Long. What more needs to happen at the federal level
and the state level to achieve more effective forest
management?
Mr. Markham. Well, we have to have consistency within our
federal agencies. We have to be able to take the regulations we
have and put in some robust timelines. We have to have
accountability. And then, we also have to have prioritization.
I mentioned that earlier where I believe that, when we are
looking at a project that is going to reduce wildfire risk, we
can't go down to the bottom of the pile where somebody may be
wanting to put in a driveway on federal land. We have to be a
priority where we are not waiting nine months.
Mr. Long. Real quickly in my last 15 seconds here, what
role does litigation play in the ability to manage federal
forests? What role is litigation playing?
Mr. Markham. It is pretty critical because, if there is a
tree that we have not been able to remove and it starts a
wildfire, we are going to be held responsible for it.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me seven
extra seconds. I will yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentle lady from New York, Ms. Clarke, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Clarke. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank our
Ranking Member Upton, for convening this important hearing on
how we can improve the power sector in order to better serve
and safeguard our communities.
I want to thank you, our panelists, as well for offering
your testimony here today.
And I have heard a number of panelists mention forest
management as part of this issue. However, there was also an
across-the-board acknowledgment of the exacerbation and force
multiplier of climate change as part of the equation. So, the
recent wildfires in California, as well as the major fires in
Oregon, Alaska, Australia, and Brazil over this past year, are
a stark reminder of the climate crisis facing our nation and of
the severity of the impacts that this crisis is already having
on our homes, communities, and critical infrastructure.
NASA-NOAA just recently reported that this past decade was
the hottest ever on record, and our computer models project
that the average temperatures will continue to get hotter for
many years to come, unless we act swiftly to curb climate
warming emissions.
As our climate changes, natural disasters such as
wildfires, droughts, storms, and floods are becoming more
frequent with more severity. From 2016 to 2018, there were 15
individual billion-dollar disasters, and on average each year,
that is more than twice the number of billion-dollar disasters
that occurred each year from 1980 to 2016. In 2018 alone, NOAA
estimates that the total cost to the United States from natural
disasters was over $91 billion.
As these impacts continue to increase, there is no doubt
that the power sector is of critical importance, as recent
fires in California, unfortunately, demonstrate. This issue
also hits very close to home for me. From Superstorm Sandy to
intense summer heat waves, extreme weather has caused
communities in Brooklyn to experience major power outages
almost every single year over the past decade. Last summer,
over 40,000 people lost electricity when extreme temperatures
pushed our electric grid to the brink of failure, leading our
local utility to preemptively cut off power.
So, right now, in cities across our country, new smart
technologies are being put in place to increase the efficiency
and resilience of critical municipal systems and service. Many
of these technologies also make us safer by granting us greater
degrees of control and by enabling us to access data and
respond to problems in real-time.
So, I would like to ask, Mr. Johnson and Mr. Markham, do
you think there is an important place for these technologies
within the power sector and on transmission lines? And do you
think that we could use smart grid technology in locations such
as California or New York City to prevent future wildfires or
blackouts, and make these systems more resilient?
Mr. Markham. Yes, thank you, Congressman.
Technology, as I mentioned earlier, three major components,
and technology being one of them. We have to get better at
utilizing technology to prevent things from blackouts. I do
believe that, as we look at load management capabilities, and
demand response capabilities, we can use those. In our area, it
is potential blackouts or issues during wintertime, not
summertime. So, we have to manage our high peak demands, which
quadruple on our system. And so, yes, doing things like that is
very critical to the system.
Ms. Clarke. Very well.
Mr. Johnson. I agree entirely with that answer. Anything
that we can do to use energy smarter, more resiliently, to use
less of it, because it is a precious resource, so any
technology we can deploy--storage, smart grid, anything that
achieves a move toward decarbonization--I think is a very
helpful thing.
Ms. Clarke. And as you think about sort of the forest type
of setting, even sensors. I don't know that we have begun to
look as much into sensor technology, given the density of the
forestry and things of that nature, but I do want to put that
on the record.
I know that you have mentioned a few of the technologies
before, Mr. Johnson, but could you please elaborate on what you
see as a couple of the most important technologies and how they
could be used?
Mr. Johnson. The most important technology in the short
term is materials that keep our conductors from sparking. So,
material coverage, different materials. After that, I think a
move to microgrids with a storage capability probably is the
best answer to a lot of these questions.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. I yield back; and I thank you,
gentlemen, for your expertise here today.
Mr. Rush. The gentle lady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Flores, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Collins, let me start with you, if we can. Your
testimony goes into great detail about how the century-long
forest management practices that we have had of fire removal
and suppression have transformed the sort of severe wildfires
that we see today. The accumulation of dead or dying trees has
allowed an unnatural and chaotic form of wildfires while also
allowing harmful invasive species to find a home, which further
damages the forests. These disasters subvert the benefits of a
healthy forest, as you talked about, including natural carbon
storage and clay water filtration. It appears that we are
missing out on huge opportunities to benefit from the outcomes
of a healthy, more resilient forest.
And so, do you agree that the unnaturally severe wildfires
we are experiencing today prevent us from enjoying the all-
important ecological benefits of a more resilient forest?
Dr. Collins. Yes, I think there are instances where
recreation, in particular, has been impacted, people's scenic
views from their homes, all that, yes.
Mr. Flores. What are some of the challenges from fire
smoke, both from a health perspective and a safety perspective?
Dr. Collins. The challenges to just the general public or?
Mr. Flores. Yes.
Dr. Collins. You mean in terms of mitigating it or----
Mr. Flores. No. I guess, what are the environmental and
health challenges?
Dr. Collins. When a wildfire happens?
Mr. Flores. Yes. Fires from the smoke.
Dr. Collins. Sure. I mean, the smoke obviously, as has been
mentioned before, especially particulate matter, is quite
concerning. The obvious thing of evacuating them. And even if
you are evacuated in a safe time, there is a lot of emergency
problems as you tend to put people on narrow roads and people
sort of freak out a little bit, I guess.
Mr. Flores. Yes.
Dr. Collins. And then, there is the obvious thing like what
happened in Paradise in California. So, it spans the gamut in
terms of impacts to communities.
Mr. Flores. And so, let's compare and contrast the
challenges for a wildfire versus a prescribed fire. So, walk us
through. Let's just focus on smoke for a minute, the
environmental and safety aspects of smoke.
Dr. Collins. From a smoke standpoint, there is pretty good
regulatory structure in place to approve burns when there is
good dispersion. So, in general, they can be done at least
under forecasted conditions that don't tend to impact
communities. Now, that being said, there are going to be
unforeseen things that weren't forecasted that will impact
communities. But, in general, we try to manage smoke.
And then, also, there are containment lines that try to
prevent fire from escaping the footprint, but there is always
that little, small percentage of risk that is out there, that a
fire will escape containment, even a prescribed fire.
Mr. Flores. OK. Mr. Johnson, quick questions for you.
During wildfires, how does your natural gas distribution system
hold up?
Mr. Johnson. It held up well. We did, out of caution, turn
off a number of customers in one of the fires, but, in general,
it held up well.
Mr. Flores. OK. And I assume it held up well because of the
inherent resiliency of a buried pipe versus a suspended high
line, is that correct?
Mr. Johnson. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Flores. OK. And did you have to cut off gas? OK, you
did say you had to do some preventive cutoffs of supply to
customers. But did you, under the PSPS, in addition to cutting
off electricity?
Mr. Johnson. No. We cut off about 20,000 gas customers
because there was a fire in their area.
Mr. Flores. OK.
Mr. Johnson. As part of the PSPS, we do not turn off gas.
Mr. Flores. OK. All right. And how many total customers
were cut off, had their electricity cut off?
Mr. Johnson. In meters, 900,000, so 2.5 million people, on
that order in the largest one.
Mr. Flores. OK. So, 900,000 customers versus 20,000
customers, electric cutoffs versus gas cutoffs. But PG&E has
supported gas bans in many jurisdictions. Do you support these
gas bans for safety reasons not expressed in your letters and
comments?
Mr. Johnson. So, we have supported the California policy,
which is to work out of using gas as a fossil fuel into the
future; we have supported it in several instances where it made
sense in new construction to ban gas.
Mr. Flores. Do you support these gas bans for economic
reasons?
Mr. Johnson. No. Well, in the new construction, if it makes
sense not to use gas, it is economical, but our support is
really the support of the California policy, which is to
eventually, over some period of time, work out of natural gas
as a fuel.
Mr. Flores. OK. All right.
Thank you. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Dr. Ruiz for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to all the witnesses for being here today.
Wildfires have devastating impacts on life and livelihoods,
to homes and economies, but most people visualize rapidly-
spreading fires that are an imminent threat to life and homes,
triggering evacuations and Red Cross shelters. Communities and
counties are good at these rapid responses to severe threats.
However, most people don't think about the effects that
lingering particulate matter from smoke has on people's health.
Smoke triggers asthma attacks in children and respiratory
failure in older Americans with COPD, and emphysema. And
chronic exposure can decrease lung function, even in non-
asthmatic children. So, lingering smoke is correlated with an
increased risk of emergency department visits and hospital
admissions for asthma.
Furthermore, resource-poor and underdeveloped communities
are especially at risk for these health conditions because of
outdoor work environments, decreased access to health care, and
lack of access to filtered indoor air, and closed air
conditioning.
This past fall, in my district, there was a 50-acre mulch
fire that did not pose an imminent threat to life or homes.
However, it did produce lingering smoke that caused students
from nearby schools to be transported to the hospital and the
school district to close for a full week. Students at home did
not have closed-air circuit ACs because many live in trailers
with swamp cooler window units which concentrate the smoke
indoors, making the matter worse. Farm workers endured this
smoke working outdoors in the fields.
You see, this isn't theoretical. Airborne hazards are real
for my constituents. I grew up there, and enough is enough.
This is why I have taken action, forming a collaborative effort
bringing together federal, state, county, tribal, and school
officials to better prevent, mitigate, and respond to airborne
hazards. We must have better systems to protect the public from
the risks associated with breathing smoke-filled air.
So, I would like to ask you a question, Dr. Davis. In your
testimony, you spoke about the need for collaborations like
this when it comes to informing the public and mitigating
health risks. How important is effective communication between
different agencies when it comes to mitigating the impacts of
health? And I am not talking about the imminent threat of life
and homes and evacuations with the shelter, which it happens. I
am talking about the situation where there is just poor air
quality in a community. How important is it for that dialog?
Dr. Davis. I think it is a vital issue that we really
address. And I think education is the way to go. This has to be
multi-scale in terms of all aspects of government, all the
different levels of government. And we have to recognize that
there are many inherent social barriers towards more at-risk or
lower-income people being able to participate.
Mr. Ruiz. So, what is the importance of the agencies
communicating? What is the most important information that the
public needs to know when a smoke event is occurring?
Dr. Davis. Without being an expert in emergency
communications, I do think understanding how those chronic
situations can emerge, where people often feel like they can
respond to an acute situation, an immediate situation, but they
do not necessarily know what it means to go day after day after
day into those same conditions, and the lifelong potential
health impacts that has on individuals.
Mr. Ruiz. And one specific problem you describe is the lack
of consistent messaging regarding how we talk about the impacts
of smoke. What is your recommendation to Congress to harmonize
this type of messaging?
Dr. Davis. Again, I think if we look at the research and
the experience that we have from communicating other major
potential health impacts, even looking at things like smoking
as an issue and how we have changed our messaging over decades
in relation to smoking, the same approach could be taken with
messaging around wildfire smoke exposure.
Mr. Ruiz. And so, in resource-poor settings where you don't
have closed-circuit ACs to send students home to, what is your
recommendation and how important is investing in comprehensive
plans to have a shelter-in-place location for communities,
especially those underserved communities?
Dr. Davis. I do believe that shelter-in-place has to be
something that we really do look to develop. I also believe
that there are social barriers to people being able to take
time off of work, being able to go home and make sure that
their children are being taken to those shelters as well. So,
it is not as simple as just having the shelters.
Mr. Ruiz. It is a form of communicating and addressing the
other needs.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Duncan, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to reference the memo put out by the Energy and
Commerce Committee. In paragraph 1, or (i), the current state
of wildfires, it says, ``Additionally, 2018 and 2017 were some
of the worst years for wildfires in California.'' It says on
the memo that 2018 saw 7600 fires that burned 1.9 million
acres. In 2019, there were 7800 California wildfires.
Let me just go back, a little simple research, 2000 through
2018, and I am going to read some numbers to you. I am not
going to read the years, but start at 2000 to 2018: 7,622,
9,458, 8,328, 9,116, 8,415, 7,162, 8,202, 9,093, 4,923. 2009
was 9,159; 2010, 6,554; 7,989; 7,950; 9,907 in 2013; 7,865;
8,745 in 2015; 6,986; 9,133 in 2017, and 8,572, based on
Wikipedia, in 2018. That's a heck of a lot of wildfires. To say
that 2018 and 2017 were some of the worst years for wildfires
in California, this debunks that. There's been a lot of
wildfires. Those were all California wildfires--8,000, 7,000,
9,000. The numbers refute that statement.
But what is mitigation? I think we all know what mitigation
is, sitting on the panel. But FEMA says that mitigation is
``the effort to reduce loss of life and property by lessening
the impact of disasters. In order for mitigation to be
effective, we need to take action now--before the next
disaster--to reduce human and financial consequences later.''
That is ``analyzing risk, reducing risk, and insuring against
risk''. That is mitigation.
Now I am from South Carolina. You go, you don't know
anything about Western fires and Western situations. I own
property in Montana. In August of 2011--excuse me--August 11th,
2018, I was out there. A lightning storm came through. There
was already a fire burning, I believe, on Gibralter Ridge. But,
on August the 11th, the lightning storm caused four fires,
three of which were just outside of the Glacier National Park
on Montana State property. They had mitigated the risk and the
fires were reduced to a very small amount of acreage.
But, inside Glacier National Park, where no mitigation is
done because it is a National Park, 14,500 acres were burned,
the Lake McDonald Fire or the Howe Ridge Fire, because they
haven't done any mitigation. I have been to a fire line. I have
talked with firefighters. I have seen the need for prescribed
burning. Those were lightning fires in Montana.
But wildfires aren't unique just to the Western States. In
2009, Horry County, South Carolina--that's Myrtle Beach, for
those that don't know where Horry County is--burned 20,000
acres, destroyed 60 homes, and evacuated 2500 people. Now the
reason that fire got so out of control and would burn so hot
was because they had not done any prescribed burning on that
State forest. Why hadn't they don't any prescribed burning on
that State forest? It is because of the encroachment of the
communities under development up on that State forest. And when
they had tried prescribed burning in the past, the residents
said, ``Whoa, whoa, whoa. Wait a minute.''
We have the Sumter National Forest in my district, in my
home county. They do prescribed burning on those national
forests. They wait for westerly winds. They wait for the right
conditions, so that the fires can burn and they can do a
prescribed burning to keep wildfires like that from happening.
And I listened to all this talk today about climate change
and how all that is changing and affecting wildfires, when I
see thousands and thousands of wildfires in California, and I
have to think to myself, why do these wildfires seem to be more
out of control or more intense? And I go back to the spotted
owl, go back to lack of good forest management of prescribed
burning and cutting old-growth forests, that sort of thing that
happened after spotted owl in the 1990s forward.
But I also understand that our communities are growing and
encroaching on these areas that we normally would do good
forest management practices. So, it is just like farms; people
don't like the smell of farms because they have moved out there
and they go, ``Wait a minute. I don't like the smell of that
farm. I don't like those trucks going at six o'clock in the
morning down the roads.''
Mr. Rush. The gentleman's time has----
Mr. Duncan. We need to do prescribed burning and good
forest management. That will help mitigate this.
I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Schrader, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think pretty much everybody on the panel has referenced a
bipartisan bill I worked on for several Congresses with my good
friend and colleague, Doug LaMalfa from California, to
streamline the ability of power companies to get into the
rights-of-way and clear these areas of these trees and
vegetation, to prevent the catastrophic fires. Fire is going to
happen, but at least the catastrophic fires.
I am disappointed that only 69 members of my party voted
for that bill, when it is a no-brainer. Every person on this
panel has talked about vegetative management as a critical
piece of the puzzle to deal with the climate change effects we
are seeing that are starting these catastrophic fires. There
are 60 million acres of national forestland at risk right now.
Mr. Markham, I would like you to talk about a situation you
had in the Prineville area a few years ago where you sought the
ability to treat some problems, and what happened, and then,
what happened in terms of what the agency wanted you to do
after the fact.
Mr. Markham. OK. Congressman, I am trying to remember this.
It was over in Prineville. I cannot recall this story that we
are talking about.
Mr. Schrader. Well, I can refresh your memory.
Mr. Markham. OK.
Mr. Schrader. You had asked to remove some hazardous fuel,
and some trees in the area. You were worried about the right-
of-way. The Forest Service refused to do that. There was a
fire, and then, they tried to bill you for the damn fire.
Mr. Markham. Actually, yes. OK. Actually, down in La Pine,
it was with Midstate Electric Cooperative.
Mr. Ruiz. Right. Yes.
Mr. Markham. And they had requested removal of a dangerous
tree and they basically were denied. That tree ended up coming
down. It started a fire, and I believe it was over half a
million dollars in fire suppression costs they ended up having
to pay.
Mr. Schrader. Yes. That is ridiculous. That is ridiculous--
asking to do the right thing, getting refused, and then, being
billed for the aftereffects.
Mr. Johnson, do you have a budget for vegetative
management?
Mr. Johnson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Schrader. And what is that number?
Mr. Johnson. Historically, it has been about $300 million a
year for the last ten years. This year it was a billion
dollars.
Mr. Schrader. Now that is a lot of money, even in
Washington, D.C. And so, the number is going up, trying to be
proactive and deal with these issues that are out there. Has
the federal government over the years been helpful in trying to
help you get in there with the regulatory framework and stuff?
Or has it been a little bit of a hassle?
Mr. Johnson. More helpful in the last year or so. Before
that, it was quite a bit of a hassle, but I think the last
year, a couple of things; the bill made a big difference. You
got their attention. And also, everybody is starting to wake up
to the fact that, whatever the cause of the risk is, the risk
is growing of these fires.
Mr. Schrader. Sure. Mr. Markham, do you have clear
guidelines yet from the federal government about the vegetative
management bill that this Congress and the President signed,
and it is in the law now?
Mr. Markham. No, Congressman, we do not.
Mr. Schrader. No, we don't. That is two years ago--two
years ago--before the fire that devastated California. Where
the heck is our federal government? Where are the agencies
sitting on this where it is pretty crystal-clear all they want
to do is remove hazardous fuels. They are not clear-cutting the
American forests. They are not burning all the BLM grasslands.
They are just trying to do a little extra work. This should not
be very complicated at this point.
And I hold the federal government responsible, not PG&E,
for these catastrophic fires that we are seeing throughout the
West--Oregon, Washington, California; you name the particular
area. It is not the utilities' fault. They don't get any
positive press by allowing a fire to happen. They try and do
the right thing, but, again and again, they come up against
various obstacles.
Dr. Davis, I would like to talk a little bit about forest
mortality. There was a study coming out of Oregon State
University that talked about. If we are not doing management of
the forests, what sort of emissions occur from the death and
decay of our forests right now, particularly in Oregon?
Dr. Davis. This is an area where really we are seeing a lot
of new studies come online because this is something we have to
get a better handle on as we look towards that carbon balance
in forests. So, I would like to dig in a little bit more on
that and follow up with you afterwards.
But some of this builds off of something Dr. Collins
mentioned, where when those fires burn more intensively, the
stronger, hotter burning fires, then it can be difficult for
trees to regrow afterwards, which can disrupt the way that that
cycle of emissions, and then, absorption of carbon occurs over
time.
Mr. Schrader. Absolutely. And the study I was talking about
indicated that we have 22 million metric tons of CO2 emissions
that come from just the mortality in the forests, from the
overgrowth that you and Dr. Collins both alluded to. That is
equal to all the emissions put into the air by the
transportation sector in the State of Oregon. And that is just
by letting trees die, not doing project management, not doing
the right things at the end of the day.
I think it is a huge problem that we have got out there. We
are way behind the curve in addressing this. People want to do
new technology. That is great, but let's use the old
technology.
One last thing that I will reference real quick. There was
a question by one of my colleagues that talked about can we
possibly thin all these acres. The answer is yes. It may take
20, 30, or 40 years. That is jobs in rural Oregon. That is a
great way to leverage both opportunities. And what is the cost
to the federal government? Zero, because the companies will pay
for the privilege to harvest trees and do the project
management for us. This is a win-win for the taxpayer, a win-
win for rural communities, and a great win for getting rid of
these catastrophic fires.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentle lady from Washington, Mrs. McMorris
Rodgers, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And building upon my neighbor from Oregon, I believe that
if Americans really understood the condition of our national
forests, they would be outraged and they would be demanding
more action. We are seeing it with the larger and larger
catastrophic fires.
But just to kind of put it in perspective, the national
forests, the U.S. Forest Service owns nearly 200 million acres,
and they estimate that 40 percent--so, 80 million acres of
trees in America--are dead, diseased, dying timber. And my
neighbor in Oregon just highlighted the impact of carbon that
is being released because of the mismanagement.
In recent years, my home State of Washington has faced
catastrophic fires. And these fires are so damaging. They hurt
our health, dangerous impacts due to smoke. In Spokane,
Washington, our air quality has been so bad that it is off the
Air Quality Index. We can't even measure it. And there is no
place to go. It really is a scary feeling when the air quality
is so bad and there is no place to go. It jeopardizes our
safety. It is destroying our environment, releasing dangerous
emissions into the air.
We should all, Republicans and Democrats, be able to come
together to support healthy forests. When our forests are
healthy, it becomes harder for these fires to take off. But,
right now, we are not effectively managing or responding to an
increasingly at-risk forest.
Unfortunately, decades of overregulation and frivolous
lawsuits have stalled forest management and our ability to keep
our forests healthy. And we are all paying the price.
Over the last few years in Congress, I have been encouraged
that we took steps to fix fire borrowing, so we can better
fight fires. And we have worked to advance active forest
management reforms to give communities more tools to improve
the health of our forests.
Last year, I introduced the FORESTS Act of 2019 to further
promote active management on federal forestland. There is still
more work that needs to be done. Local communities, industries,
tribes, states, and the Federal Government should all play a
role in actively managing our forests and reducing the risk of
fire.
In eastern Washington that I am proud to represent, we have
shown that local collaboration can work and what it can
accomplish. We are proud right now that on the Colville
National Forest, a million-acre national forest in northeastern
Washington, we have the A to Z Project, which is a public-
private partnership where local communities, conservation
groups, the recreational community, industry, and the Forest
Service teamed up together and awarded a contract for 50,000
acres over a 10-year period. The Vaagen Brothers Lumber Company
is managing this contract. They funded the environmental review
process, and we are reducing fuel loads by removing small-
diameter logs. It is working.
If you want to come visit, we would love to have you. We
had the Chief of the Forest Service out last August. Many other
groups are coming and seeing it, and it works.
It has been so successful that we are planning another A to
Z Project, and it is almost completed. After decades of warring
between industry and the environmental communities, these types
of collaborative projects should serve as a national model for
forest restoration that would improve our environment and the
economy.
So, with the remaining time, Dr. Collins, what forest
management strategies have shown successful, especially in
thinning the small-diameter logs? Would you talk about carbon
sequestration impacts of thinning and what roles fires
historically have played in the natural landscape, especially
related to watershed health? Yes?
Dr. Collins. We have talked about this before, but I will
briefly summarize. The historical role of fire was as sort of a
regulating mechanism. It sort of kept the forests in check with
regard to growth, the establishment of young trees, and the
accumulation of surface fuel on the forest floor. But it did
that in a very complex and heterogeneous way across a
watershed, for example. So, to think that we just need to thin
everything the same way and need to burn everything the same
way would be an oversimplification and, frankly, ecologically
not something we would want. So, I think to a certain extent,
we need to embrace some of that complexity, the heterogeneity,
and incorporate these ideas both from a thinning standpoint and
from a prescribed burning standpoint in order to achieve that
health, I guess.
Mrs. Rodgers. Yes. So, would you talk about the
collaborative approach and if other strategies are working that
you think are going to help?
Dr. Collins. Sure. I recognize that we are out of time. The
collaborative approach is working in California. There are many
examples of it. My problem with it is it is slow. It is slow
and we are not keeping up with sort of the pace at which fires
happen.
Mrs. Rodgers. It does keep us out of the courts, though.
Dr. Collins. It is true.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rush. The gentle lady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Peters, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to the witnesses for being here.
As you may know, the San Diego region, including parts of
my district, was devastated by wildfires in 2003 and 2007, when
I was a local elected official. We have had more fires since
then. But the first one showed how unprepared we were. And
afterwards, we made huge changes. One of the outfits that made
changes was our utility, San Diego Gas & Electric, which made
investments in much of the infrastructure we are hearing about
today. That was done in coordination with county emergency
operations, CAL FIRE, and city fire departments. We have new
technologies like cameras, weather stations, helicopters, the
input of the community groups around fire preparedness, and
more.
And, Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to introduce to
the record a January 28th letter from SDG&E.
Mr. Rush. Hearing no objections, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Peters. I want to ask, first, Mr. Collins, in your
testimony, it is clear that we need an all-of-the-above
strategy for managing--thinning, vegetative management,
prescribed burns, and controlled burns. What I didn't hear or
at least read in the presentation was how we are managing all
of the residuals created from thinning and other vegetation
management. So, we have a lot of leftover waste in the form of
treetops, limbs, non-merchantable timber, and underbrush. We
shouldn't be leaving this material out on the forest floor.
What are the options for removing the waste? In particular, is
there a way to use it, sustainably harvested, for some sort of
biomass energy?
Dr. Collins. I think that is essential to where we need to
go with regard to forest health.
Mr. Peters. What do we need to do, though, as Congress?
Because there is not a market for that, I think a free market.
So, what should we be doing to encourage that kind of use?
Dr. Collins. You know, I am not a policy person myself, so
I don't know what it takes to incentivize that production or
that establishment of the industry. But the hurdle that we
often can't get over is transportation. We can't push that
material any further than, let's say, about 50 miles before it
costs more than it is worth to turn it into energy. So, we end
up burning that stuff in giant piles. After a thinning project,
there are piles the size of a house that we burn under light
snow and have lots of emissions associated with it.
Mr. Peters. So, we are burning that material today, but
without getting energy out of it?
Dr. Collins. Right. And causing air quality impacts.
Mr. Peters. What I would like to look at maybe is whether
something like the California low carbon fuel standard is
enough of an incentive to encourage us to reuse that material.
If we are burning it anyway, we ought to be getting energy out
of it.
Dr. Collins. I mean, at least as far as what I see, it
hasn't happened yet.
Mr. Peters. OK.
Dr. Collins. I think there is talk about it. There has been
talk about it for five or seven years, but it hasn't really hit
the road yet.
Mr. Peters. I would suggest that is something that our
committee might want to look at.
I would ask Mr. Johnson, we talked about the Schrader-
LaMalfa bill, which I voted for in 2017, and we are now waiting
for the administration to issue regulations under that. And we
are hopeful that that generates the kind of permission for you
to do your job in a way that helps prevent fires in the future.
Are you aware of any other legislative action that the Congress
needs to take along those lines? Or as long as the regulations
come out and are favorable, did the Schrader-LaMalfa bill meet
the needs of the legislation that we were looking for?
Mr. Johnson. I think that bill meets at least the needs of
PG&E, if it is enacted the way that we think it should be and
if there is continued funding from the Congress to make sure
that the activities are being done. But I think if we can get
the regulations in the right place, that is a giant step
forward.
Mr. Peters. And I assume we will be in touch as the
regulations come out--I think I share a little bit of Mr.
Schrader's impatience--to make sure that we do cover all the
bases. And we will be looking forward to working with you on
that.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. Peters. And I would ask Professor MacWilliams about the
research you referenced. You talked about the work the National
Labs are conducting. What kind of investments are we looking
for the federal government to make in terms of planning,
monitoring, modeling, and other research needs?
Mr. MacWilliams. Sure. Well, actually, I will go back to
the first topic that you were referring to, which is biomass.
And I mentioned a little bit earlier there is really
interesting work being done right now at National Labs and
other places looking at biomass gasification to produce
hydrogen, which is exactly to your point. And then, you need to
sequester the CO2, and it turns out, as I mentioned, in
California, there is some good geology for that.
That is the type of thing, when you talk about what the
Federal Government can be doing, obviously, many of these are
state and local issues. Recognize that. But the federal
government, through funding the Department of Energy and other
agencies working on these technologies, and then, also,
obviously, as you are aware, looking at financial incentives,
tax incentives, and other things, to encourage those kinds of
technologies.
The other technologies, very briefly, are the ones we have
been talking about--center technology, advanced computing
technologies, building large data lakes, those types of things.
Mr. Peters. Very much appreciate the hearing and realize
this is work for all of us to do, and we hope everyone will
continue to step up, from the communities on up to the Federal
Government.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Carter, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank all of you for being here.
Obviously, this is a very important subject, particularly
for us in the State of Georgia. Georgia is the No. 1 forestry
state in the nation and we have a lot of forestlands,
particularly in my district. We, too, have had forest fires. In
fact, I will remind you about the West Mims Fire that was just
a few years ago in the Okefenokee Swamp. Also, we have the Big
Turnaround Fire in 2007.
I represents the entire coast of Georgia and goes all the
way across, almost halfway across Georgia. So, I have the
Georgia-Florida state line. And, of course, the Big Turnaround
Fire choked Georgia and Florida for many years and for a long
time while it was happening.
But I want to talk about forest management because forest
management is extremely important to us in Georgia, something
that I think we do a good job with. We have sustainable
forests. We have prescribed burns quite often. In fact, I am
having a prescribed burn on the property that I own in Camden
County near Cumberland Island on Sheffield Island. I am having
it done next week, as a matter of fact. It is a precautionary
measure. We are doing it to make sure that we don't have
problems later on. Of course, we are doing this in conjunction
with DNR, the Department of Natural Resources in Georgia,
making sure that the wind conditions are right, the weather
conditions are right. But now is the time to do that.
And I want to ask you, Dr. Collins, the growth of
communities, particularly in areas that before we didn't have
communities, combined with the lack of forest management, how
has that contributed to the rise of some of the severe fires
that we have seen in our country, particularly out West?
Dr. Collins. Dr. Davis mentioned this as well. It is an
issue. I mean, there are many issues. One is that some of the
people moving into those communities aren't totally familiar
with the ecology of the forest, the fact that they are prone to
burn, they are adapted to burn. And so, they don't know/
understand that there is a role that we need to play there in
terms of managing the forests.
The other thing is that what they see when they move there
is their expectation of what is natural. But the problem is
that what we are looking at right now is a completely unnatural
condition for the forests. So, any alteration to what they see
in terms of thinning, or something like that, looks unnatural
to them. And, in fact, it is trying to move us back towards a
more natural condition. So, I think we have some problems, and
I suppose education would definitely work there. But, also,
what is happening, frankly, in California is the wildfires are
educating people pretty quickly, and they are making them want
to do something.
Mr. Carter. I have the pleasure and the privilege of
serving on the Select Committee on Climate Change. And one of
the things that we talk about is resiliency and ability for our
resiliency, and that is bipartisan. I mean, we all believe
that, that we need to do that. There is no question about it.
And I believe that, in order to address climate change that
I do believe in, I believe we have got to have innovation,
adaptation, and mitigation. One of the ways that we can
mitigate some of the things that are happening here is through
land management.
Again, Dr. Collins, is that something that you think we are
doing a good enough job of practicing? Or are there
improvements that we can make?
Dr. Collins. Well, I still think we are behind in terms of
the scale that we are implementing. We kind of know what we
should do, but we are just not implementing it at a scale that
is necessary. I mean, there is a number of reasons for it, but
I think that we just need to get over that hurdle.
Mr. Carter. Right, right.
Well, let me ask you this: in your testimony, you discussed
the Blodgett Forest--I hope I pronounced that right--the study
that was undertaken by UC-Berkeley. Did you go into the study
with any kind of preconceived notions about what should or
shouldn't be considered to address wildfire suppression?
Dr. Collins. Yes, I think a lot of us understood that
thinning of different strata of fuel, where you take out what
are called the ladder fuels, and then, if you were to remove
surface fuels, yes, you would absolutely have an effect on
wildfire hazard. And, of course, we did. But what we didn't
anticipate were some of the longer-term effects.
Mr. Carter. Such as? Longer-term effects?
Dr. Collins. Well, the changes in the fuel structure. Like,
for example, in the area where we did a thinning, which was a
commercial thinning, but it left about 30 or 40 percent canopy
cover of the trees, and then, we burned it. We actually had a
really strong and uniform shrub response, which was not
probably something we wanted a ton of. So, there are things
like that that we could adjust future treatments and do better.
I think those are some of the neat take-homes of that long-term
study.
Mr. Carter. Yes. Well, my time is about up, but I do want
to thank you all for being here. This is a very serious
subject. I do think it is something that, if we use common
sense and use what is available to us, and build up our
resiliency, that regardless of the carbon buildup, regardless
of whatever, we could do a better job. There is no question in
my mind about that.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentle lady from California, Ms. Barragan, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, and thank you all for being here
for this conversation. It has been interesting to hear about
climate change and forest management. I think we can agree that
it is going to be a combination of both.
I happen to be a big believer that the combination of the
increasing heat, longer droughts, and intensifying winds, along
with record-breaking wildfires, are becoming the new norm for
California, which is not a good new norm for us. In Southern
California, Los Angeles County Fire Chief Daryl Osby has been
outspoken on this, stating that, ``Climate change is undeniably
a part of why these wildfires are more devastating and
destructive than ever before.'' I think it is such an important
issue that he is going to be my guest at the State of the Union
to talk about the impact that wildfires are having and being
intensified by climate change.
And, Dr. Davis, I want to thank you for talking about the
health impacts. Because sometimes people say, well, the
wildfires are not in my backyard; why should I be so concerned
about it? So, to talk about the health impacts of what they are
doing to our air and to our communities is so critical.
Some people want to just ignore the climate change aspect
of it. We have heard a little about that today. We heard the
President merely say more rakes will solve the problem. I
happen to believe, especially after our conversation today; it
is more complicated than that.
Mr. Johnson, I want to go to you to talk a little bit about
microgrids. One of the solutions for improving community
resiliency to outages from climate disasters is microgrids,
where we combine local clean energy resources, such as solar
with battery storage, to keep the power on. Can you speak to
this solution and what policy changes Congress can make to
bring microgrids to more communities?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you for that great question.
We know they work because we had one during the fire
season. The Blue Lake Rancheria Tribe has a microgrid. It is
solar with battery storage. And they were able to use that to
keep some of the Humboldt County areas electrified during one
of the PSPSes. So, we do think going forward and have actually
significant plans to increase the number of microgrids, on the
order of perhaps 20 more this year and 40 more over time.
I think these are largely--well; one thing that would
happen to help fix this would be a carbon standard, would be a
climate standard by the Congress. That certainly would move
this in the right direction. Otherwise, I think these are
mostly state decisions, reflecting state standards. And in
California, it is very hospitable to this kind of application.
Ms. Barragan. What do you envision that carbon standard by
the Congress would be like?
Mr. Johnson. Economywide, affordable, and driving
innovation.
Ms. Barragan. OK. And, Mr. MacWilliams, as the area
designated as a high fire threat widens and additional risk
from climate change hazards such as storms and flooding grow, I
am concerned that homeowners, particularly low-income residents
and people of color, will not be able to afford home insurance.
How is access and affordability to insurance being impacted in
California and the country?
Mr. MacWilliams. Yes, I think that is absolutely an issue.
One of the things I mentioned in my written testimony is that,
to me, what is happening in California, but in climate change-
related issues more broadly, is that we are seeing society
really having to grapple with the question of how we are going
to take these increased costs, which are going to be very
significant, and allocate them among all these different
stakeholders, whether it is the ratepayers or taxpayers, et
cetera. And so, this is another example where we are going to
look at and decide how we can support those communities because
increased costs are going to go up because risks are going up,
and the actuaries will reflect that ultimately in rates.
Ms. Barragan. Right. I happen to represent a district--
there are only four districts poorer in California than my
district. And when I would call people throughout California
during the wildfires, those in more affluent communities would
say, ``Well, my family is just evacuating. We're going to get a
hotel. Not a big deal for us, more of an inconvenience.'' But
when I think about my own district, and districts like mine,
there will be many communities who will not have the ability to
do that, which is why I think it is so important that we
collaboratively work together to prevent more wildfires. And
how do we get it so that it is not the new norm?
And so, thank you to our panel for all your suggestions.
And I am sure this will not be the end of the conversation.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentle lady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Soto, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
When we are looking at the numbers, it is staggering. Since
1970, in the U.S., the average number of large wildfires has
tripled. The area burned is six times greater since 1970. Since
1984, the area burned by wildfires in the Western States has
doubled. And I think we all understand this is not a
coincidence. This is the result of a human-caused climate
crisis.
I think a lot of these individual policies that have been
recommended, including by Congressman Schrader--I was happy to
vote for that bill, along with other recent federal policies--
California and their new vegetation management programs, and I
just witnessed this today; those are all helpful. But, as the
saying goes, we must see the forest from the trees. That is why
we put forward the CLEAN Future Act, a holistic, economywide
approach to the climate crisis to get to 100 percent carbon-
neutral by 2050.
We talked about the West Coast. We talked about Australia.
We lost a Floridian, Rick A. DeMorgan, Jr., from Navarre,
Florida, a firefighter down there trying to help out.
In southern Polk County in central Florida, over two years
ago, we saw rampant fire in our forest. And in 1998, over
500,000 acres in Florida went under flames.
So, first, my questions are for Mr. Johnson and Mr.
Markham. Are we embracing clean energy and reducing fossil
fuels in a way that we could bend the arc of carbon pollution
to potentially get to carbon-neutral by 2050? Are we seeing
that among both your organizations? And I will start with you,
Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. We are certainly making an effort to do that.
And that is in the standard in California. I think it will be
difficult to do that. We don't have the technology to do it
today. But part of setting a standard and a goal is that you
are going to have to figure out how to do it and how to make
the technology.
So, you know, PG&E, I think last year the electricity was
80 percent carbon-free. So, we are moving toward that standard.
But the closer you get, the harder it is going to get.
Mr. Soto. Sure.
Mr. Johnson. That is just the nature of things. But this is
how innovation happens.
Mr. Soto. Well, we said we would go to the moon and we did.
Mr. Johnson. I know.
Mr. Soto. And I believe in American ingenuity. And that's
why we are here today. So, thanks for that commitment.
And for you, Mr. Markham, I know our cooperatives are doing
a lot, too.
Mr. Markham. Thank you, Congressman Soto.
Central Electric and the cooperatives throughout Oregon, we
are about 97 percent carbon-emission-free right now. So, our
growth, I think the most important thing in protecting our
hydropower that we have right now is a carbon-emission-free
resource. That is very critical.
Now the State has been working. It had a carbon plan last
year. They are looking at it again in this year's legislative
session with the investor-owned utilities and utilities, larger
utilities like we are as a coop.
But I think that technology is going to have to improve as
far as battery storage because, in Oregon, in my area, for us
to have the ability to use more of that, we have to have a
week's worth. It can get 10-20 below and stay there for a week.
So, we have to have battery technology that can last that long,
not just a day.
Mr. Soto. Sure. Thank you for that.
And when we are hearing about forestry management, we see
this fine line and this quandary of forest and trees that are
some of the best ways for carbon sequestration. But if you
don't manage it right, it actually is a net contributor, as we
have seen in some of these areas.
And so, my questions are for Dr. Davis and Dr. Collins. The
new California vegetation plan, the wildlife suppression
funding, and Forest Management Activities Act that we passed
last year, Congressman Schrader's bill, and even in the farm
bill, we have put forward new policies. How are those going
right now? We will start with you, Dr. Davis.
Dr. Davis. I think it takes a long time for us to learn how
to apply policies and to be able to use those, also recognizing
that the scale of wildfire issues and the size of the landscape
that we are talking about, this is a decadal-century issue, not
a year-to-year issue.
Mr. Soto. And, Dr. Collins?
Dr. Collins. I agree with that, very much so. And I think
one of the things we struggle with a little bit is the actual
probability of wildfire occurrence. In order to realize the
benefit of doing some kind of treatment and actually taking
carbon off the landscape, it has to burn, frankly, because you
are balancing that against the wildfire impacts, and it is
really hard to prove. So, it takes that longer-term
perspective.
Mr. Soto. Thanks for that.
And I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Sarbanes, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to be pretty brief because, as you can imagine,
by this point in the hearing, most of the questions that I have
been asked and answered.
But I thought maybe Mr. MacWilliams, and anybody else who
wants to answer, we certainly have talked about managing the
forests in order to limit wildfires and the ways that they
should. And we have talked about prescribed burning and other
measures that are part of a comprehensive and robust management
program. But maybe you could speak a little bit to how much the
lens is being brought, or maybe it could be brought more
effectively, of thinking of the forests in terms of the carbon
sink that they represent.
In other words, you could approach--and I think, probably
traditionally, we have approached these forests--with the idea
of how to limit wildfires, manage the fuel, et cetera. That
wouldn't necessarily mean that in the planning, you are
bringing the lens of how to design the forests and build the
forests to maximize the carbon sink potential that these
forests have. And I wonder if you could speak to the value of
bringing that kind of a lens and perspective in on the front
end, so the groundwork of building these management plans, as
opposed to the kind of thinking of it as an afterthought.
Mr. MacWilliams. Well, I think from a climate perspective,
that is absolutely an important point. And I will defer to Dr.
Collins and Dr. Davis on the technical side, of designing the
forest management. But, obviously, forests are a very important
sink, and that is why the burnings and the clearings we have
seen, particularly in the Amazon and other places, since this
is a global problem, are such a concern for us.
In general, I mean, as we have been talking about all day
long, we have a very complex problem here, and complex
solutions usually do not yield to single solutions. That is why
all the things we are talking about here, forest management and
all these other climate-related activities, are so important.
And that is why leadership, obviously, from the Congress is so
important, which is why, personally, I am so encouraged by the
bipartisan nature of this hearing.
Dr. Collins. One thing I think you brought up, which is
kind of interesting, is that we need to differentiate between
the total carbon capacity that a forest could carry versus the
stable carbon capacity. And I think that the stable is one that
could endure fire and still remain; whereas, the total, you
know, we could keep packing it in there, but it won't last,
given the current sort of trajectory for wildfire.
Dr. Davis. And I would just add that we are here talking
about wildfire. We are talking about climate. We also have to
look at our forests as the source of carbon storage as one
lever. There are reactional values; There are cultural
resources within these forests, sustainable bioproducts and
timber that we can grow to use and renew our cities. There is
water filtration and values. There is a recreational economy
and rural economy. And looking at these collectively across the
forest is really important, so that we don't maximize one set
of values right now, and then, try to adapt to a different set
of values in five years. We need to look at this as a lasting
change.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks. I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. And the Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Arizona, Mr. O'Halleran, for 5
minutes.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Chairman Rush.
Today's hearing focuses on an issue that greatly impacts
the Southwest and Arizona, preventing catastrophic wildfires. I
do want to mention that I am in agreement with the gentleman
from West Virginia when he talked earlier about what other
countries are contributing more and more CO2 into the
atmosphere, even though they have indicated that they want to
do less. But that doesn't mean that the United States doesn't
lead. If they are not leading and they are so large, then
somebody has to lead, and I think our citizens want us to lead.
Arizona CD1 includes all or part of six large national
forests and, also, the Grand Canyon, each of which is filled
with ecological beauty and plays an important role in Arizona's
rural communities and the State's water supply. I have actively
supported forest restoration policies for over 15 years. In the
Arizona legislature, I chaired the natural resource committee
and co-chaired the Governor's Forest Health Oversight
Committee, which produced a report with recommendations for
stakeholders, local governments, the State, and Congress.
We need to maintain forest health and prevent catastrophic
fires today. My office provides active oversight and support
for the U.S. Forest Service's Forest Restoration Initiative,
4FRI, the largest restoration effort in our nation. And it does
have its problems even after what we have done in the last
couple of years.
Last summer, nearly 2,000 acres burned in Flagstaff. For
Arizona, that is a really small fire, but it was in Flagstaff,
which is surrounded by our national forests. And it was within
a block of homes. Luckily, people got to it fast during the
Museum Fire. I would like to Arizona's utility partners, State
and federal agencies, and our first responders for actively
preventing the Museum Fire from worsening into the next
tragedy.
The climate threat is real, and we must take every measure
possible to prevent future wildfires from devastating our
forests, which help our air quality and capture carbon; are
critical for the water supply into the future for Arizona and
for the Colorado River.
And I do have a question for Dr. Collins. Your testimony
highlights the rate of forest restoration efforts nationwide as
insufficient. I would be in agreement with that. 4FRI is one of
the largest forest restoration efforts nationwide. I would like
to see forest thinning in Arizona pick up the pace. They are
critical and, also, for economic development in rural areas.
What barriers still exist that prevent the pace of forest
maintenance?
Dr. Collins. I think we have talked about some of those
today. Obviously, things tend to always flow back to funding,
right? But one of the things that we haven't talked about that
is kind of interesting in my interactions with folks on the
Forest Service at the district level is how much trouble there
is internally with regard to the NEPA process itself. And I am
not saying that the NEPA process is problematic inherently, but
it has gotten so complex that, even within what they call an
interdisciplinary team, they cannot agree on priorities. Each
specialist--you know, the aquatic specialist, go on down the
line--each specialist sort of protects their own duty. And as a
result, the area for treatment gets trimmed further and
further. So, it is amazing to me, we always think about sort of
some outside litigants and things like that, but it is actually
some of the internal stuff that is really difficult to
overcome.
Mr. O'Halleran. And in the case of the Forest Service, they
might want to expedite it, but there are other agencies
involved all the time.
Dr. Collins. Sure.
Mr. O'Halleran. And that might not be their immediate
priority. And so, that lengthens the process also.
Mr. Davis, could you comment on whether the research
efforts of the U.S. Forest Service and the rest of the
government agencies for productive uses of forest byproducts
and biomass are sufficient?
Dr. Davis. There is excellent research being conducted. I
do believe that, if we reframed the scale of work that needs to
be conducted on our landscapes to invest in research at that
scale, we would see an investment in research collaboratively
across federal agencies, across private universities, public
institutions, and NGOs. There is research being done that is
advancing this, but I don't think it is at the scale that we
need to see to be able to move this into a functioning economy.
Mr. O'Halleran. And then, Doctor, you also highlighted the
natural effect of controlled fires leading to an increase in
biomass remnants. In our case, biomass, if we can't get rid of
it, we can't thin those forests out. That is just a fact. And I
just think that we need to get going on that. How can biomass
and forest byproducts--and I am the wrong way, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentle lady from Delaware, Ms. Blunt Rochester.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you so much to the witnesses today.
The science is clear; we must transition to a 100 percent
clean economy, energy economy, as quickly as possible if we are
going to avoid the worst impacts of climate change. I hear
every day from my constituents in Delaware who are facing the
impacts on a daily basis, whether it is our farmers who are
suffering from drought or small business owners who rely on
tourism that our beaches provide. And as a resident of the
State with the lowest--and I have to get it correct because
Florida has challenged me--but our State has the lowest mean
elevation in the country. We see the effects all too well.
Climate change is fueling extreme weather, which impacts
every part of our country. And whether it is the wildfires
ravaging communities out West or heat waves, extreme drought,
or major hurricanes, these events are happening more frequently
and more intensively because of climate change. That means that
we must have an electricity grid that is resilient and also
will keep the power on during these extreme weather events.
I enjoyed the conversation back and forth as well about
prescribed burns. In Delaware, we actually have an example
where the Nature Conservancy in Delaware conducted a prescribed
burn on 20 acres of the Hurley Tract property of Middleford
North Preserve in April of 2018. And so, even the conversation
about prescribed burn associations was interesting to me.
But my first question is for Mr. MacWilliams. When we look
at wildfires in the context of climate change, it is clear that
multiple strategies need to be deployed to strengthen the grid.
Not all threats will look the same. How does planning for
wildfires fit into the broader strategy of planning for climate
change?
Mr. MacWilliams. Well, I think planning for wildfires is
sort of part and parcel with strengthening a grid, making it
more resilient, making it more intelligent, which is required
for a number of threats. It is not just wildfires, as you well
know. You referred to sea level rise. It is a huge issue. I
referred to earlier that, from a technical perspective,
cybersecurity threats, and some physical security threats are
all very similar. So, it is really tied into a broader effort
that is very important to make our grid more resilient and more
intelligence and, ultimately, more efficient. And so, that, in
turn, with technology such as microgrids, storage, and other
things, will change the generation mix and will facilitate us
moving to a lower carbon future.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. You kind of anticipated my next
question, which was, as we protect against these multiple
threats, how do we ensure that grid planning is comprehensive?
Mr. MacWilliams. Well, as you well know, energy policy in
this country is really a combination of federal, state, and
local. At times, that is very helpful, and at times, that could
be impediment to large-scale change. In this situation where we
are dealing with transmission and interstate commerce,
obviously, the Federal Government has authorities and FERC has
substantial authorities. So, that is one way. But I think, as
has been said numerous times, building partnerships between
federal and state and local authorities are going to be
critical here if we are going to solve the complex issue.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Mr. Johnson, in your testimony, you
detailed some of the resiliency projects currently underway at
PG&E. Are you also pursuing clean options like solar paired
with storage? And what do you think is the role of renewable in
making communities more resilient?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you for that question.
We are pursuing everything, all of the above, as long as it
is clean. To do microgrids, you know, PG&E I think, has the
most distributed energy resources of any company in the
country, something like 450,000 rooftop solar. So, we are
familiar with distributed clean. And so, yes, I do think this
will help with resilience. The closer the generation and
distribution are to the community, the more resilient it is.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. And that kind of leads to, what
efforts are the easiest and fastest to deploy? And what
demonstration projects can be easily scaled? And I have 20
seconds.
Mr. Johnson. Yes. So, we know how to scale solar. We do
rooftops. We also have big solar. We will deploy some gas
generation, but it is renewable gas. So, we will be in the
renewable gas business, hooking up microgrids with that kind of
technology.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you so much, and I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentle lady yields back. There are two
members who have patience and have endured in the hearing for a
number of hours now, and they are not members of the
subcommittees, but they waived onto the subcommittees. And now,
we will recognize the gentleman from Montana, Mr. Gianforte,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gianforte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing and, also, for allowing me to participate today.
My home State of Montana exports about half of the
electricity it generates, some from coal, some hydropower, some
natural gas, and some from wind. But, no matter what color the
energy is, it still moves on a transmission line.
In 2017, we had a devastating fire season all across the
West. In Montana alone, we burned 1.2 million acres in 2017.
The first bill I voted on as a new Member of the House was
the Electricity Reliability and Forest Protection Act,
introduced by my colleague, Representative Zinke, at the time.
The bill, now law, makes it easier to perform vegetation
management on rights-of-way across federal lands. That bill and
other forest management provisions, including the fire
borrowing fix, were included in the year-end package that
President Trump signed into the law. We are thankful to get
some more tools.
Mr. Markham, thank you for being here today. Your coop
serves customers in Oregon and is part of a larger organization
that stretches across the Pacific Northwest, including Montana.
Your members know that transmission lines aren't cheap, and
neither are fires. What else can Congress do to help ensure you
are able to continue delivering affordable, reliable
electricity to your customers?
Mr. Markham. Thank you, Congressman from the great State of
Montana.
As I mentioned, we are member-owners of PNGC Power, 15-
member distribution electric cooperatives throughout there. I
think the most important thing that we have to make certain is
that there is resource adequacy within the Northwest. That is a
significant issue right now. We are, obviously, removing a lot
of the fossil fuel plants we are replacing--but are we
replacing fast enough?--with solar wind. And so, that is
probably the biggest issue, making certain that there is
resource adequacy and capacity.
Mr. Gianforte. So, production capability----
Mr. Markham. Correct.
Mr. Gianforte [continuing]. To keep the grid reliable?
Mr. Markham. Yes, absolutely. Yes.
Mr. Gianforte. OK. Good.
Well, there has been a lot of talk today about climate
change. The solution to addressing climate change is unleashing
American innovation, not imposing government regulation.
History bears out the successes of American innovation for
confronting big challenges. And while we are innovating, we
have to remember that we cannot control the weather, but we can
control how we manage our forests. Healthy forests sequester
carbon and are more resilient to catastrophic wildfires.
We have to promote collaborative approaches that reduce the
constant litigation against critical forest management projects
that would help us resolve our forest health crisis. We need to
modernize the Endangered Species Act. We need to build on
President Trump's NEPA reform, so that we can get critical
energy infrastructure built and forest management projects
approved in a timely manner. These are not theories. They are
not academic discussions. These are pragmatic, common-sense
steps we can take to bring health back to our forests and
reduce the danger of wildfires.
I thank the witnesses for being here today and sharing your
experiences. It is very important to us.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the chairman of the Subcommittee on Health, the
gentle lady from California, Ms. Eshoo, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the ranking
member, for allowing me to waive onto the subcommittees today.
And thank you to each of the witnesses. I have been here
for a while and I have been listening hard, and I have learned
a great deal from you. So, thank you.
I want to start today by--I know that the title of the
hearing is ``The Impact of Wildfires on our Power Sector and
the Environment''. I want to kind of rename it, if I might,
``The Impact of Wildfires on our Power Sector and our Power
Sector on Us,'' because we have had some real problems.
For the rest of you, I am a Californian, and I know that
Mr. Johnson knows this. Now I have some questions for you, Mr.
Johnson. I am going to give you my questions first, and then,
allow you the time to answer them.
I don't presuppose that everyone in Washington, DC, knows
who PG&E is or what they have done. Now Californians know it. I
certainly know it, and my constituents have lived it.
In your testimony on page three, you indicate that it will
take 12 to 14 years--12 to 14 years--to harden and strengthen
the grid. That timeframe implies that you have deferred a lot
of maintenance over the last ten years. So, my first question
is, why didn't the deferred maintenance happen and why was this
allowed to happen?
Secondly, how are ratepayers to be convinced that these
preemptive blackouts, which have just caused hell in people's
lives, in plain English--these preventive preemptive blackouts,
are they really based on good science and careful assessment of
safety concerns, and not just simply PG&E turning off the juice
to shield the company and its shareholders from legal
liability, and not protect the ratepayers and Californians from
possible fires? There is a great deal of trust that has been
lost between the utility and people. I also would like to know,
how can ratepayers be confident that you are putting safety
first when you have only hardened three percent--3 percent--of
your systems in high-risk areas?
And something that was notable last fall in part of my
congressional district in Santa Cruz County, which I think you
are aware of, they discovered that PG&E's list of critical
facilities was incomplete and, notably--notably--excluding a
local hospital. Now, this is, you know, it is like you can just
blow a hole through the ceiling with that one. So, I would like
to know what steps you have taken to ensure that these lists
are correct.
You can start with strengthening the grid, the deferred
maintenance. And then, on to the preemptive blackouts, is it
science, or is it turning off the juice for the reasons that I
stated? And then, obviously, your lists, have you updated them?
Are they correct? As well as ratepayers being confident that
you are putting safety first.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you for those questions. I will
try to respond.
Ms. Eshoo. You are nice to say, ``Thank you.''
[Laughter.]
Mr. Johnson. I will try to answer them in order.
Ms. Eshoo. OK.
Mr. Johnson. First of all, the 12 to 14 years is not an
issue of deferred maintenance. It is an issue of putting up new
conductor that is covered with wire. So, this is a new project.
This is not----
Ms. Eshoo. Are you suggesting that you did not, that PG&E
did not defer maintenance?
Mr. Johnson. I am just saying, on this particular thing,
the 12 to 14 years is part of a plan we----
Ms. Eshoo. Well, I remind everyone that there were, not
under your watch but previously, six felony charges against
PG&E for the homes exploding and people's lives lost in San
Bruno, California. That was a direct result of deferred
maintenance. How about no maintenance, I would say. But, at any
rate, go ahead.
Mr. Johnson. I cannot speak to that. That was a decade
before I got there.
Ms. Eshoo. I said--OK.
Mr. Johnson. But I am familiar with it. The 12 to 14 in the
testimony refers to a new project, not to deferred maintenance.
On the preemptive blackouts, so you know about our company
and you know that in the last couple of years, our equipment
was involved in the fatality of 100 people. And so, when we
came to the fire season this year, I wanted to make sure that
we had a program that was based on science, sound science,
filed with the Commission, that we would protect public life
and public property. And we did achieve that. Now we did it at
a cost, and that is your point.
But these were not just made up out of the air. We have a
very precise algorithm that takes into account wind speed, wind
direction, humidity, fuel content, and all these things, based
on very significant meteorology input. And so, I do understand
the point that where you are standing or living, there might
not be any weather, but your power is off. And that is because
of the way the transmission system is built and the
distribution system. Somewhere a line connected to your house
was in those conditions that was a fire risk. So, there is no
trying to get around the liability rules or anything else. This
is based purely on the science and on the methodology that we
filed with the Commission.
Can the ratepayers be confident we are putting safety
first? I think they can. We only did three percent of the
system. It was the first year. We are going to do a lot more of
the system as time goes on. These are new programs.
Ms. Eshoo. And what year do you anticipate 100 percent?
Mr. Rush. The gentle lady's time is up.
Ms. Eshoo. Can he answer? Can he answer?
Mr. Rush. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. Long after I retire. I would say not ten
years. I think one thing we learned this year is we have to get
these programs shorten, in place quicker. So, maybe five to
seven years, but shorter.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will submit the rest
of my questions to the witnesses in writing. Thank you.
Mr. Rush. The gentle lady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Veasey, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
While the wildfires in California and Australia have been
dominating the news, we have had our issues, too. And we try to
be very responsible in Texas about how we have put renewable
energy on our grid. We have done a great job of it, too, and
being able to keep safety first and foremost as well. But that
doesn't mean that we haven't had issues because of the power
lines.
We have had about 4,000 wildfires in Texas that have been
caused by power lines. And in the aftermath of some really bad
fires that we had in 2011 that were caused by electric
distribution lines, the legislature in the State authorized the
Texas Power Line Caused Wildfire Mitigation Project. The
project aimed to study the causes and possible solutions to
wildfires. They found that, while most utilities' initiatives
to harden physical structures through things like better poles
and covered wires were steps in the right direction, they ended
up being insufficient.
In addition to shoring up the physical infrastructure and
reducing foliage near lines, the group suggested using more
advanced technologies and big data to detect and even forecast
when failures might occur. My understanding is that it is
difficult to statistically predict failures of distribution
circuits because components that are designed to last 40 years
in service very rarely fail.
And so, my question to the panel today is, what advances
have been made in using remote sensors and big data to more
reliably detect or even predict events or other failures before
they have a chance to start fires?
Mr. Johnson. Let me try a little bit of that. Actually, in
your home State, at Texas A&M, there is a lot of work going on
on this particular item----
Mr. Veasey. Absolutely.
Mr. Johnson [continuing]. Using really artificial
intelligence to be able to predict when we are going to have a
fault on a distribution line. And so, that is in the field
being tested.
And the other thing, historically, utilities like ours have
back-cast and looked at historical data. We are now learning
that big data is a much better tool for projecting forward. And
I think you will see we are starting to deploy that in our own
wildfire program. So, there is a big impact.
Mr. Veasey. Anyone else?
Mr. MacWilliams. I would just add, one of the reasons that
I have stressed the role of the National Labs is, as you all
know, the National Labs, several of them in particular,
including Bay Area labs, are the home of the largest
supercomputers in the United States. And so, there is a lot of
work being done on new computing architectures using big data
and data analytics and deep learning to build what they refer
to as cognitive simulation. And those are exactly the
technologies you are referring to, which I believe are quite
applicable to fire prevention.
Mr. Veasey. In order to make sure that safety is being
maintained responsibly, does the safety component of making
sure that this infrastructure is being maintained properly,
does it need to be completely separate from the way the rest of
the electric distribution is run in the state? Does it need to
be a completely separate entity for people that don't
necessarily have anything to do with anything else surrounding
electric distribution and what goes on the grid, but just
something that is a completely different safety component that
is independent of anything else political that may be happening
in any state surrounding a grid?
Mr. Johnson. I don't know the answer to that question.
Maybe my colleague in operations at the end does here.
Mr. Markham. I can say that, in Oregon, we have the Oregon
Public Utility Commission that oversees electric cooperatives,
all utilities, for safety. They actually come out in the field.
We know our system better than anybody else, our line
personnel, and employees who have been there 20-30 years. We
know the nuances. We know where we need to focus our
maintenance plans and hardening plans every year.
The Public Utility Commission has strict requirements on
what we need to do for safety every year. And then, they come
out and check us on that. So, they are an independent party,
and then, it is our job to make sure that the safety is being
employed.
Mr. Veasey. Any thoughts, in particular, on PG&E and them
separating the safety component versus the other aspects of the
business?
[No response.]
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Cardenas, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you for holding this very important hearing on this critical
matter, and all the other chairmen and ranking members of the
committees.
I want to touch base--it wasn't going to be my first
question, but since Ms. Eshoo touched on it. This question is
for Mr. Johnson over at PG&E. Does the CPUC have any authority
or any actions that they need to take before a company like
yours can actually invest and/or do maintenance or management
of your system? The California Public Utilities Commission----
Mr. Johnson. Yes, yes.
Mr. Cardenas [continuing]. For those people who don't know
what CPUC is.
Mr. Johnson. Yes, typically, the way that works is that you
go to the Commission with a project. They approve it and they
approve the rates that you would need to collect to recover it,
yes.
Mr. Cardenas. So, you go to them on Monday and, by Friday,
they have it done? The answer? I want to educate the people of
what happens.
Mr. Johnson. Oh, no. No, it is----
Mr. Cardenas. It is important.
Mr. Johnson. It is a year later.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. A year later?
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. Now a year later to get an answer?
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Cardenas. It doesn't mean that a year later, you get
the answer and they say, ``OK, go cut that forest back and make
it safer,'' right? Sometimes they say no on a safety matter.
Mr. Johnson. Yes. Typically, you don't ever get what you
ask for and you negotiate a solution over that period of time.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. And that is one of the things that is
unfortunate. The public sees a fire erupt, and then, people
just want to focus on the moment. And the fact of the matter is
there are a lot of factors--good, bad, and otherwise--that go
into the scenario and the situation at hand at the moment.
I happen to know a little bit about the CPUC because I
spent six years in the State legislature, and I was a bit
surprised when sometimes some of the organizations, private
institutions that, rightfully so, want to protect the forests,
et cetera, and some people have just never seen a dead tree or
a live tree that they would want any human being to touch.
And the fact of the matter is, that leads into my next
question when it comes to fuel loads. And this question is to
Dr. Davis. When it comes to fuel loads and these drought-
changing conditions that we are experiencing more and more, and
we seem to have catastrophic fires, what is a megafire? Why
would they label something a megafire? Is that term used these
days?
Dr. Davis. It is a term that has really gained a lot in
modern vocabulary, recognizing the size, the number of acres--
--
Mr. Cardenas. Because there is a greater frequency of
megafires today than perhaps we were recording decades ago?
Dr. Davis. Correct.
Mr. Cardenas. Is what is going on in Australia, is that in
any way categorized as a megafire?
Dr. Davis. I think what we see in California is that this
is a fire-driven ecosystem that has had larger fuel loads and
prolonged drying conditions that we have seen elsewhere. So, it
would move into that same category.
Mr. Cardenas. So, when people say fires have been going on
since the beginning of time, that is a fact.
Dr. Davis. Yes.
Mr. Cardenas. But, at the same time, what human beings can
do or not do to help mitigate and reduce the potential for an
eruption of a fire and/or the short-term and long-lasting
effects of the fire getting to be the point where it is,
instead of tens of thousands of acres, fires could now be to
the tune of hundreds of thousands of acres, even millions of
acres, that we have seen more and more frequently?
Dr. Davis. That is the result of more fuel on the
landscape, those drier conditions, and, also, where we
communicate differently than we did 25 or 50 years ago. So, we
are aware at that global scale, or even a regional scale, of
those issues.
Mr. Cardenas. Are there examples in other countries around
the world where they are actually taking human mitigation,
legislation, et cetera, and doing a better management in
pockets of the world, or at least examples that perhaps we can
learn from here in the United States?
Dr. Davis. I think there are examples around the world.
There are examples around the United States where there are
proactive approaches. We heard earlier of examples in the
Southeastern United States where familiarity with prescribed
burning and with smoke awareness allows for a different
conversation. We are see this more emerging, as Dr. Collins
mentioned, in California as a readiness to accept treatments on
the landscape over that long term that we have to apply them.
Mr. Cardenas. Mexico doesn't have the best reputation of
having government and/or public partnerships that actually
result in good management or good practices, but it is my
understanding that Mexico has some pretty enlightening examples
of them with their private landowners and their federal
government working with them, allowing them to do forest
management. There are some examples in Mexico that have rung to
be true and good practice?
Dr. Davis. I am not familiar with the situation.
Mr. Cardenas. Anybody at the table?
[No response.]
OK. I read a document about that. It was an anecdotal. I
just wanted to point that out because one of the biggest
problems we have in the United States of America, we always
think that we do everything better than everybody else; that we
don't want to learn from other countries, and that is
unfortunate. That is a bit too myopic, and it is selfish and
ignorant.
So, I yield back. My time has expired.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back.
And the Chair requests unanimous consent to enter the
following articles into the record: a letter from the Edison
Electric Institute; a letter from Jupiter Intelligence; a
letter from the Western Governors' Association; an article from
The New York Times; an article from the National Public Radio,
and an article from CNN.
Hearing no objections, so ordered.
Mr. Rush. This concludes the witnesses' statements, and I
would like to thank each and every one of the witnesses for
your participation in today's hearing. And as you travel to
your destinations, I wish that you travel with grace and arrive
safely at your destination.
I remind Members that, pursuant to committee rules, they
have ten business days to submit additional questions for the
record to be answered by the witnesses who have appeared before
us today. And I ask each witness to respond promptly to any
such questions that you may receive.
And at this time, the subcommittees stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:56 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
