- LEGISLATION TO REVERSE THE YOUTH TOBACCO EPIDEMIC

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LEGISLATION TO REVERSE THE YOUTH TOBACCO
EPIDEMIC

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 16, 2019

__________

Serial No. 116-70

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
43-572 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              GREG WALDEN, Oregon
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York             FRED UPTON, Michigan
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           PETE OLSON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California           DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico            H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PAUL TONKO, New York                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York, Vice     BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chair                            BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa                 LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts                    MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California            RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California                TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DARREN SOTO, Florida
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
------

Professional Staff

JEFFREY C. CARROLL, Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Deputy Staff Director
MIKE BLOOMQUIST, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Health

ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Chairwoman
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina,     Ranking Member
Vice Chair                       FRED UPTON, Michigan
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico            GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILLY LONG, Missouri
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
Massachusetts                    SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
TONY CARDENAS, California            MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California                EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     3
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Richard Hudson, a Representative in Congress from the State
of North Carolina, opening statement...........................     9
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, prepared statement.....................................   108

Witnesses

Matthew L. Myers, President, Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids......    11
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Answers to submitted questions...............................   149
Dorian Fuhrman, Cofounder, Parents Against Vaping e-Cigarettes
(PAVe).........................................................    26
Prepared statement...........................................    29
Susanne E. Tanski, M.D., on behalf of the American Academy of
Pediatrics.....................................................    33
Prepared statement...........................................    36
Answers to submitted questions...............................   154
Phillip Gardiner, D.P.H., Senior Program Officer, Tobacco-Related
Disease Research Program, University of California.............    45
Prepared statement...........................................    47
Michael Siegel, M.D., Professor, Department of Community Health
Sciences, Boston University School of Public Health............    51
Prepared statement...........................................    53
Additional material submitted for the record.................    83

Submitted Material

H.R. 2339, the Reversing the Youth Tobacco Epidemic Act of 2019,
submitted by Ms. Eshoo.........................................   110
Letter of October 15, 2019, from Chad P. Gehani, President, and
Kathleen T. O'Loughlin, Executive Director, American Dental
Association, to Ms. Eshoo and Mr. Burgess, submitted by Ms.
Eshoo..........................................................   129
Letter of October 16, 2019, from Action on Smoking & Health, et
al., to Mr. Pallone and Mr. Walden, submitted by Ms. Eshoo.....   131
Statement of the National Medical Association by Niva Lubin-
Johnson, President, April 16, 2019, submitted by Ms. Eshoo.....   133
Letter of October 15, 2019, from Lori Tremmel Freeman, Chief
Executive Officer, National Association of County and City
Health Officials, to Ms. Eshoo and Mr. Burgess, submitted by
Ms. Eshoo......................................................   134
Statement of the Cancer Action Network, American Cancer Society,
October 16, 2019, submitted by Ms. Eshoo.......................   136
Statement of CVS Health, October 16, 2019, submitted by Ms. Eshoo   139
Statement of the American Osteopathic Association, October 16,
2019, submitted by Ms. Eshoo...................................   141
Letter of June 11, 2019, from Vera Bumpers, National President,
National Association of Black Law Enforcement Executives, to
Mr. Pallone, submitted by Mr. Hudson...........................   142
Letter of October 11, 2019, from Major Neil Franklin (Ret.),
Executive Director, Law Enforcement Action Partnership, to Mr.
Pallone, submitted by Mr. Hudson...............................   144
Letter of October 11, 2019, from Paul Harden, President and Chief
Executive Officer, Texas Food and Fuel Association, to Mr.
Burgess, submitted by Mr. Burgess..............................   146
Fact sheet, Tobacco User Fee Assessment Formulation by Product
Class, 2019, submitted by Mr. Burgess..........................   148

LEGISLATION TO REVERSE THE YOUTH TOBACCO EPIDEMIC

----------

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 16, 2019

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:31 a.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Anna G. Eshoo
(chairwoman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Eshoo, Engel, Butterfield,
Matsui, Castor, Sarbanes, Schrader, Kennedy, Cardenas, Welch,
Ruiz, Dingell, Kuster, Kelly, Barragan, Blunt Rochester, Rush,
Pallone (ex officio), Burgess (subcommittee ranking member),
Upton, Shimkus, Guthrie, Griffith, Bilirakis, Long, Bucshon,
Brooks, Mullin, Hudson, Carter, and Gianforte.
Also present: Representatives Clarke and Schakowsky.
Staff present: Joe Banez, Professional Staff Member;
Jeffrey C. Carroll, Staff Director; Waverly Gordon, Deputy
Chief Counsel; Tiffany Guarascio, Deputy Staff Director;
Stephen Holland, Health Counsel; Zach Kahan, Outreach and
Member Service Coordinator; Josh Krantz, Policy Analyst;
Aisling McDonough, Policy Coordinator; Meghan Mullon, Staff
Assistant; Alivia Roberts, Press Assistant; Rebecca Tomilchik,
Staff Assistant; Kimberlee Trzeciak, Chief Health Advisor; C.
J. Young, Press Secretary; Margaret Tucker Fogarty, Minority
Legislative Clerk/Press Assistant; Theresa Gambo, Minority
Financial and Office Administrator; Peter Kielty, Minority
General Counsel; Ryan Long, Minority Deputy Staff Director; J.
P. Paluskiewicz, Minority Chief Counsel, Health; and Kristin
Seum, Minority Health Counsel.
Ms. Eshoo. The Subcommittee on Health will now come to
order.
Good morning to all of my colleagues, to the witnesses that
are here today. We are grateful to you for being here and to
everyone else in the audience that has joined us.
The Chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Smoking kills. It is the leading cause of preventable death
in the United States. Cigarette smoking is responsible for more
than 480,000 deaths in the United States each year, and more
than 16 million Americans are living with a disease caused by
smoking.
These health problems cost our country more than $300
billion, with a B, a year. But despite knowing the consequences
of smoking for over half a century, we are still raising
children who smoke.
In 2018, 4.9 million middle and high school students were
current users of some type of tobacco product or e-cigarettes.
Many of those children will be lifelong smokers.
Over 90 percent of adult smokers began smoking before they
turned 21. The tobacco industry knows the best way to continue
their business to aggressively target children with their
addictive products so that they will have guaranteed customers
for decades.
That is why 10 years ago, along with both Republican and
Democratic members of this committee, we voted for the Family
Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act of 2009.
This law restricted marketing tobacco products to children
and banned most of the flavored cigarettes made to appeal to
children.
After that law passed, youth tobacco use declined. But the
rise of e-cigarettes reversed that trend. For the first time in
decades, the CDC reports that youth tobacco use is
significantly rising.
Because of e-cigarettes, 1.5 million more youth used a
tobacco product in 2018, compared to the year before, 2017.
High school e-cigarette users are four to seven times more
likely to start smoking traditional cigarettes than their
nonvaping peers.
Our work to end tobacco use and nicotine addiction in the
United States is really at risk. We have been caught flat-
footed by the popularity of e-cigarettes among young people.
And now, in the midst of the youth e-cigarette epidemic, we
are seeing an outbreak of a vaping-related illness, with nearly
1,300 cases and 26 deaths.
This illness is affecting children. Thirty-six percent of
the patients are under 20 years old. Just last month, the FDA
Acting Commissioner told our Oversight Subcommittee that the
FDA, quote, ``should have acted sooner,'' unquote, to rein in
e-cigarettes.
Despite the lessons from the Tobacco Control Act of 2009,
we haven't extended its bipartisan restrictions to e-
cigarettes.
The bill we are considering today, Chairman Pallone and
Representative Shalala, who is here with us this morning right
in the front row--former Secretary of HHS, now happily a member
of the House of Representatives, she came very often to testify
before this subcommittee--her legislation fixes the problem I
just described.
The bill extends tobacco marketing, sale, flavor
restrictions, and fees to e-cigarettes while also making the
landmark change of raising the minimum age to buy tobacco
products to 21 years.
This bill will save lives. Raising the tobacco age to 21
will result in a quarter of a million fewer premature deaths
for those born between 2000 and 2019.
It is comprehensive legislation that will reverse youth e-
cigarette use and drive down youth tobacco use overall. We
cannot allow young Americans to be ensnared in nicotine
addiction.
It is time to do everything we can to end youth tobacco
use. I look forward to working with all of my colleagues on a
bill to do just that.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Eshoo follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Anna G. Eshoo

Smoking kills. It is the leading cause of preventable death
in the U.S.
Cigarette smoking is responsible for more than 480,000
deaths in the U.S. each year and more than 16 million Americans
are living with a disease caused by smoking. These health
problems cost our country more than $300 billion a year.
But despite knowing the consequences of smoking for over
half a century, we're still raising children who smoke.
In 2018, 4.9 million middle and high school students were
current users of some type of tobacco product or e-cigarette.
Many of those children will be life-long smokers. Over 90% of
adult smokers began smoking before they turned 21.
The tobacco industry knows the best way to continue their
business is to aggressively target children with their
addictive products, so that they'll have guaranteed customers
for decades.
That's why 10 years ago, I was proud to vote, along with
both Democratic and Republican members of this committee, for
the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act of 2009.
This law restricted marketing tobacco products to children and
banned most of the flavored cigarettes made to appeal to
children.
After that law passed, youth tobacco use declined.
But e-cigarettes reversed that trend. For the first time in
decades, the CDC reports youth tobacco use is rising
significantly. Because of e-cigarettes, 1.5 million more youth
used a tobacco product in 2018 compared to 2017. High school e-
cigarette users are 4 to 7 times more likely to adopt
traditional cigarette use than their nonvaping peers.
Our work to end tobacco use and nicotine addiction in the
U.S. is at risk.
We've been caught flat-footed by the popularity of e-
cigarettes among young people. And now, in the midst of the
youth e-cigarette epidemic, we're seeing an outbreak of a
vaping-related illness with nearly 1,300 cases and 26 deaths.
This illness is affecting children--36% of the patients are
under 20 years old.
Just last month, the FDA Acting Commissioner told our
Oversight Subcommittee that the FDA ``should have acted
sooner'' to rein in e-cigarettes.
Despite the lessons from the Tobacco Control Act of 2009,
we haven't extended its bipartisan restrictions to e-
cigarettes.
The bill we're considering today, Chairman Pallone and
Representative Shalala's Reversing the Youth Tobacco Epidemic
Act, fixes that problem. The bill extends tobacco marketing,
sale, flavor restrictions and fees to e-cigarettes, while also
making the landmark change of raising the minimum age to buy
tobacco products to 21 years.
This bill will save lives. Raising the tobacco age to 21
will result in a quarter of a million fewer premature deaths
for those born between 2000 and 2019. It is comprehensive
legislation that will reverse youth e-cigarette use and drive
down youth tobacco use overall.
We can't allow young Americans to be ensnared in nicotine
addiction. It's time to do everything we can to end youth
tobacco use. I look forward to working with all my colleagues
on a bill to do just that.

Ms. Eshoo. The Chair now recognizes Dr. Burgess, the
distinguished ranking member of the subcommittee, for his 5
minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. And I thank the Chair, and I want to thank our
witnesses for being with us this morning. I will just note
there have been over a thousand confirmed and probable cases of
lung injury reported to the Centers for Disease Control,
reaching almost every State and U.S. Territory.
Eighty percent of these cases involve individuals under the
age of 35. Vaping and e-cigarettes acutely affect the youth
population in the United States, which is why there has been
such great national attention by the news media and, indeed, by
the Congress.
The CDC continues to work closely with State and local
authorities together and to analyze the information from across
the country.
So both the Trump administration and Congress have taken
steps to try to further understand and combat this lung injury
outbreak. Action is needed, but we do need to first understand
the issue at hand to devise the best solution.
When it's an issue of public health at stake, it is
critical that Congress work with the agencies, including the
Food and Drug Administration and the CDC, to gather as much
information as possible and act within appropriate authorities
to protect the public.
When this investigation began, the CDC issued a warning
that consumers should avoid using any and all vaping products,
including nicotine, THC, and hybrid products.
Since the investigation has progressed, the CDC has perhaps
refined their warning a bit to just avoid using these products,
particularly those containing THC.
Most affected patients reported a history of using THC-
containing products, confirming the findings that the THC has
played a role in the outbreak.
As more information becomes known and understood about e-
cigarettes, we should ensure that our legislative solutions
tackle the true underlying cause of the issue.
Throughout this conversation we do have to keep in mind
that the nicotine in e-cigarettes is still highly addictive. E-
cigarettes do provide an alternative to traditional cigarettes
for adult smokers who are trying to quit.
Traditional cigarettes remain the leading cause of
preventable death in the United States, claiming an estimated
480,000 lives or more each year.
This is personal for me because both of my parents were
part of that 480,000 statistic a few years ago.
According to the CDC, an estimated 34 million adults in the
United States currently smoke cigarettes, and more than 16
million Americans live with a smoking-related disease.
I am certainly concerned about the effect of e-cigarettes
on youth, but we do need to remember there is a large adult
population with a whole host of health problems related to
tobacco.
This legislative hearing today is about Mr. Pallone's bill,
H.R. 2339. The bill includes some policies similar to President
Trump's Executive order banning flavored e-cigarettes and some
similarity to Senator McConnell's Tobacco-Free Youth Act that
raises the minimum age for purchasing tobacco to age 21.
While H.R. 2339 overlaps with some good policy coming from
the administration and the Senate, there are provisions in the
bill that are concerning should this become law.
There is potential infringement on the First Amendment by
requiring graphic health warnings on cigarette labels and
advertising.
There are other ways to educate individuals, particularly
the youth population, of the harmful effects of smoking and
reduce youth smoking rates without being detrimental to the
freedom of speech.
For example, Mr. McConnell's Tobacco-Free Youth Act, which
has bipartisan support and in fact was included in a bipartisan
package that passed out of the Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions Committee over in the Senate, S. 1895, and that is a
bill that directly addresses youth smoking by raising the age
to purchase without problematic and overreaching provisions.
A bill such as 2339 includes some policies that may be
helpful, but there are problematic provisions and lack of full
understanding of the causes of this lung injury epidemic.
Reducing youth tobacco rates is essential to a healthy
America. So I am certainly glad that we are having this
discussion today.
Again, thanks to all of our witnesses for being part of
this important conversation this morning, and I look forward to
hearing your testimony and the question portion of the hearing.
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Michael C. Burgess

Thank you, Madame Chair and to our witnesses for being here
today. There have been over 1,000 confirmed and probable cases
of lung injury reported to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, reaching almost every State and even a U.S.
Territory. Approximately 80 percent of these cases involve
individuals under 35 years of age. Vaping and e-cigarettes
acutely affect the youth population in the United States, which
is why there has been such great national attention by the news
media and by Congress.
The CDC continues to work closely with State and local
authorities to gather and analyze information from across the
country.
We must continue investigating this very concerning
outbreak among our Nation's youth.
Both the Trump administration and Congress have taken steps
to try to further understand and combat this lung injury
outbreak. While action is needed, we must first understand the
issue at hand so that we can devise the best solution. With an
issue of public health at stake, it is critical that Congress
work with agencies, including the Food and Drug Administration
and the CDC, to gather as much information as possible and act
within appropriate authorities to protect the public.
When this investigation began, the CDC issued a warning
that consumers should avoid using any and all vaping products,
including nicotine, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), and hybrid
products. Since the investigation has progressed, the CDC has
refined their warning to avoid using these products,
particularly those containing THC.
Most affected patients reported a history of using THC-
containing products, confirming the findings that THC has
played a role in the outbreak. As more information becomes
known and understood about e-cigarettes, we should ensure our
legislative solutions tackle the underlying causes of this
issue.
Throughout this conversation, we should also keep in mind
that the nicotine in e-cigarettes is still addictive. However,
e-cigarettes do provide an alternative to traditional
cigarettes for adult smokers who are trying to quit.
Traditional cigarettes remain the leading cause of
preventable death in the U.S., claiming an estimated 480,000
lives or more each year. This is a personal issue for me, as I
lost both of my parents to tobacco-related illness.
According to the CDC, an estimated 34 million adults in the
United States currently smoke cigarettes and more than 16
million Americans live with a smoking-related disease.
While I am certainly concerned about the affect of e-
cigarettes on our youth, we do need to remember that there is a
large adult population with a whole host of health problems
related to tobacco.
This legislative hearing is about Mr. Pallone's bill, H.R.
2339. This bill includes some policies similar to President
Trump's Executive order banning flavored e-cigarettes and to
Senator McConnell's Tobacco-Free Youth Act (S. 1541) that
raises the minimum age for purchasing tobacco products to 21
years old.
While H.R. 2339 overlaps with some good policy coming from
the administration and the Senate, there are concerning
provisions that could hinder this bill becoming law.
There is potential infringement on the First Amendment by
requiring graphic health warnings on cigarette labels and
advertising. There are other ways to educate individuals,
particularly the youth population, of the harmful effects of
smoking and reduce youth smoking rates without being
detrimental to the freedom of speech. For example, Mr.
McConnell's Tobacco-Free Youth Act, which has bipartisan
support and has been included in bipartisan HELP drug cost
package (S. 1895), is a bill that directly addresses youth
smoking by raising the age to purchase without problematic and
overreaching provisions.
A bill such as H.R. 2339 includes some policies that may be
helpful in combating the youth tobacco rates in the U.S.;
however, there are problematic provisions and a lack of a full
understanding of the causes of this lung injury epidemic.
Reducing youth tobacco rates is essential to a healthy America,
and I am glad we are discussing this issue today.
Again, I would like to thank all our witnesses for being
part of this important conversation today. I yield back.

Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Pallone, the chairman of the
full committee, for his 5 minutes of an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairwoman Eshoo.
This committee takes another important step in protecting
our youth from a life of chronic disease, disability, and death
from tobacco products and nicotine.
We will consider H.R. 2339, the Reversing the Youth Tobacco
Epidemic Act of 2019, which is a bipartisan bill that I
introduced with Representative Donna Shalala, aimed at reducing
the number of kids using tobacco products in the United States.
And I did want to mention, Congresswoman Shalala, when
you--Madam Chair, when you said ``happily,'' I was thinking
about that because it's true. She's always happy and yet she's
always substantive at the same time.
It's a rare combination, and it's also rare that somebody
is the Secretary of a major agency and comes back to Congress.
But I think it's that--you know, I was thinking about what
Chairwoman Eshoo said, and I think that you are just very
optimistic and you always think that we can do things and it's
a day--you know, oftentimes she'll come to the floor and say
``I have a new idea'' and be all excited about it, which is
such a great thing. So I just wanted to mention that.
Let me say that 55 years ago, the Surgeon General warned of
the dangerous health effects of smoking cigarettes. Yet, five
decades later, smoking remains the leading cause of preventable
death.
The use of tobacco and nicotine has evolved since that
first Surgeon General's report. A quick Google search will lead
you to an array of products online, including cigarettes,
cigars, smoking pipes, and the most recent addition, e-
cigarettes, and these e-cigarettes are now available in many
flavors, and studies show that flavored choices like mint,
candy, fruit, or chocolate draw the interests of teens in
middle school and high school.
Unfortunately, while combustible cigarette use among teens
have declined over the past two decades, there is a widespread
and false perception that e-cigarettes are safe, and I have to
say I have been to some of my middle schools, and that's what I
would get until recently from the students, that, ``Oh, they
are safe, there's not a problem here.''
And this false belief threatens the progress we have made
in combating this public health threat. Compounding this
alarming reality is the fact that nearly all tobacco use begins
during youth and young adulthood, which is a crucial period for
the development of the human brain.
Recent data shows that over 3.6 million youth used e-
cigarettes in 2018, making this product the most commonly used
tobacco product on the market.
Last month, our Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee
held a hearing on the public health threats of e-cigarettes,
and I remain deeply concerned about the outbreak of lung
illnesses associated with e-cigarette use and vaping products.
The most recent report from the CDC confirmed 26 deaths in
21 States, and at our Oversight hearing, CDC stated that they
expect the number of cases to increase by the hundreds.
So I firmly believe that the youth vaping epidemic we face
today could have been addressed if the FDA had moved forward
with reviewing all e-cigarettes on the market when the agency
first had the chance 2 years ago.
And while I appreciated the administration's announcement
to ban flavored vaping products, we have yet to see that
promise come to fruition.
Ten years ago, Congress took significant bipartisan action
when we passed the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco
Control Act, which gave the FDA regulatory authority to
regulate tobacco products, and that was a strong step.
But now, given the shocking increases in the number of
teens and young people using e-cigarettes, our bill takes this
authority a step forward. It extends FDA regulation on the sale
and distribution of tobacco products, including e-cigarettes.
The bill raises the minimum age for purchasing tobacco to
21 and makes it unlawful for any retailer to sell a tobacco
product to any person younger than 21, and the bill also
prohibits non-face-to-face sales of all tobacco products and
bans all flavors of tobacco products, including mint and
menthol.
Now, this bipartisan bill has widespread support from
groups like the African American Tobacco Control Leadership
Council, American Academy of Pediatrics, American Cancer
Society, American College of Cardiology, American Heart
Association, American Lung Association, American Thoracic
Society, Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids, March of Dimes, and
the National African American Tobacco Prevention Network.
These groups say loud and clear we are facing a serious
problem that needs a comprehensive solution, and as the
committee responsible for protecting the Nation's public
health, we have to act.
It is my intention to advance this legislation this fall,
and I hope we can do so with strong bipartisan support because
we simply can't lose another generation to a lifetime of
nicotine addiction.
And I want to thank the witnesses for being here today and
look forward to our committee's discussion on this important
bill, Madam Chair.
Thank you, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Today, this committee takes another important step in
protecting our youth from a life of chronic disease,
disability, and death from tobacco products and nicotine
addiction. We will consider H.R. 2339, the Reversing the Youth
Tobacco Epidemic Act of 2019, a bipartisan bill that I
introduced with Representative Donna Shalala aimed at reducing
the number of kids using tobacco products in the United States.
Fifty-five years ago, the Surgeon General warned of the
dangerous health effects of smoking cigarettes. Yet, five
decades later smoking remains the leading cause of preventable
death.
The use of tobacco and nicotine has evolved since that
first Surgeon General's report. A quick Google search will lead
you to an array of products online, including cigarettes,
cigars, smoking pipes, and the most recent addition--e-
cigarettes. These e-cigarettes are now available in many
flavors and studies show that flavor choices like mint, candy,
fruit, or chocolate draw the interest of teens in middle school
and high school.
Unfortunately, while combustible cigarette use among teens
has declined over the past two decades, there is a widespread--
and false--perception that e-cigarettes are safe. This false
belief threatens the progress we have made in combatting this
public health threat. Compounding this alarming reality is the
fact that nearly all tobacco use begins during youth and young
adulthood--which is a crucial period for the development of the
human brain. Recent data shows that over 3.6 million youth used
e-cigarettes in 2018, making this product the most commonly
used tobacco product on the market.
Last month, our Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee
held a hearing on the public health threats of e-cigarettes. I
remain deeply concerned about the outbreak of lung illnesses
associated with e-cigarette use and vaping products. The most
recent report from the CDC confirmed 26 deaths in 21 States,
and at our oversight hearing, CDC stated that they expect the
number of cases to increase ``by the hundreds.''
I firmly believe that the youth vaping epidemic we face
today could have been addressed if the FDA had moved forward
with reviewing all e-cigarettes on the market when the agency
first had the chance 2 years ago. And while I appreciated the
administration'sannouncement to ban flavored vaping products,
we have yet to see that promise come to fruition.
Ten years ago, Congress took significant bipartisan action
when we passed the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco
Control Act, which gave FDA regulatory authority to regulate
tobacco products. That was a strong step, but now, given the
shocking increases in the number of teens and young people
using e-cigarette, my bill takes this authority a step forward.
It extends FDA regulation on the sale and distribution of
tobacco products, including e-cigarettes. My bill raises the
minimum age for purchasing tobacco to 21 and makes it unlawful
for any retailer to sell a tobacco product to any person
younger than 21 years of age. My bill also prohibits non-face-
to-face sales of all tobacco products. It also bans all flavors
of tobacco products, including mint and menthol.
This bipartisan bill has widespread support from groups
like the African American Tobacco Control Leadership Council,
American Academy of Pediatrics, American Cancer Society Cancer
Action Network, American College of Cardiology, American Heart
Association, American Lung Association, American Thoracic
Society, Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids, March of Dimes, and
National African American Tobacco Prevention Network.
These groups say loud and clear: We are facing a serious
problem that needs a comprehensive solution. As the committee
responsible for protecting the Nation's public health, we must
act. It is my intention to advance this legislation this fall,
and I hope we can do so with strong bipartisan support.
We simply cannot lose another generation to a lifetime of
nicotine addiction.
I thank the witnesses for being here today and I look
forward to our committee's discussion on this important bill.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr.--is Mr. Walden here?
Mr. Burgess. In Mr. Walden's absence, may I ask unanimous
consent that we recognize the gentleman from North Carolina?
Ms. Eshoo. So ordered. The gentleman from North Carolina is
recognized.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RICHARD HUDSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA

Mr. Hudson. I thank the chairwoman.
I appreciate the opportunity to speak today, and I share
the concerns about youth initiating the nicotine products. But
I want to make one thing clear: There is only one youth
epidemic right now, and it is in e-cigarettes.
I have serious concerns with the proposed legislation today
and the intended and unintended consequences that could result
from its enactment.
My biggest concern is the total flavor ban for all tobacco
products included in this legislation. While we have seen
pronounced increases in youth initiation rates for e-
cigarettes, we have not seen the same increases in traditional
tobacco products such as combustible cigarettes and smokeless
tobacco.
In fact, these products have seen declining usage rates for
the past 20 years, according to the National Youth Tobacco
survey and the Monitoring the Future survey.
Now, looking at the larger issue of flavors as they relate
to youth initiation, the Monitoring the Future survey notes
that youth are almost four times as likely to use illegal drugs
and alcohol as they are to smoke cigarettes. The percentage is
even lower for menthol cigarettes.
Right now, you can buy alcohol in any number of flavors,
including whipped cream, peach, mango, black cherry, and so
forth.
Alcohol is responsible for 4,300 deaths and 119,000
emergency room visits for people aged 12 to 21. Additionally,
you can purchase marijuana-infused edibles such as gummy bears
in any number of flavors appealing to children.
Marijuana is a federally controlled substance and is being
marketed to children. Yet, we are discussing banning legal
products that have declining usage rates among youth.
The Tobacco Control Act specifically provides the authority
for the FDA to adopt additional product standards. Given the
FDA already has the authority to ban menthol and other flavored
products through a law that is now almost 10 years old, we
should focus this hearing on the issue at hand--youth vaping,
and how we can control and stem its occurrence.
I agree this youth epidemic requires congressional
attention, and I want to make sure our children are not
initiating nicotine products that can lead to lifelong
addictions.
But let's make sure the tools already in statute are being
used before we engage in knee-jerk reactions and add additional
layers of statute on top.
Thank you, and I will--if anyone wants me to yield to them,
I am willing to do that. If not, Madam Chair, I'll yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hudson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Richard Hudson

Thank you Mrs. Chairwoman.
I appreciate the opportunity to speak today and I share the
concerns about youth initiating in nicotine products but I want
to make one thing clear, there is only one youth epidemic right
now and it is in e-cigarettes. I have serious concerns with the
proposed legislation today and the intended and unintended
consequences that could result from its enactment.
My biggest concern is the total flavor ban for all tobacco
products included in this legislation. While we have seen
pronounced increases in youth initiation rates for e-
cigarettes, we have not seen the same increases in traditional
tobacco products such as combustible cigarettes and smokeless
tobacco. In fact, these products have seen declining usage
rates for the past 20 years according to the National Youth
Tobacco Survey and the Monitoring the Future survey.
Further, looking at the larger issue of flavors as they
relate to youth initiation, the Monitoring the Future survey
notes that youth are almost 4 times as likely to use illegal
drugs and alcohol as they are to smoke cigarettes. The
percentage is even lower for menthol cigarettes. Right now, you
can buy alcohol in any number of flavors, including whipped
cream, peach, mango, black cherry, and so forth. Alcohol is
responsible for 4,300 deaths and 119,000 emergency room visits
for people aged 12-21. Additionally, you can purchase marijuana
infused edibles such as gummy bears in any number of flavors
appealing to children. Marijuana is a federally controlled
substance and is being marketed to children, yet we're
discussing banning legal products that have declining usage
rates among youth.
The Tobacco Control Act specifically provides the authority
for the FDA to adopt additional product standards if scientific
evidence warrants action. Given the FDA already has the
authority to ban menthol and other flavored products through a
law that is now almost 10 years old, we should focus this
hearing on the prominent issue at hand--youth vaping and how we
can control and stem its occurrence.
I agree this youth epidemic requires congressional
attention and I want to make sure children are not initiating
nicotine products that can lead to lifelong addictions, but
let's make sure the tools already in statute are being used
before we engage in knee-jerk reactions and add additional
layers of statute on top.
Thank you and I yield back the balance of my time.

Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair reminds Members that, pursuant to committee
rules, all Members' written opening statements shall be made
part of the record.
I now would like to introduce our witnesses for today's
hearing.
First, Mr. Myers is the president of the Campaign for
Tobacco-Free Kids. Thank you for being with us here today.
Ms. Dorian Fuhrman--she is the cofounder of Parents Against
Vaping e-Cigarettes. Thank you for being with us.
Dr. Tanski is a member of the American Academy of
Pediatrics. Thank you to you for the testimony that you're
going to provide.
We have Dr. Gardiner. He is the senior program officer of
the Tobacco-Related Disease Research Program at the University
of California, in my view the greatest public university in the
world. How is that?
And last but not least, Dr. Michael Siegel. He's a
professor, Department of Community Health Sciences at the
Boston University School of Public Health. Thank you to you as
well.
So, at this time, I am going to recognize each witness for
5 minutes to provide your opening statement. I think you know
what the--you need to have your microphones on. Get close to
them because we don't want to miss a word. It'll be green and
it'll turn yellow and you know what red means.
So, with that, Mr. Myers, you have 5 minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF MATTHEW L. MYERS, PRESIDENT, CAMPAIGN FOR
TOBACCO-FREE KIDS; DORIAN FUHRMAN, COFOUNDER, PARENTS AGAINST
VAPING e-CIGARETTES (PAVe); SUSANNE E. TANSKI, M.D., ON BEHALF
OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS; PHILLIP GARDINER,
D.P.H., SENIOR PROGRAM OFFICER, TOBACCO-RELATED DISEASE
RESEARCH PROGRAM, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA; AND MICHAEL SIEGEL,
M.D., PROFESSOR, DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY HEALTH SCIENCES,
BOSTON UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW L. MYERS

Mr. Myers. Thank you, Chairman Eshoo, and Dr. Burgess and
members of the committee. We very much appreciate the
opportunity to testify on H.R. 2339, the Reversing the Youth
Tobacco Epidemic Act.
My name is Matthew Myers. I am the president of the
Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids. The campaign strongly supports
this bill because we have a genuine crisis of youth e-cigarette
use that is growing worse by the day, and this is the piece of
legislation that addresses all of the leading drivers of youth
tobacco use and tobacco-related health disparities: the use of
sweet flavors, the use of marketing that appeals to kids, and
the easy access to tobacco products for our Nation's children.
Make no mistake, we do have a crisis. The use of e-
cigarettes by our youth has skyrocketed. Newly released data
shows that it has grown even worse over the last year. Today,
roughly, 27.5 percent of our high school students--an increase
of 3 million in just the last two years--use e-cigarettes.
It's also critical to understand these kids are not just
experimenting. More than a quarter of high school e-cigarette
users are frequent users. That means they are using them more
than 20 days a month--a clear sign of addiction.
If you want a point of comparison, that is three to five
times the number of e-cigarette users who use them with a
frequency to demonstrate addiction than we see with cigarettes.
For decades we have been concerned about how rapid kids
become addicted to cigarettes. E-cigarettes are an addiction
that is more intense, more rapid, and is affecting more of our
children than we have seen in two decades in the United States.
There is also reason for additional concern. The evidence
shows that kids who use e-cigarettes--nonsmoking kids who use
e-cigarettes--are far more likely to go on to become regular
cigarette smokers. One study demonstrates it increases the risk
by three to four times.
Put it in context. The kids who are using e-cigarettes are
by and large not kids who are most at risk for cigarette
smoking. So what we are not doing is we are not replacing kids
who might have smoked with e-cigarettes. We are adding a whole
generation of young people.
The use of e-cigarettes by our kids has both short- and
long-term health consequences. The use of products that deliver
massive doses of nicotine have a direct effect on the
developing brain.
They harm kids' memory, attention span, learning. The tales
of kids who are dropping out of sports, who can't pay attention
in the class, who are being--who are so addicted that they have
to go to in-patient therapy are legion.
What we are facing is a true crisis of addiction, and we
don't know the long-term health effects of these products.
Now, Dr. Burgess, you correctly said--and we are all
concerned--about the need to do more to help adults quit. We
are also concerned about not chasing false gods.
The reality is that the scientific evidence about e-
cigarette use and cessation is far weaker than it has been
presented in most circumstances.
Let me quote the prestigious journal--medical journal--The
Lancet, just this last week: ``Manufacturers of e-cigarettes
and some public health advocates have supported their use as a
smoking cessation tool and a safer alternative to cigarettes,
something we would all support.''
The journal goes on to say, ``However, the evidence of both
of these claims is weak. The positioning of e-cigarettes as a
viable cessation aid is vastly overstated.''
Every public health authority in the United States that has
examined the evidence has found that the evidence is too weak
to conclude that these are effective tobacco cessation tools.
Our adult smokers need effective tobacco cessation tools.
They don't need to be misled. And we shouldn't be surprised.
Let me quote a senior executive from JUUL.
Quote, ``We don't think a lot about addiction here because
we are not trying to design a cessation product at all,'' he
said, later noting, ``Anything about health is not on our
mind.''
So we need to understand. We need to help adult smokers
quit. We need the FDA to do more to assist and to identify
products that will be effective to doing so. But we are not
helping adults when we allow them to be misled by claims going
on.
At the heart of the industry--at the heart of the problem
is in fact the use of flavors. Nearly 97 percent of current e-
cigarette youths have used a flavored e-cigarette in the past
month. Seventy percent say they use them because of the
flavors. The tales are legion.
And make no mistake, mint and menthol are flavors that
appeal to kids. We have seen the use of those----
Ms. Eshoo. Mr. Myers, your time has expired.
Mr. Myers. Sure. Let me just finish this sentence. We have
seen the use of those two flavors go from 41 percent to 53
percent to 64 percent over the last 3 years. We need to address
that issue.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Myers follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you very much.
I now would like to recognize Ms. Fuhrman for her 5 minutes
of testimony. Welcome again.

STATEMENT OF DORIAN FUHRMAN

Ms. Fuhrman. Good morning, and thank you, Chairwoman Eshoo,
Ranking Member Burgess, Chairman Pallone, and members of the
Subcommittee on Health.
My name is Dorian Fuhrman, and I am one of the cofounders
of Parents Against Vaping e-Cigarettes, a national grassroots
organization founded by three moms in response to the youth
vaping epidemic, the worst adolescent public health crisis we
have seen in decades.
We founded PAVe in 2018, and today we have 13 chapters in
10 States. In late 2017, we became aware of a new trend called
JUULing. The real catalyst for us to form PAVe came in 2018
when JUUL sent a representative into our son's ninth-grade
class for an addiction and mental health talk. We testified
about this in July in the congressional Oversight Subcommittee.
After the talk, our boys went to speak with the presenter.
When asked what to do if a friend was addicted to nicotine, the
presenter pulled out his JUUL, showed the boys how it worked,
and called it the iPhone of vapes.
We discovered that these predatory companies targeted our
kids where they live, on social media with slick ads,
influences, and promotions.
We were contacted by parents who discovered these companies
advertising on homework websites. Yes, homework websites.
We knew it was important to educate parents about the
dangers of flavored e-cigarette products. We launched our
website that fall and immediately began to get emails from
parents around the country who were struggling with their kids'
severe nicotine addiction.
These kids were vaping in record numbers, and the physical
and emotional effects of their nicotine addiction were
stunning, and it was tearing families apart--the extreme,
explosive anger, the inability to concentrate and focus in
school, the extreme anxiety and mood swings.
We learned that nicotine rewires the developing adolescent
brain, not only priming it for further addiction but affecting
cognitive development, mood, and impulse control.
We learned that kids' lungs continue to develop until the
age of 25, just like their brains. These unknown, unregulated,
proprietary flavorings may be safe for consumption but are not
safe to be heated at high temperatures, combined with other
chemicals and particles of metal, and inhaled deep into
healthy, developing lungs, and extremely high levels of a new
patented nicotine salt, higher than any nicotine we have seen
before, are absorbed so efficiently into a teen's blood and
brain that the effects are immediate and the addiction is
immediate.
Kids report vaping 24/7, and it's easy. Today's vapes leave
no harsh smell and create very little smoke. Kids sleep with
their JUUL under their pillow or tape them to the night stand
so they can vape in the middle of the night and first thing
when they wake up.
Now kids have dozens of brands to choose from, each with
their own multitude of proprietary flavors. Kids do not
perceive harm in a product that is flavored like vanilla or
cotton candy.
JUUL and other pod-based devices hide in plain sight on
kids' desks. Now new disposable brands like STIG are even
smaller with sweet, often mentholated flavors and can easily be
hidden in a child's small hand.
These disposable plastic vapes, a new favorite among kids,
are quickly replacing JUUL. They can cost as little as $3--$3
for a sweet vape with more nicotine than a pack of cigarettes.
Kids can then easily dispose of the evidence.
The emails from desperate parents and families continue to
move us the most. They are desperately seeking resources,
information, and treatment for their e-cigarette-dependent,
nicotine-addicted kids.
The truth is that currently there is no FDA-approved
treatment for teen e-cigarette nicotine addiction. For
instance, we got an email from Kelly Kinard of North Carolina
whose son, Luka, experienced seizures and had an addiction so
severe he went to rehab for 39 days.
There was a New York mom who wrote us when her 12-year-old
was expelled from school for JUULing. Twelve. There was Geri
Sullivan from Pennsylvania, whose only son was hospitalized for
vaping-related illness and now cannot play football in his
senior year of high school.
There was the dad whose son is a DI baseball player, and
the entire team was vaping. Now they use tobacco pouches, a
new--actually, nicotine pouches, excuse me--a new flavored
product.
Ruby Johnson's daughter, Piper, was hospitalized on her way
to freshman year in college. Piper's out of the hospital, and
Ruby has joined PAVe. The mom who read about Ruby and brought
her own daughter to the hospital after recognizing the symptoms
now credits Ruby for saving her daughter's life.
The list goes on. We get so many letters, and it's hard to
answer them all. And that friend who was addicted to nicotine?
That was my 14-year-old son.
I later found out that my son had been handed a mint JUUL,
a teen favorite, at the end of eighth grade by another eighth-
grader. It had become the new social norm. Suddenly, when kids
met someone new, the first question was, ``What's your
flavor?,'' not ``What school do you go to?'' or ``What's your
favorite sport?''
Thankfully, my son was able to stop JUULing with a lot of
support. Every day, more scientific evidence emerges that
vaping causes harm to the heart and lungs, the cardiovascular
system, and now, possibly, cancer, and that means we are in a
race against time to protect our kids from becoming not only an
entire generation of nicotine addicts but human guinea pigs for
the vaping experiment overall.
I am here today representing PAVe and families around the
country to support the legislation to reverse the youth tobacco
epidemic and a full ban on flavored tobacco, which has been
addicting our kids.
The FDA banned flavored cigarettes in 2009 under the Family
Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Act except menthol, and now we
must ban all flavored tobacco products, including e-cigarettes
and menthol cigarettes, to protect an entire generation of
young Americans.
The FDA themselves and the Surgeon General called this a
youth vaping epidemic last year. The numbers are even higher
today. Let's stop these numbers from rising, together.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Fuhrman follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you very much, Ms. Fuhrman.
Could the committee staff get the samples that Ms. Fuhrman
has so that all of the Members can hold them in their hands,
view them, and have a sense of what we are talking about here?
I think that would be a good idea.
There's the young man.
Ms. Fuhrman. I did not bring a JUUL because I assumed
everyone knew what a JUUL was. This is--this might look like a
highlighter. It's a vape I've been holding in my hand.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you.
I now would like to recognize Dr. Tanski and welcome her.
You are recognized for 5 minutes for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF SUSANNE E. TANSKI, M.D.

Dr. Tanski. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairwoman Eshoo, Ranking Member Burgess,
Congresswoman Shalala, and members of the subcommittee.
It's my pleasure to be here today to address the national
youth tobacco epidemic, an urgent matter that requires
Congress's prompt action.
My name is Dr. Susanne Tanski. I am a practicing
pediatrician and tobacco control expert with over 17 years of
experience researching tobacco issues and counseling youth who
use a wide range of tobacco products, including cigarettes,
cigars, and e-cigarettes.
I am here today representing the American Academy of
Pediatrics, a professional medical organization with over
67,000 pediatricians.
The AAP strongly supports the Reversing the Youth Tobacco
Epidemic Act. Pediatricians are on the front lines of
counseling youth and young adults about the harms posed by
tobacco products.
Unfortunately, we call tobacco use a pediatric disease
because virtually everybody started using before the age of 18.
The latest data, as mentioned, from the National Youth Tobacco
Survey shows that 27.5 percent of our high school students are
current e-cigarette users.
This shocking number is a 2\1/2\-fold increase since 2017.
As a pediatrician, I see all too often how nicotine addiction
takes hold in my teenage patients who use e-cigarettes.
Biologically, the brain is more susceptible to nicotine
addiction during adolescence, and symptoms of dependence begin
within days to weeks of occasional use and well before daily
use.
Nicotine dependence impacts reward pathways and areas of
the brain that control executive function, memory, and mood. At
low doses, it acts as a stimulant, leading to a feeling of
pleasure and a reversal of unpleasant withdrawal symptoms, such
as irritability and anxiety.
With repeated exposure, tolerance develops quickly and
leads to needing more nicotine to even just feel normal.
Importantly, for many young people, this is not sporadic use,
but it is consistent, frequent, and dependent use.
Recently, a colleague asked me if I had heard of teens
getting up in the middle of the night. I said I hadn't. This is
a sign of intense nicotine addiction.
But I quickly realized that it's just because I wasn't
asking the right question, and repeatedly since then, in
speaking with my patients, they admit they are indeed vaping
throughout the night.
This is something I've not seen with adolescent cigarette
users. The teens I see in my practice and in my community are
using a variety of e-cigarette devices, but most often JUUL and
the small devices like you see here today--small and discreet.
One JUUL pod contains the nicotine content as an entire
pack of cigarettes. I have adolescents reporting using a pod or
more a day.
These pods lack any cues for how much has been used,
meaning adolescents have no idea how much nicotine they're
getting. With high levels of nicotine delivery, our adolescents
simply don't have a chance.
What's more, studies to date have shown that previously
never-smoking e-cigarette users are three times more likely to
progress to smoking initiation with cigarettes.
Beyond nicotine addiction, as mentioned, there are serious
concerns about vaping and lung health. As of last week, there
have been about 1,300 cases of vaping-associated lung injury,
with 36 percent of those cases occurring in kids under the age
of 21.
Twenty-six deaths have been reported, with the youngest
being 17 years old. This outbreak has called attention to the
acute dangers of e-cigarette aerosol inhalation.
And while some have been quick to explain that this is only
due to vaping THC, which is the psychoactive ingredient in
marijuana, this has not yet been determined, and the CDC
reports nicotine use in almost 60 percent of cases and
exclusive nicotine at 13 percent.
In light of these health concerns, it is critical to limit
the appeal and access of these products to youth. The Reversing
the Youth Tobacco Epidemic Act will institute a prohibition on
all flavored tobacco products, including e-cigarettes, menthol
cigarettes, and flavored cigars.
This is the single most important policy that Congress can
pass to address the youth tobacco epidemic and a step that
Congress took years ago for other flavored cigarettes.
The body of evidence is clear. Flavors in tobacco products
attract young users and hook kids. The flavors help mask the
harsh taste of nicotine, making repeated use more likely and
thereby increasing the likelihood of developing addiction.
It's important to include menthol, as this is well known to
promote and sustain tobacco use. People are more addicted and
sicker because of menthol in tobacco.
This legislation will also raise the tobacco sales to age
21, a key policy that successfully reduces teen access to
tobacco products. This works in part by getting tobacco
products out of high schools, cutting off a social pipeline.
The bill also, importantly, prohibits tobacco sales
online--another source of youth access--and it holds e-
cigarettes to the same marketing restrictions as traditional
cigarettes, preventing the use of tried-and-true tobacco
company marketing tactics aimed at youth that have been
designed to mislead the public about tobacco.
We have made significant progress over the years in
reducing adolescent tobacco use to reduce cigarette smoking.
But that progress has been jeopardized by a tobacco industry
that is constantly innovating in the business of addicting
young people.
The Reversing the Youth Tobacco Epidemic Act will help
prevent youth from starting tobacco in the first place, and we
urge Congress to quickly advance this very important
legislation.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Tanski follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Dr. Tanski.
I now would like to recognize Dr. Gardiner for your 5
minutes for testimony, and welcome again.

STATEMENT OF PHILLIP GARDINER, D.P.H.

Dr. Gardiner. Thank you, and thank you for having me here
this morning.
I am Dr. Phillip Gardiner. I work at the University of
California Office of the President Tobacco-Related Disease
Research Program, and have worked there for 23 years.
I am also the cochair of the African American Tobacco
Control Leadership Council, from which I am speaking here
today.
Let me just read my opening paragraph statement that I sent
to the committee earlier.
The African American Tobacco Control Leadership Council
strongly encourages the Subcommittee on Health of the Energy
and Commerce Committee to adopt Representatives Pallone and
Shalala's bill, Reversing the Youth Epidemic Act of 2009, H.R.
2339.
From our reading, this bill is the most comprehensive
tobacco legislation proposed in years, especially because it
would prohibit the manufacture of menthol and all
characterizing flavors in tobacco products, including e-juices.
Support for the bill now is extremely important, given the
vaping lung injury crisis that is sweeping our Nation today.
But also, this bill would finally get menthol flavorings out of
cigarettes, little cigars, and all other tobacco products,
something the FDA has failed to do for the past 10 years.
The predatory marketing of these products must be stopped,
and we all should recognize this as a social injustice issue,
an issue that disproportionately impacts poorer communities,
marginalized groups, youth, and communities of color.
Be appraised that 85 percent of African-American adults and
94 percent of Black youth who smoke are using menthol products.
These striking statistics come from the predatory marketing of
these products.
There is more advertising for menthol cigarettes in the
African-American community, there are more lucrative promotions
for these products, and I guess what pisses me off the most,
these products are cheaper. We have nationalwide data as it
relates to that.
So let's just take a look at this for a minute. I would
suggest to you that menthol is the ultimate candy flavor and
helps the poison to go down easier.
Menthol masks the harsh taste of smoking. It activates cold
receptors in the lungs and in the branchia, it activates taste
buds, it produces an anaesthetic effect that allows easier and
deeper inhalation.
The deeper you inhale, the more toxins and nicotine you
intake. The more nicotine and toxins you intake, the more
addicted you become. The more addicted you become, the harder
it is to quit.
It also inhibits--menthol also inhibits metabolism of
nicotine. It slows it down, essentially, allowing for nicotine
to stay in the body longer.
It activates more nicotinic receptors, and not to get too
technical, it produces more dopamine expression in the body,
meaning they are more pleasurable. You like them more. That's
why it's harder to quit.
In chewing tobacco, if you have menthol in it, it cross the
gum barrier much more effectively than if it isn't in there.
And last but certainly not least, menthol in cigarettes
increases the ability of smoke to penetrate cell membranes much
more effectively.
Some have argued that this is discriminatory since black
people use menthol cigarettes more, and this--we should protect
their product. However, I would suggest to you it's just the
opposite.
It's the discriminatory practices of the tobacco industry
that led to the disproportionate use of these products by
folks.
Look at it this way. In 1952, only 5 percent of Blacks used
menthol cigarettes. By 1968, it almost tripled to 14 percent.
By 1976, it had tripled again to over 44 percent and by 2000 we
are into the 80 percent with this thing.
Other people would also like to suggest to you that, if you
were to ban this product, this will lead to the criminalization
of young Black youth.
I've worked on this subject for the last 10 years. We've
gotten bills passed in 26 cities that restrict the sale of
menthol overall. No one's been arrested.
This bill is about--not about possession. It's about--in
the Pallone bill it's about manufacturing, but at the local
level it's been about sale.
Let me tell you, we should strike while the iron is hot.
Six States have already outlawed these flavors in some form or
another.
I don't want to wait on the FDA to act or wait on the Trump
administration to act. Let's have the Congress act. Let's have
somebody act on this.
I would suggest to you that the most fundamental health
thing that could go down--and my colleagues have all pointed
out it's the number-one killer in the United States--let's take
some action on it.
Let's get flavors out of cigarettes. Let's get flavors out
of the e-juices. Let's protect our youth.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Gardiner follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Dr. Gardiner, for all the years that
you have given of your life to this subject matter.
And the Chair would now like to recognize Dr. Siegel. You
have 5 minutes for your testimony. Thank you, again, for being
here today.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL SIEGEL, M.D.

Dr. Siegel. Thank you, Chairwoman Eshoo, and members of the
subcommittee.
My message today is simple. H.R. 2339 has the potential to
help curtail the youth vaping epidemic. But first you must
eliminate one subsection that, if enacted, will have severe
negative public health consequences.S
Subsection (d) of section 103, which bans flavored
electronic cigarettes, will result in a public health disaster.
As you know, we are in the midst of an outbreak of severe
acute respiratory disease that has affected more than 1,000
people and has resulted in more than 20 deaths.
Can we prevent these tragic deaths by banning the retail
sale of vaping products? The answer is no. In the vast majority
of cases, the victims were not purchasing vaping products from
retail stores.
Instead, they were obtaining vape cartridges from the
completely unregulated black market. These products originate
from illegal drug operations that are producing tens of
thousands of contaminated THC, not nicotine vape cartridges.
So, in a sense, the cause of this outbreak is not the fact
that youth are buying vaping products from stores but the fact
that they are not buying their vaping products from stores.
The lesson that this outbreak should teach us is that the
greatest danger to our youth is not store-bought vaping
products but those purchased from friends, on the street, or
over the internet from the black market.
A ban on flavored e-cigarettes would create a public health
disaster because it would create a new black market for
flavored e-liquids. It is nearly certain that we would see more
outbreaks similar to what we are experiencing now with these
tainted THC vape cartridges.
Banning flavored e-liquids is not going to do anything to
curtail this respiratory disease outbreak. But it may make the
outbreak worse.
Why? Because the supply of e-liquids that youth are vaping
is going to transition from one dominated by nicotine products
to one dominated by THC products, exactly the products that are
causing this outbreak.
There's a second reason why banning e-liquid flavors would
have devastating health consequences. More than 2 million adult
smokers in the U.S. have quit smoking completely by switching
to flavored electronic cigarettes.
If these products are banned, many of these ex-smokers will
return to cigarette smoking. Most of those who don't will turn
to a new, potentially dangerous black market that will be
created by this legislation.
I want to suggest to you today that the way to address the
problem of youth e-cigarette use is not to ban these products
but to strictly regulate them, and second, that we must focus
on the aspect of e-cigarettes that is actually causing harm to
our youth.
The real danger of e-cigarette use is not the flavors. It's
not the flavors that are causing the harm. It's the high levels
of nicotine and the special nicotine formulations being used in
some of these products that are resulting in youth addiction to
vaping.
For example, prior to the introduction of JUUL, three-
fourths of nonsmoking youth vapers reported using e-cigarettes
no more than once a week, and only 4 percent used them every
day.
But by 2018, 12 percent of nonsmoking youth used e-
cigarettes every day, a tripling of the percentage of youth e-
cigarette users who were addicted, and less than half of
nonsmoking youth vapers use e-cigarettes less than once a week.
This change is what has created a public health crisis. So
what explains this change? What changed is that products like
JUUL, Suorin, SMOK, and Phix entered the market and quickly
became popular among teenagers.
All of these brands use a different nicotine formulation
from virtually all other e-cigarettes. They use a nicotine salt
at very high concentrations. The use of nicotine salts allows
nicotine to be absorbed into the bloodstream much more quickly,
simulating the pattern that you get with a real cigarette.
That is why so many youth are now addicted to vaping. It's
not the flavors. It's the nicotine. Regulating the nicotine
formulations and levels allowable in e-liquids is the single
most effective step you can take to help reverse the youth e-
cigarette epidemic.
In summary, the broad stroke of prohibition is going to
make this crisis worse, not better. Instead of regulating e-
cigarette flavors, I recommend that you regulate the nicotine
content in e-cigarettes.
This will allow you to balance the need to reverse the
epidemic of youth vaping and the need to keep flavored e-
cigarettes available to adults who have quit smoking or are
trying to quit smoking.
The art of public health and public policy is being able to
balance competing objectives. I think we can do that in a way
that protects the health of both youth and adults.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Siegel follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Dr. Siegel.
We've concluded opening statements. We are now going to
move to Members' questions. Each Member will have 5 minutes to
ask questions of our witnesses, and I will start by recognizing
myself for 5 minutes.
Do each of our witnesses support raising the minimum
tobacco age to 21? Everyone agree?
[Chorus of yes.]
Ms. Eshoo. OK. Terrific. Do you support extending the
current restrictions on sales and advertising of traditional
cigarettes to e-cigarettes?
[Chorus of yes.]
Ms. Eshoo. Everyone? Good.
Do you support prohibiting non-face-to-face sales of
tobacco products so that children can't buy tobacco products
online?
[Chorus of yes.]
Ms. Eshoo. Everyone agrees? Wonderful.
All right. So we, obviously, are in agreement about major
portions of the bill we are considering today.
Now I want to talk about the provision that bans flavors. I
was going to start with Mr. Myers, but I want to go to Dr.
Siegel.
What kind of candy do you like?
Dr. Siegel. Well----
Ms. Eshoo. What's your favorite candy?
Dr. Siegel. Bubble gum.
Ms. Eshoo. Bubble gum. And you like the flavor of bubble
gum, right?
Dr. Siegel. I do.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes. So I think that if you take the attraction
to the flavor, that that's your gum of choice. You're attracted
to it because of the flavor.
Now, that--I would draw a parallel from that to--and I
disagree with what you said in your testimony, that flavor
doesn't have anything to do with anything.
Well, you know, I love Italian food, so I go to Italian
restaurants. Flavor is very attractive. It really drives our
eating habits and other habits. So I just want to get that on
the record.
Mr. Myers, do you know whether e-cigarettes' sweet flavors
have contributed to youth tobacco use?
Mr. Myers. All of the evidence is that they're the driving
force of that, and that it has gotten worse over the last 4
years.
Ms. Eshoo. And do you know whether e-cigarettes' sweet
flavors have contributed to adults quitting tobacco use?
Mr. Myers. Well, what's extraordinary, and I have a chart I
would be happy to provide the committee, that over the last 4
years we've seen this meteoric rise in youth use of these sweet
flavors.
The percentage of adults who have used e-cigarettes during
the time the flavors have been so prominent hasn't increased at
all. It's hovered straight about 3 percent and not gone up.
So what it shows is the introduction of all these flavors
has fueled a youth epidemic, but it had no impact whatsoever--
indeed, before JUUL was introduced the most popular e-cigarette
flavor was tobacco.
So for smokers who want to quit, that was a viable option
until JUUL changed the market.
Ms. Eshoo. That's interesting. Thank you.
Dr. Tanski, you spoke about the large amount of nicotine
that e-cigarettes deliver--and thank you, Ms. Fuhrman, for the
samples because I noted on the various packages the percentage
of nicotine that they contain. A single e-cigarette pod--this
is really stunning--can have as much nicotine as a pack of
cigarettes, and, as you said, some young people report smoking
more than one pod a day.
Should we consider legislation to restrict the amount of
nicotine in a pod?
Dr. Tanski. That's actually a little bit of a complicated
question. As Dr. Siegel was mentioning, the technology really
changed with the addition of nicotine salts to the industry,
and there were differences in PH that were introduced by that,
and every pod is also a different size. So these are--you have
a disposable one here, but there are some that Dr. Siegel was
also mentioning where the pod size is 3 milliliters rather than
just .7 or 1 milliliter. So there's a lot more quantity that
can go in there.
So this is a fairly complicated chemistry equation as well
because, depending on the voltage of the device, it also
changes delivery.
So someone who's using one of those big pod devices, they
can use a very low nicotine----
Ms. Eshoo. I understand the complication.
Dr. Tanski. Yes.
Ms. Eshoo. But we deal with complex things here.
Dr. Tanski. But so let me finish my thought.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Dr. Tanski. It will show why a number of----
Ms. Eshoo. I only have 56 seconds left. So----
Dr. Tanski. OK. Sorry. So the amount of nicotine in it is
insufficient because the voltage can change delivery, so you
have a 1 percent nicotine solution in a high-voltage device
that will----
Ms. Eshoo. Do you think we should look for a way to
restrict the amount of nicotine in a pod? Yes or no.
Dr. Tanski. Yes. FDA needs to look at the science, though--
--
Ms. Eshoo. OK. Thank you.
Dr. Tanski [continuing]. Because we can't just say a number
because of a knee-jerk reaction.
Ms. Eshoo. I understand. I understand.
How can we require e-cigarettes to better warn people about
the amount of nicotine they're ingesting?
Dr. Tanski. A warning label will go a long way, and making
it very clear what the numbers mean. The numbers are very
confusing on the packaging. Some people don't know what the
numbers mean--
Ms. Eshoo. I think it should state it's equal to one pack
of cigarettes, equal to two packs of cigarettes. That's pretty
clear.
Dr. Tanski. Exactly. I think the other piece, it has to be
as delivered as opposed to what's the content because there's a
difference between what's delivered and the content that's in
the device.
And, again, that's complicated nuance. But it really is
critically important because, again, our young people have no
idea how much nicotine they're getting when they use these
devices.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you. My time has expired.
Dr. Tanski. Sorry.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you to each one of you.
The Chair now recognizes Dr. Burgess, the ranking member of
our subcommittee, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, and this is fascinating, about
regulating the amount of nicotine in these devices.
I actually remember in 2008 or 2009, when we did the
Tobacco Control Act, and for reasons I did not understand,
written into statute was a prohibition that the FDA could not
require a 0 milligram cigarette to be produced.
I thought that was odd, and I thought that was wrong. So I
had an amendment that the FDA could require a 0 milligram
cigarette to be produced.
I actually lost that battle. That language, I think,
endures to this day. But to Dr. Siegel's point, the nicotine is
the culprit here.
People may like the flavor of bubble gum or dark chocolate,
but it is the nicotine that keeps you coming back, and it is
the nicotine that you cannot live without. If someone said,
``Well, you can't have your bubble gum today,'' the world would
not come to an end.
But if someone says--someone who is heavily nicotine
addicted--deprivation of nicotine actually incites a fairly
significant physiological and psychological response, and it is
unpleasant enough that people will do--just like with other
addicting substances, people will do whatever is required to
the exclusion of everything else to fulfil that need.
I am not a psychologist, but I think that's kind of the
definition of addiction. I don't like to use that because
people then apply it to coffee, which I don't think we should
outlaw.
But this is an area where--and Dr. Gardiner, I appreciate
your call to action and your enthusiasm with that call to
action. But the way our system is set up, we can legislate, and
we do legislate all the time.
But we do require the administration--we do require the
Federal agencies for the implementation of that and, indeed,
one of the, perhaps, the failings of the Tobacco Control Act
was the fact that this committee has not had many oversight or
implementation hearings on that activity, and I think we heard
the acting FDA Director kind of admit that they've fallen
behind the curve, and maybe had Congress exercised its
oversight authority in that regard a little more stringently,
perhaps we wouldn't be at this place.
But, Dr. Siegel, we saw the devices that Ms. Fuhrman
supplied to us. But your contention is, or Dr. Tanski, I guess,
your contention is that it wouldn't matter--the 6 percent, 5
percent, 2 percent devices--mandating that level, because of
the differences in bioavailability of different nicotine salts
and delivery devices alters what a person actually absorbs?
Dr. Siegel. So the nicotine salt formulation that JUUL
introduced and which has now been copied by several companies,
essentially the nicotine is absorbed much more rapidly into the
body, and that's what creates the addiction.
That is why kids are addicted to JUUL. It's not just the
amount. It's the formulation, and the cigarette companies have
perfected this method of getting nicotine into the blood.
So I think that--what I think needs to be done is to have a
certain nicotine level that's allowable for all e-cigarettes,
and then a lower nicotine level that would be the maximum for
nicotine salt formulations.
I think a 20 milligram per milliliter limit for electronic
cigarettes would be very reasonable, and I would make it half
of that for nicotine salt formulations.
It's important to recognize that in the U.K. they do have a
level. They have a 20 milligram per milliliter level, and
that's the maximum. They have JUUL there, but JUUL comes in at
17 milligrams per milliliter in the U.K., not 50 like they do
in the U.S.
So I think regulating that at a level of 20 would help to
solve this problem with youth addiction.
Mr. Burgess. And what about, as Dr. Tanski pointed out,
creating some--like with opiates, we have milligrams of
morphine equivalence, the MME that has become so famous. Is
there any way to apply that to the nicotine delivery devices?
Dr. Siegel. Yes, absolutely. I think, as Dr. Tanski
mentioned, if we require companies to reveal the nicotine
delivery of the product, that that will inform the user of
exactly what they're getting, and I think it's easily possible
to do that.
Mr. Burgess. Well, again, fascinating topic, and you have
given us a lot of additional information. You know, we do have
to get this right, and over and above everything.
So I thank you for your testimony, and I will yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes--is Mr. Pallone here?
Mr. Butterfield, the gentleman from North Carolina, for his
5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and
thank you to the five witnesses for your testimony. I have
stayed throughout the hearing, because I wanted to hear from
each one of you because this issue is very important to me.
As many of my colleagues know, I represent a tobacco
district. At one time, it was the largest tobacco district in
the United States of America.
I think it may have slipped to number two or three now, but
we are a tobacco-producing district, and so whenever I hear the
word ``tobacco,'' my ears perk up just as those from New York,
you know, when you hear ``financial,'' your ears may perk up.
When you hear ``sugar,'' then you pay extra attention if you're
from a sugar district. And so that's where I am coming from
today.
My phone has been ringing for the last few days. Some have
even asked me, ``Does Congress have a legitimate interest in
regulating these products?'' And my position is--and I've said
it to anyone who's willing to listen--we do have a legitimate
interest as Congress in addressing public health concerns and
the recent spike in the use of electronic cigarettes.
No one in this room, I would hope, disagrees that a youth
vaping epidemic is underway. We need to address it. And so I
thank the chairman for meeting this epidemic head on and
wholeheartedly support his efforts to stem youth vaping.
However, I have very real concerns with the unintended
consequences that could result if this bill were to become law.
We all know that nicotine is harmful. We have heard that
throughout the hearing. It's harmful to young people and can
have a lasting impact on their developing brains.
The CDC reports that there is evidence to indicate that
flavorings such as fruit and candy in e-cigarette products can
make them more appealing to youth, and in fact they are the
primary reason that youth report using e-cigarettes.
Flavors such as these are already banned in cigarettes. I
was on this committee when we enabled and authorized that. They
are already banned, but these types of flavors are not
currently prohibited in e-cigarettes.
The bill before us seeks to address the disturbing youth
vaping trend in two ways. First, the bill raises the age to 21,
and we all agree with that. I am 100 percent supportive of
raising the age.
The second shift in--monumental shift in--the bill is a ban
on characterizing flavors including menthol for all tobacco
products.
While a ban on flavors in e-cigarettes that appeal to youth
may be an appropriate public policy response to vaping, I am
concerned that extending that ban to existing tobacco products
on the market, such as menthol and flavored smokeless tobacco
and cigars, could have unintended consequences.
Menthol cigarettes are one-third of the U.S. market. In the
African-American community, the preferred cigarette is menthol.
Eighty percent of African Americans who smoke prefer to use
menthol cigarettes. In other communities, the preferred
cigarette is nonmenthol.
So I want us to think about that, my colleagues. Think
about that. This bill does not address tobacco use in two-
thirds of the U.S. market. Instead, it targets one-third of the
market that just happens to be African-American.
The fact is that banning menthol cigarettes will lead to
users migrating to nonmenthol cigarettes. It will not lead to
cessation of using tobacco products.
So a flavor ban on existing tobacco products does not solve
the problem that we all agree needs to be addressed. Instead,
this bill makes the manufacturer of menthol tobacco products
illegal and retains legal status for nonmenthol.
My fear, shared by the National Organization of Black Law
Enforcement Executives and Law Enforcement Action Partnership,
is that such a ban will inevitably lead to the creation of a
black market for mentholated products.
According to these groups, there is already an illicit
market for cigarettes, and a ban on menthol could encourage
more criminal activity as groups look to bring in mentholated
cigarettes from outside of the country or make them on their
own.
In conclusion, if we really--my colleagues, if we really
want to address tobacco cessation, someone just put a bill on
the table that will ban the manufacture, sale, and use of
tobacco, period.
If you want to stop the use of tobacco, let's present a
bill that will prohibit the manufacture and use of tobacco. It
is naive to think that a prohibition of flavors for existing
tobacco products like menthol will not have unintended
consequences.
I urge my colleagues to think about these things and to
realize that you are targeting a specific community at the
exclusion of another community.
Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
It's a pleasure to recognize the gentleman from Illinois,
Mr. Shimkus, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and you took me
by surprise. I thought Mr. Upton was going to be before me. But
let me just go to a couple questions.
And we've had these debates before, but not in this venue,
of the e-cigarette. So this is, I think for those of us who
have been able to stay--we've got two hearings going on at the
same time--the interesting one down below on the first floor is
the Telecommunications and whatever the other committee is and
it's unimportant because I am not on it. But----
Ms. Eshoo. Technology.
Mr. Shimkus. Technology--whatever it is.
Ms. Eshoo. It's not whatever. It's----
Mr. Shimkus. Whatever, and you're wasting my time, Madam
Chairman. So, but the other--but the point is that what we are
trying to address in the e-commerce world is do the providers
and the stewards of that information--do they have some legal
authority to police that?
And it's interesting, in one of the court cases two people
were brought to court. The one that tried to police lost the
case. The one that allowed free information did not lose the
case.
So this kind of goes to Dr. Siegel, and some of the
comments made on black-market issues that we have to really be
concerned about, and also regulation.
Let me--the deaths that we have seen are--I've been told
and what I've read is that they are black-market pods that had
THC and oils like Vitamin E, and I think most people, even
though I am not--Dr. Bucshon is a cardiothoracic surgeon--I
hope I am here to listen to his questions if he gets a chance
to do that.
I mean, you can't put oil on your lungs. That's--because if
you just know anything about lungs and how they operate, you
just can't coat them with oil because that's why people end up
dying.
Dr. Siegel, Congressman Butterfield raised this issue, and
we were here for this last debate on menthol, and Dr.
Gardiner--it's kind of interesting because your testimony
identifies we are targeting the African community by allowing
this.
But my colleague would say we are targeting the community
by if we attack menthol aspect. So there is this--this is the
same debate we had here.
Is it tar that creates the build-up of--tar in lungs that
creates either lung disease in a regular smoker, and cancer?
Can anyone answer that question?
I think the--anyone? I think the answer is yes, the build-
up of tar--we used to hear tar in nicotine, right? So an e-
cigarette takes away the tar out of this equation, and I would
propose that as we move forward we look at FDA's involvement
and proper regulation of what is a healthy application of this,
because I do think there's a credible argument about those who
are in minority communities who are smoking menthol cigarettes
who now are trying to move to e-cigarettes to decrease their
risk of cancer, right.
If it's readily regulated in ways delivered that--that
should not be discounted. Does anyone disagree with that?
Go ahead. Yes, sir.
Mr. Myers. Just a couple facts I think are really important
to understand here. First of all, delivering of nicotine,
particularly to adolescent brain, is itself harmful. So----
Mr. Shimkus. Oh, yes. I know. But we've talked about, first
of all, aids. I am not--I am not talking about just doing the
aids. I am talking about the issue of cigarettes and e-
cigarettes and cancer and tar.
Mr. Myers. So a couple other things are important. We don't
know the long-term health effects of e-cigarettes because they
haven't been studied and they haven't been regulated.
Mr. Shimkus. And that's why we have the Food and Drug
Administration that properly vets the science and makes
regulations on the safety and efficacy of products.
Mr. Myers. But it's also a reason we should be concerned
about the youth epidemic, and what we have seen is that, while
the nicotine keeps them coming back, it's the flavors that get
them in the first place.
Mr. Shimkus. But if you regulate the nicotine at a level--
and I understand the chairman's point about flavors are
important.
But, Dr. Siegel, your point was it's the nicotine and the
addiction that keeps them coming back, not the flavor. Is that
correct?
Dr. Siegel. Exactly. Exactly.
Mr. Myers. But in the interim, what we have is we have a
million and a half new kids each year----
Mr. Shimkus. So we should regulate the--I think the answer
is the FDA if we want to help people save themselves from
cancer, transition, and deal with the pods.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
I am pleased to recognize the gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Sarbanes, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks to the panel.
I am proud to be a co-sponsor of the bill that we are talking
about today.
I am mostly just terribly confused by this conversation
because I remember this gigantic tobacco settlement that we had
a few years ago, and I remember aspects of it being how to
limit marketing to young people in all different kinds of ways.
And it just seems like the industry has found this gigantic
loophole for going back and creating that whole public health
crisis all over again.
And I am interested in hearing again some of these
statistics because I think I am understanding that the pace at
which young people--middle school age, high school age, maybe
younger, if you want to describe that--the pace at which they
are--the uptake of the e-cigarettes may be like nothing we've
ever seen when you look at the period of time and the numbers
that we are talking about.
And if that is what begins the addiction to nicotine that
then leads to use of the product over time, then we are kind of
right back where we were 15 years ago on this.
It's staring us in the face. It's bearing down on us. So
could you describe the statistics that way in terms of--whoever
is in the best position to do it, and maybe compare it
historically to other periods when there was a significant
acceleration in use among youth of tobacco products and comment
on how it's new and different and scary.
Mr. Myers. Let me defer to Dr. Tanski. But the increase in
e-cigarette use between 2017 and 2018 is the single largest
increase in use of any substance that has been studied in the
last 43 years.
So when you say that it's unprecedented, it is genuinely
unprecedented, and what's more frightening is that between 2018
and 2019 the absolute numbers of new kids using these products
grew by the exact same number.
We haven't seen an epidemic come on us this quickly, this
intensely at any point in the last 50 years.
Let me refer to Dr. Tanski.
Dr. Tanski. Yes, I completely agree. This is, indeed,
unprecedented. In 2017, it was 11.7 percent of our high school
kids were using e-cigarettes in the last month, and now it's
27.5 percent, and that's just exponential.
And if you look back and you look at kind of the rates of
cigarettes rising year over years, cigarettes never did this
this quickly. So this really is uncharted territory.
And to your point about marketing, you're right. Marketing
really influences kids, and there is implicit marketing and
explicit marketing, and sometimes they--what the packaging says
or what the ad says, the kids read it in a very different way.
And there's topics of freedom and there's this image of
healthiness, and kids respond to that. And we know that
marketing works, and that's why marketing was restricted so
profoundly with all the previous acts that we've had around
other tobacco products.
Mr. Sarbanes. Could you speak to whether there's any
effective countermarketing, or I would call it education, going
on in schools that is equipping young people to resist this
temptation?
What are some programs you have seen or education efforts
that you consider to be particularly effective, even if right
now they're not really competing that well with what's coming
from the other direction?
Dr. Tanski. That's a great question. The FDA actually has a
very strong program that is in the schools. They actually have
posters in the bathrooms that say ``People actually use the
bathroom here, too,'' trying to counteract the idea that now
the rest rooms in some of the high schools and middle schools
are used for--that's where people go to vape.
So they're really trying to get in where the kids are and
directly countermarket, if you will. The Truth Initiative also
has some excellent countermarketing where they're really trying
to work with the kids.
They've done testing on the messages to make sure that
they're actually being received the right way. So we are
trying. But the issue is that the overwhelming pressure that
kids are getting from either marketing that is explicitly from
these industries or that social marketing and social media-
related, it's very difficult to break through that.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you.
Dr. Tanski. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
I now would like to recognize the gentleman from Virginia,
Mr. Griffith, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you all very much for being here today.
The e-cigarette problem is a significant problem that we
have to deal with and, you know, it always amazes me how people
can do things that ought to just--your instincts ought to tell
you there's something wrong with them.
I know the history books when I was growing up had lots to
be desired, but one of the stories that they told in our
Virginia history books was that the first person or one of the
first people who was smoking a cigar on the streets of London,
somebody ran into the store, grabbed the bucket that was there
for fire, and put it in their face because, clearly, there was
smoke coming out of them, they were on fire, and that couldn't
be healthy.
I don't know why we don't realize that. So I recognize
that. And my wife is a juvenile judge, and she is constantly
talking about all the problems they're having in the schools
because they are so small, Ms. Fuhrman, the devices are so
small the kids can take them to school. It's not like a
cigarette where you immediately smell the smoke and you can
see, you know, generally where it's coming from, or if there's
people in the bathroom.
No, it leaves no tell-tale sign and then can actually do it
in the classroom while the teacher is trying to teach, and so
it is a significant problem, and we need to do something.
The question is, is this the bill? Now, I don't have a
problem with raising the age to 21. But then we get into these
other issues.
And to me--and I am not trying to chastise you all--I think
the American public have to suddenly realize we have some kind
of split personality thing going on because, you know, as my
colleague said in his opening statement from North Carolina,
you can get gummy bears with marijuana in them. You can get
brownies with marijuana.
A staffer brought me cannabis-infused honey sticks, and it
says anyone from small children with severe seizures to old men
with Alzheimer's disease can benefit from taking marijuana or
CBD supplements. And ``We do have a physical store in the U.S.,
but if you want us to ship to you, we are happy to do so.''
Now, my problem is I've always been for medicinal use of
marijuana since the '90s. I think that makes sense. I don't
know why we haven't been studying it more.
But, Mr. Myers, you said in relationship to e-cigarettes,
we don't know what the long-term effects are.
But the American public is demanding that we make
recreational marijuana legal. It's been illegal for decades,
and while I support medicinal marijuana I've never been
convinced on recreational, and part of it is exactly what you
said. I don't know what the long-term effects are on the
public.
So I am going to ask you all, not because I am trying to
make any huge point other than we have to sort this out as a
society. Laws don't solve all the problems.
But do any of you all support recreational use of marijuana
being legalized in the United States?
Mr. Myers.
Mr. Myers. Let me not avoid your question but say we have a
lot of problems in this country.
There's some we do know how to solve, and this is one we
can solve so that there are clear pathways to deal with the
increased use of nicotine by kids.
Mr. Griffith. And I don't disagree there are things we can
do. I don't disagree with that. But I am trying to find out----
Mr. Myers. And we shouldn't----
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. And I don't think you all--I was
expecting a quick answer on this--I don't think you all have
that split personality that the public has.
I think because of the long-term risks that are unknown,
and because particularly on smoking anything, whether it's
tobacco or marijuana, it's got to be harmful, particularly on
those young brains.
And when you're talking about eliminating flavored
cigarettes, then should we not be looking at eliminating in
those States that say it's legal, notwithstanding the fact it's
still illegal federally, brownies and honey sticks?
What say you, Mr. Myers?
Mr. Myers. There is a broader question, but our issue
focuses on there's something we could do about this issue now
and there's a solution to it.
Mr. Griffith. My problem is I see them as being similar
issues, and I am with you on one. But if you're for smoking
recreational marijuana, I am not sure I am with you until we
know the results.
Ms. Fuhrman, what say you?
Ms. Fuhrman. Well, I would say that eating a brownie and
vaping a strawberry THC pod are very different. So yes, I do
not--I do not believe in legalizing recreational marijuana,
especially when it's in a vape which, obviously, attracts kids
and the flavors--a lot of these THC vapes are also flavored.
Mr. Griffith. I understand that. Yes, ma'am. Absolutely.
Dr. Tanski.
Dr. Tanski. Smoking anything is likely to shorten your
life, period.
Mr. Griffith. Yes, ma'am. Burning material in your lungs is
not a good thing, in my opinion.
Dr. Gardiner.
Dr. Gardiner. Let me suggest to you that you can--in
California marijuana has been legalized--I am sorry--marijuana
has been legalized in California.
I think what would be great at the national level is the
decriminalization of it such that you aren't going around
arresting people for this.
Smoking anything is bad for you. There's a period after
that. How you legalize it--it didn't have to get legalized
where you have billboards all over California like you have. It
could have been legalized another way. I would suggest at the
Federal level that there's a way to do both things. Legalize
it, decriminalize it, not promote it.
I need to say this. We had a conference 4 years ago at
UCSF--University of California San Francisco--on the
legalization of this.
We came out with two conclusions. One conclusion is that it
should be decriminalized. The second conclusion is it should be
denormalized.
Mr. Griffith. I know I am out of time, Madam Chairman.
Dr. Siegel, answer quickly.
Dr. Siegel. Sure. I think you're making a great point. I
think that flavored alcoholic beverages are causing major havoc
among youth. We know that it's a gateway to liquor use. It's
causing tens of thousands of deaths.
We know that flavored THC products are causing this
outbreak. But nobody has called for a ban on flavored alcoholic
beverages. Nobody has called for cracking down on flavored THC.
Mr. Griffith. And my time is up, so I am going to have to
yield back.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
It's a pleasure to recognize the gentleman from New York,
Mr. Engel, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Madam Chair.
In my home State of New York there's been a 160 percent
increase in the number of teens using e-cigarettes between 2014
and 2018.
Many of these children use e-cigarettes in schools, and
I've even heard from schools in my district that they are
installing vape detectors in the bathrooms to catch students
vaping.
Teachers, principals, and school administrators have been
thrust to the forefront of this epidemic, but schools,
unfortunately, are not equipped to handle these types of public
health cases.
To that end, I've introduced the bipartisan, bicameral
Smoke-Free Schools Act, which would ban vaping in schools and
child care facilities. Schools should be places that promote
healthy childhood development. But tobacco use jeopardizes
their health.
Dr. Tanski, I want to ask you, could you please describe
how tobacco use hinders a child's brain development and how it
can impact a child's ability to succeed in the classroom?
Dr. Tanski. Thank you for the question.
So as I mentioned in my testimony, we know that the
adolescent brain is really quite uniquely susceptible to
nicotine addiction, and if you think very simplistically things
kind of develop from the back to the front, and one of the
final things that develops is our executive function and our
ability to put brakes on our own behavior.
The pleasure center lights up first. So we know what feels
good, and so that's why the adolescent brain is more likely to
be addicted. We know it feels good. They try it. It feels good,
and they don't have the brakes to stop their own behavior.
So addiction is very prevalent in adolescents and in
younger people, and we know that it impacts on their executive
function. We know that nicotine can impair the way people kind
of process and prioritize things.
So, indeed, it can make a big difference on school success.
So someone who is struggling with either nicotine addiction or
withdrawal, so if someone is withdrawing from nicotine during
the classroom because they don't--they can't vape in the
school, or because they don't have a vape, or they put good
restrictions on, they're distracted.
They're irritable. They're anxious. They don't feel good,
and so that also is going to impair their ability to be
successful in a classroom.
Mr. Engel. Thank you very much.
The science is settled and nicotine certainly has short-
term and long-term health consequences for children, and it's
my understanding that many e-cigarettes on the market today are
much more efficient delivering nicotine than traditional
cigarettes, delivering nicotine at substantially higher levels
and making these e-cigarettes potently addictive.
In some cases, JUUL pods deliver around 200 puffs, which
provides the same amount of nicotine as a pack of 20
cigarettes.
And what's more concerning is that research has shown that
many young JUUL users are unaware that these e-cigarettes
contain nicotine.
JUUL threatens the tremendous progress we've made in
reducing teen smoking rates to what was an all-time low of 10
percent.
Mr. Myers, let me ask you, what enables the JUUL devices to
deliver higher levels of nicotine than cigarettes?
Mr. Myers. I think this is an issue on which we all agree.
JUUL developed the science of using benzoic acid to turn
nicotine into nicotine salts that delivers nicotine more
efficiently, more rapidly, and allows smokers and young people
to inhale more intensely because it eliminates the harshness.
So what it means is that we have the double whammy. We have
sweet flavors that attract kids to get them to try it, and then
we have new technology that addicts kids more rapidly and more
intensely than we've had before.
Mr. Engel. Thank you.
Ms. Fuhrman, let me ask you. In 2009, I helped pass the
Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act as a member
of this committee. This legislation banned flavors in
cigarettes, since they were being used to attract kids.
In the current e-cigarette epidemic, we are seeing a repeat
of this industry tactic. In fact, nearly 97 percent of teen e-
cigarette users reported using a flavored product in the last
month.
Last year I was one of the first House members to call on
the FDA to ban flavored e-cigarettes, and I am pleased to co-
sponsor Chairman Pallone's Reversing the Youth Tobacco Epidemic
Act, which would ban flavors in e-cigarettes.
Ms. Fuhrman, in addition to flavors, what other marketing
tactics have e-cigarette makers used to target children?
Ms. Fuhrman. That's a great question. There are many.
Flavors are the primary marketing tactic because it
prevents the kids from perceiving harm. They don't think that
there's anything harmful with gummy bear.
They've also been targeting the kids on social media. They
have hashtag vape tricks. The kids actually now have started
taking over now that JUUL has banned--has stopped their own
social media accounts. Now there are hundreds and thousands of
kids who actually do their own vape tricks.
The size--the fact that they're deceptively innocuous. You
can have them on a desk and they look like a highlighter or a
flash drive. So all of these marketing tactics.
And the fact that they can get them over the counter,
they're available online with no age verification. JUUL has a
very strong age verification now, but many brands, like
Eonsmoke, does not. So kids can order them and get them in two
days, or they can go to the corner store.
Mr. Engel. Social media, YouTube videos, and teen-oriented
magazines--the sky is the limit with this.
Ms. Fuhrman. Exactly. And homework websites, as I said.
Homework websites, social interaction apps, and games--they all
advertise on those as well.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Now I would like to recognize the gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Hudson, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
First, I would like to echo the sentiments of my colleague,
Representative Butterfield, and I would like to ask unanimous
consent to insert for the record the two letters he referenced
from the National Association of Black Law Enforcement
Executives and the Law Enforcement Action Partnership.
Ms. Eshoo. So ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Hudson. And I share his concerns that, if we outlaw
specific tobacco products such as menthol, it'll lead to
illicit trade of tobacco products.
I have a bipartisan bill with Representative Sheila Jackson
Lee aimed at curbing this very practice around the globe.
According to the Department of State report, the illicit trade
in tobacco products funding for criminal activities included
money laundering, bulk cash smuggling, and the trafficking of
humans, weapons, drugs, antiquities, diamonds, and counterfeit
goods.
I do not believe it is good policymaking to ban legal
products unless it is the last viable option because of these
concerns. If we deny consumers access to products, they may
turn to the black market to find their desired product and
drive consumers away from regulated tobacco products.
Dr. Siegel, I've read your testimony and I would like to
hear a little bit more from you on, you know, our shared goal.
I think everyone here agrees there is an epidemic with youth
using e-cigarettes. We all agree we want to combat that.
Could you just talk a little bit more about what you think
are the most effective ways to achieve that goal of stopping
youth from using e-cigarettes?
Dr. Siegel. Sure. I think that the key is to make these
products nonaddictive. I think that's the key, because prior to
JUUL, we didn't have a problem of addiction.
Kids were using these products socially, at parties, only
on occasion, and it's only after JUUL and its copycat products
that we start to see addiction.
And so I think regulating the nicotine level and regulating
the nicotine salt formulations can make these products so that
they're not addictive to kids.
I think we are being naive if we think that, if we ban
flavored e-liquids, kids are going to stop vaping. They're not
going to. They're going to continue vaping, but they're going
to change what they vape, and what they're going to vape is
going to be more and more THC.
And one thing that hasn't been said today but is a key
statistic that I think everyone needs to understand is that, of
regular vapers--kids who regularly vape e-cigarettes--70
percent of them have reported vaping THC.
And I think that kids are incredibly resourceful, and they
will use what products are available, and I think prohibition
is going to be a disaster because kids are just going to use
what's available, and what is going to be available are the
black-market products.
And right now, you can go right on the internet, go to
dankvapes.com, say you're 21, and you can get Apple Jacks,
Banana, Birthday Cake, Blackberry, Blue Dream, Candyland,
Cherry Pie, Cotton Candy, Bubble Gum.
We talked about bubble gum before. Bubble gum vapes are not
really killing anyone. But bubble gum THC products are, and
that's where we need to focus our attention.
Don't create a new black market. Strictly regulate these
products like we do all other dangerous products on the market.
Mr. Hudson. I think you make a good point, especially in
light of what I mentioned in my opening statement. According to
Monitoring the Future, youth are four times more likely to use
alcohol and illegal drugs than they are to use e-cigarette
products.
Are there any additional tools, in your opinion, that we
need to give to FDA to help regulate this?
Dr. Siegel. I think that what we need to do is to require
the FDA to set standards, and I think that your legislation
that you had proposed, I believe, last year would have required
them to do that.
I think the problem is that the FDA has been sleeping on
this issue for 10 years. They've had authority, but they
haven't passed any actual safety standards.
Instead, they have been essentially taking a prohibitionist
approach. It's all or nothing. You have to put in an
application, and either you're approved or not approved.
That's not the way we regulate dangerous products. The way
we regulate them is actually passing safety standards. Had they
implemented safety standards back in 2013 when I was first
calling for it, we would have had limits on nicotine levels,
and JUUL would never have occurred. We need the FDA to be
forced to immediately, without delay, set safety standards for
these products as you had requested.
Mr. Hudson. Yes, that makes a lot of sense. And, you know,
you look at alcohol. Prohibition didn't work. The percent of
alcoholics in America is more than before Prohibition now.
But we do regulate alcohol at point of sale, and I think
ideas like point-of-sale regulation for tobacco products makes
a lot of sense as a way to keep these out of the hands of kids.
So I appreciate your testimony, and Madam Chair, I yield
back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
I think it's important for everyone to understand that THC
is prohibited by the Federal Government. So if there's any
product that's carrying this poison in it, we have--enforcement
is really essential in this.
I now would like to recognize the gentlewoman--and she is a
gentlewoman--from California, strengthful and gentle, Ms.
Matsui, for her 5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Thank you very much, my friend, Madam
Chair.
Thank you for calling this important hearing, and I am
really pleased that we are examining a truly comprehensive bill
to address the epidemic of youth smoking and e-cigarette use.
While we know the Tobacco Control Act of 2009 was a
historic piece of legislation that finally gave FDA regulatory
authority over tobacco products, the current epidemic shows we
have lots more work to do.
One area this committee must address is youths' ability to
purchase tobacco products online. A simple web search shows
that there are thousands of websites selling tobacco products
via the internet, often with different standards for how they
verify the age of their customers.
If we decide to raise the tobacco purchasing age to 21 but
any child can go online and purchase e-cigarettes, we risk
exposing millions more children to these dangerous and
addictive products.
I understand that there are existing requirements for
selling tobacco products online but that current age
verification practices have not solved the problem.
Mr. Myers, can you describe how the current online age
verification for tobacco works and how it fails to prevent all
youth from accessing tobacco products, including e-cigarettes
and e-cigarette accessories via online sales?
Mr. Myers. Certainly, and it's a very important issue
because the data shows that the number of e-cigarettes sold
online is equivalent to the number sold in vape shops. So it's
a substantial number.
We have, as we know, a wide variety of rules governing this
issue, so that even if one company has good age verification
rules, many companies do not----
Ms. Matsui. Right.
Mr. Myers [continuing]. And they're equally circumvented
with regard to it. It's one of the reasons why with cigarettes
we looked at both restricting online sales and working with
those who deliver them to do it.
It's an incredibly important issue, and it's
extraordinarily difficult to get to as long as you allow any
online sales.
Ms. Matsui. Any online sales. OK.
Late last year, FDA announced they'd take new steps aimed
at curtailing illegal underage use of e-cigarettes by
implementing soon-to-be-announced heightened age verification
measures for online sales.
We are still waiting on such explicit direction from the
FDA, and I am curious if regulatory threat and public pressure
alone have been enough to crack down on illicit online sales.
Ms. Fuhrman, you mentioned that your son was able to
purchase his e-cigarette on eBay, which does not require any
age verification, and that he was able to find other websites
that sell e-cigarettes without any age verification.
Can you explain how kids and teens are finding these
websites?
Ms. Fuhrman. It's very easy. You just do a Google search.
Ms. Matsui. Mm-hmm. OK.
Absent Federal action, States like California have taken
their own initiative to increase age verification requirements
for purchasing vaping products online, and it's clear that
there remains an urgent need for Federal action, and I really
believe that Mr. Myers is saying what nobody wants to talk
about but might be really required here.
FDA has already found that menthol cigarettes likely pose a
greater public health risk than regular cigarettes. But the
agency has not moved forward with an outright ban on these
products.
Dr. Gardiner--and I appreciate you're from University of
California. I am an alum. Thank you very much. I want to thank
you for shining a spotlight on the social injustice issue at
hand wherein menthol disproportionately impacts poorer
communities, marginalized groups, youth, and communities of
color.
Dr. Gardiner, what have we learned about the impact of
local restrictions on selling menthol products? In your
opinion, how should these lessons inform Federal regulatory
decisions, moving forward?
Dr. Gardiner. I mention it in part in my testimony, and
thank you for the question.
There have been over 221 local flavor restrictions around
the country, 26 of them specifically restricting the sale of
menthol all around. It hasn't led to any criminalization or
increased arrests of anybody. None of that has taken place.
As we actually speak there last week, the Fremont City
Council in California passed comprehensive legislation. Of
course, San Francisco has passed legislation about this.
Let me just take a moment and say that the suggestion that
somehow this is a Black cigarette or that disproportionately
affecting, it would be bad for African Americans--it's been the
predatory marketing of these things that have led to that
problem.
Ms. Matsui. Mm-hmm. Right.
Dr. Gardiner. I didn't mention this in my testimony, but
African Americans die disproportionately of tobacco-related
diseases--heart disease, lung cancer, and cerebral vascular
disease or stroke.
So that's why we want to get it off the market. It has
nothing to do with this.
And lastly, the National Organization of Black Law
Enforcement Officials and its counterpart, LEAP, are all funded
by the tobacco industry. Let's make no mistake about that.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Well, thank you very much for your
testimony, and I yield back.
Dr. Gardiner. Thank you, Madam.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back.
It's now a pleasure to recognize the gentleman from
Oklahoma, Mr. Mullin, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for the
panel that's willing to take their time and come up here to
Capitol Hill and give your testimony. We appreciate that.
I want to make it very clear I have no dog in this fight. I
don't drink. I don't use any drugs, never have. I don't use any
tobacco products.
But I do believe that it's the role of this body to create
an environment for entrepreneurs to be able to perceive their
dreams and consumers to have choice.
I also think it's very hypocritical that in one hand we are
talking about banning flavored e-cigarettes and on the other
hand most of the people that are for banning are also for
legalizing marijuana.
I mean, if you're talking about targeting kids, let's talk
about the whole product and what is actually being targeted. If
we are going to talk about this, let's have an open and fair
conversation about it.
What brought this into a hearing to begin with was because
of the death and sickness that e-cigarettes has brought. But
what hasn't been discussed is that most of those individuals
were buying illegal cartridges laced with THC.
So why is it that we are just focusing on one area? I don't
like any of it. I choose not to use any of it. But we are a
free and balanced country that allows consumers to make the
decision, and we are old enough to make those decisions.
We talk about in this bill from age limits or an age limit
to 21. As I said, I don't have a dog in this fight. But we
allow men and women to choose to die for this country at 18,
and now we are saying they're not smart enough to decide if
they're going to smoke or not.
I get the point, but there's some hypocrisy that goes alone
with this, and I just have a hard time understanding it from
the onset. We need to have the full conversation.
We want to take these products and we want to put them off
the reach of the children, but we already know they're able to
get THC-laced cartridges online.
Do you think that's going to stop them? Do we think that's
not going to happen? Do we not think that's where the products
are going to move to, and then there's going to be absolutely
no oversight of it?
They're still going to be inhaling it, and it's still going
to go into their lungs.
Let me ask--Mr. Myers, let me ask you a question. Have we
seen sales increase or decrease on the black market with the
THC cartridges?
Mr. Myers. We actually don't track, because we don't have
an ability to track THC. But the issue you raised is important
in two different ways. Let me address it.
Because I don't believe most of the tobacco control
advocates out there do support legalization of marijuana. With
regard to----
Mr. Mullin. No, I am talking about--I am talking about the
people on the bill. I am talking about on this bill. The
people--most of the people that are sponsoring this bill are
for legalizing marijuana. Not all, but most.
Mr. Myers. But, you know, there is--it's important not to
confuse two separate issues. One is we have an epidemic of e-
cigarette use among our kids, and two, we----
Mr. Mullin. No, Mr. Myers--excuse me. It is important to
have a full and fair conversation about all of it.
Mr. Myers. We totally agree.
Mr. Mullin. If you're going to--if you're going to focus on
one area, focus on all of it. It still has to do with getting
people addicted to a product.
It still is called dependency.
Mr. Myers. So we agree with you. One of the critical
factors and one of the reasons we are concerned is that the
availability of flavored e-cigarettes has so dramatically
increased the number of kids who are addicted to any substance
and the----
Mr. Mullin. So has the availability of marijuana, too, and
go back and look at the States that have legalized it.
Mr. Myers. Right. But----
Mr. Mullin. And I am not trying to make this about
marijuana versus anything else. I am just saying that we got to
have a full conversation about all this.
I am not trying to focus on it. I know that's what it
sounds like. But I am just pointing out that we are only
focusing on one area. If we are going to talk about kids, then
let's have a conversation.
I've got six at home, ranging from 16 to 8. I don't want to
see any of these products either, and one of the biggest issues
we have in our schools is that they're going in and they're
smoking in the boys' room--ha, ha, song there--and we are
having an issue with it where they're having to take the stalls
off the doors.
And I don't want this product available to anybody. I
don't. But we got--we can't be kidding ourselves that we think
if we just ban this that it's just going to go away--that the
problem is just going to go away. It is absolutely not.
Dr. Siegel----
Mr. Myers. Can I just----
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. Where is most of--where has most
of the sales of THC taken place? The underage--the underage
kids, where are they getting the majority of their cartridges
for these e-cigarettes to begin with?
Dr. Siegel. They're coming off the black market and they're
coming from large drug dealers who are producing hundreds of
thousands of these completely unregulated, and people are
buying them off the internet, getting them off the street, and
those are being distributed in our schools.
And just to be clear--you made this point--that's what's
causing this outbreak, not nicotine products that people are
buying at stores.
Mr. Mullin. So if you--so if you think----
Dr. Gardiner. The CDC has been very clear about that----
Mr. Mullin. Hold on. I didn't ask you a question, sir.
Dr. Gardiner. Since you've been doing this longer----
Mr. Mullin. I didn't--I didn't ask you a question.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman's time has expired.
Dr. Gardiner. Seventy-eight percent of it, not always.
Mr. Mullin. Ma'am--Madam Chair, with all due respect,
everybody else--everybody else's went over quite a bit.
Ms. Eshoo. They haven't gone over by 20 seconds. So you can
finish your answer and then we need to move on. Who was giving
the answer?
Mr. Mullin. Dr. Siegel was.
Dr. Siegel. Yes. I concluded, basically saying--yes.
Ms. Eshoo. Good. OK. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. I would like to now recognize the gentlewoman
from Florida, Ms. Castor, for her 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Chairwoman Eshoo, for calling
this important hearing and thank you to all of the witnesses
for all of your work.
We have a very serious problem in America with this growing
epidemic of vaping and e-cigarettes, and I've seen it.
My daughters are just in their early 20s, and over the past
decade I watched among all of their friends groups and kids all
across middle school and high school as their behavior changed
substantially with the uptake of the JUUL and the e-cigarettes,
and this is borne out by the Florida Youth Tobacco Survey run
by our Department of Health found that from 2012 to 2018 there
was a 361 percent increase in kids age 11 to 17 who tried
electronic vaping and a 582 percent increase in kids that
actually continued to use the vapes.
And we all know that nearly all tobacco use begins when
kids are in middle school and high school. So that--this area
of what they do to target children to--and then get them hooked
through nicotine and other habit-forming characteristics I
think is ripe for us to do so much more.
Now, this bill, Reversing the Youth Tobacco Epidemic Act,
includes language making it unlawful to market, advertise, or
promote any e-cigarette products to individuals under the age
of 21.
Is this strong enough, the language in the bill, and it
gives the FTC enforcement ability and they can come up with
penalties? But I don't know if we are doing all that we need to
do.
I would like to have you all go down, real quick, and just
say it's not strong enough, it is strong enough. We had Dr.
Schuchat here from CDC and Dr. Sharpless from FDA. They called
it an epidemic. They're doing some things with--online and
social media.
But I continue to think it's not strong enough. What else
would you do?
Mr. Myers. It's a very good start. FDA has authority to
regulate e-cigarette marketing up to the limits of the First
Amendment. They haven't done so.
So the kind of social media marketing, which has fueled
this epidemic, needs to be the subject of very clear rules to
prevent it from happening.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Ms. Fuhrman. I would echo that--it's a great start. I think
the problem now is that kids are marketing it among themselves.
So that's also another issue that's going to be hard to follow.
And I think that we are talking about reversing the
epidemic--the youth epidemic. But once--if you ban flavors and
you slow down the uptake of new kids starting to vape, you
still have 5 million kids who are potentially addicted to
nicotine, and there's no approved method of cessation. So
that's what the next focus should be.
Dr. Tanski. One of the aspects I really like about this
bill is that it restricts sponsorships, and that's a big thing
that was restricted with the 2009 tobacco control.
So it's that Marlboro could no longer sponsor the Indy 500
NASCAR. But right now, e-cigarette vendors can, and so that's
one very important thing to clamp down on.
So it's a great start, and in particular, the sponsorship
and avoiding all that is going to be critical.
Dr. Gardiner. I think the greatest part of--and thank you--
I think the greatest part of the bill is that it, for the first
time in 10 years, takes up the question of menthol and
prohibits its manufacture and promotion. We know that it's one
of the leading causes of death in the African-American
community.
Let me also say, Ms. Eshoo, I am sorry for my interruption.
There's just been so much discussion about marijuana that
we should at least have the facts right--that 78 percent of the
cases have identified marijuana, but 22 of the cases haven't.
If we want to have a full discussion about it, then let's have
a scientific discussion about it and not make generalizations.
Dr. Siegel. So in answer to your question about the age 21,
I don't think it goes far enough. I think what needs to be done
is to not only raise the age of sale to 21 but to prohibit the
sale of all tobacco products, including e-cigarettes, to stores
that are only open to people who are 21 and older.
I don't think there's any reason in 2019 that any kid can
walk into a grocery store, a convenience store, a drug store,
and buy a pack of Marlboros. I just don't think that in 2019
that makes any sense.
I think these should be restricted to tobacco or vape
shops. That's where they should be sold, and you can't go in
there unless you're 21.
Ms. Castor. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back.
It's a pleasure to recognize Dr. Bucshon from the great
State of Indiana.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you. I appreciate the recognition.
Look, I am a conservative Republican. I am not normally for
government putting in more regulations.
But on the other hand, as a doctor, looking at the data
it's pretty clear we need to do something about the e-cigarette
epidemic in grade schools and high schools.
I have four kids. I was a cardiovascular and thoracic
surgeon. Most of my patients came to me because of the end
results of cigarette use, honestly, and my daughter, who's in
high school, tells me it's pretty pervasive in her school.
I am deeply troubled by the increasing rate of e-cigarette
use amongst children. The long-term negative health
implications of nicotine use on the heart and lungs are well
known, and enticing flavors are attracting teens who might not
otherwise have exposure to nicotine.
The fact is high school and middle school students are
getting their hands on these products, setting them up for a
lifetime of addiction and negative health side effects and
it's--they're not actually going to a legitimate marketplace
and buying them.
They're buying them from, honestly, high school and grade
school dealers and their own colleagues in their classes who
are selling these at their schools.
In 2018, more than 3.6 million U.S. youth, including one in
five high school students and one in 20 middle school students,
reported to have used e-cigarettes, and this number is rising,
as has been pointed out by multiple witnesses.
Two-thirds or more of the students don't even realize
there's nicotine in the product--a high percentage. The focus
of this issue must be on the health of our children. I think
it's important not to lose sight of this by using this epidemic
to impose excessive and overreaching government regulation
broadly.
That is why I have supported the Trump administration's
proposal to combat the epidemic of youth e-cigarette use by
banning flavored options from the marketplace by removing all
flavored e-cigarettes from the marketplace until the FDA can
properly review and approve them. If they can, we can get ahead
of the epidemic before it's too late.
I hope that this committee can continue to build on the
leadership of the administration and work together to address
this epidemic head on so that children never need to find out
the long-term negative health implications of nicotine and find
it out the hard way. Nicotine is extremely addicting. It's
almost impossible to get rid of the addiction.
In that vein, Dr. Tanski--there you are--if adults want to
quit--help quit smoking, they have a number of resources
available to them. For example, there are several FDA-approved
tobacco cessation medications that have been proven to help
adults quit.
But for kids, this doesn't seem to be the case. What common
treatment options do you recommend to your patients who are
addicted to e-cigarettes, and are any tobacco cessation drugs
or nicotine replacement therapies proven effective with kids?
Dr. Tanski. Dr. Bucshon, I really appreciate the question,
and unfortunately the answer is we don't have a lot of evidence
as to what works well for cessation for adolescents.
And with regards to vaping devices, we have no evidence at
all because there have not been any studies looking at how to
get young people or anybody to quit vaping devices.
So we are in uncharted territory. We actually dramatically
and desperately need research and some evidence to support what
we are trying to do.
We are using our best practice at the moment, and so we are
using all the tools that we used for adolescent smoking
cessation, including counseling, group counseling.
We are using nicotine replacement therapies off label
because we know that some of our young people have very high
levels of addiction, and that is a huge area of concern.
Kids are suffering. They're withdrawing in class. They're
feeling really horrible, and they're getting that bloom of
anxiety and irritability, and they're having a really hard time
getting through the day.
So we do have a big problem. And to your point as a
cardiovascular surgeon, my husband is a vascular surgeon. We
joke that I am trying to put him out of business.
We can't avoid the cardiovascular impacts of these devices,
and it took us 40 years to figure out COPD and 40 years to
figure out lung cancer, and I am confident, unfortunately, that
we are going to see cardiovascular impacts from our--these
use--our youth using these products.
Mr. Bucshon. I would agree, and I want to yield the last
minute of my time to Ranking Member Burgess.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Dr. Bucshon.
Dr. Siegel, you had made mention just a few minutes ago
about FDA perhaps missed an opportunity in 2013 to regulate the
amount of nicotine.
I just want to point out to the committee much has been
made about the passage of the Tobacco Control Act. But
remember, Tobacco Control Act contained a user fee, and so the
FDA cannot say that it was resource constrained because, since
the inception of the Tobacco Control Act, they've collected
over $5.5 billion, and I don't know that we have good oversight
as to how that money has been spent.
But it certainly could have been spent in some of this
activity. I realize that vaping doesn't have the user fee. But
if the purpose of the FDA and the Tobacco Control Act is to
regulate nicotine, they had the money to do so. I will make
this available for the record, and I will yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Bucshon. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. I would like to just make a suggestion, that as
the ranking member and the chair of the subcommittee that we
write to the FDA and inquire as to how those dollars are
being--have been used and continue to be used.
I now would like to--you know, I would like to ask--just
circle back for a moment. I did not hear Dr. Gardiner--you said
something about the organizations when I said ``so ordered''
that the letters be placed in the record, and you made a
comment but I didn't catch it. Can you restate what you said?
Dr. Gardiner. I didn't say it directly at the time, but
what I said is that the organizations--the National
Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives and LEAP, and
I am not familiar with their terminology--both take money from
the tobacco industry and actually have for a number of years.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you very much.
I now would like to recognize the chairman of the full
committee, Mr. Pallone of New Jersey.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairwoman Eshoo.
Whether it's mango, mint, bubble gum, or gummy bear, the
wide variety of kid-friendly flavors of cigarettes rival any
ice cream shop or candy store, and as we've heard from our
witnesses today, that's by design.
Tobacco manufacturers know that, to attract youth use
early, there's no better way than to give them new sweet
flavors to try, and once you have got them hooked, you might
just have a customer for life.
So it's not just me saying this. Children themselves report
that these flavored products are what they use, according the
National Youth Tobacco Survey conducted by the CDC and the FDA.
Twenty-eight percent of high school students use e-
cigarettes 20 or more days per month, and nearly 70 percent of
those students report using flavored products.
So I want to ask some of you--let me start with Dr. Tanski.
In your testimony you described the physical and psychoactive
harms that can come from nicotine use, and you described how
nicotine affects the developing adolescent brain.
Can you describe how flavors combined with nicotine might
influence the drug's addictive properties, and the impact this
has had for youth users?
Dr. Tanski. Well, I don't know the specific research about
it, but it is kind of intuitive that we know that flavors also
light up the pleasure systems in your brain. So it's kind of
intuitive to assume that, if we combine yummy flavors with
nicotine, that might be a double whammy.
I don't know about the specific research on that topic.
That is my hypothesis, and it's supported by anecdote by seeing
so many of my young patients start with flavored products.
Mr. Pallone. So let me----
Dr. Gardiner. But we do have data on the impact of flavors
on other parts of the body. Cinnamaldehyde we know is very bad
for your lungs. We know that diacetyl is also bad for your
lungs. These are things that are put into e-cigarettes. There's
a whole list of them.
One thing we didn't talk about in this hearing is that
there's a multiplicity of cardiovascular effects associated
with smoking e-cigarettes. How they relate to youth, I am not
really sure.
But we know that platelet formation, you know, in plants--I
use the example if you cut yourself what happens, and the
students all say you bleed. Well, internally, you actually
develop platelets. You actually develop--that's the mechanism
to stop the bleeding externally. Internally, it leads to
blockage of arteries.
We know that e-cigarettes do that. So, and I appreciate
what's been going on. At some point we do need to have a full
discussion about this. I mean, we are kind of at the surface of
this, and I am sorry to take all your time.
Mr. Pallone. No, that's OK. Let me ask Ms. Fuhrman, though.
Some people have argued that a flavor ban for e-cigarette
products should contain an exception for mint- and menthol-
flavored e-cigarettes, as these products may not be as kid-
friendly as fruit-flavored products.
But as the parent of a child currently in schools, what are
your thoughts on that suggestion? Is it true that teenagers and
youth are not using mint- or menthol-flavored tobacco products?
Ms. Fuhrman. No. No. It's not true at all. Actually, some
of the samples I brought were different flavors of mint chewing
gum, or Mighty Mint.
Mint is one of the preferred flavors of teens, and if you
look at JUUL sales, JUUL sales of mint and menthol are now over
80 percent of their total sales. So it's very important.
What I think is also important to recognize is that there
are other flavors coming out on the market. For instance, STIG
has a mentholated mango. So they're combining flavors now.
To what Mr. Gardiner said, the menthol makes it easier to
absorb, easier for the lungs to absorb, easier to addict. So
they're adding that mentholated to flavors that are already,
you know, commonplace.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
You know, I was pleased to see the FDA's announcement that
they would soon be conducting some level of enforcement on
flavored e-cigarette products that would lead to their removal
from store shelves and e-commerce, and more than a month later,
though, we still have not seen details of that proposal, and I
am concerned about possible loopholes in the proposed guidance.
So, Mr. Myers, can you explain why legislation provides a
more complete solution for addressing concerns about flavored
products?
Mr. Myers. Sure. It's very important for multiple reasons.
First of all, we have not yet seen a proposal out of the
administration to finally implement. Our hope is that we will
see one very soon, and it will be complete.
Second, the tobacco industry inevitably will sue the FDA as
soon as it files any such rule. They have done that in every
case. We need to be certain that this actually becomes the law
of the land.
Third, a rule adopted is a rule that can be changed. We
banned the sale of flavored cigarettes because we knew they
attracted kids. It's worked. It hasn't produced a black market.
It has helped us reduce cigarette use. We should do the
same thing here and be sure that it's not something we have to
look back on 10 years from now.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
One more question. Dr. Gardiner, you talk in depth about
menthol in your testimony, and you say we should recognize the
marketing of menthol products as a social injustice issue.
Would you just elaborate on that? What's driving the
increase in the use of menthol?
Dr. Gardiner. It has been going on for decades that prices
of cigarettes in the Black community, particularly menthol
cigarettes, are cheaper. There are more advertisements, and
promotions are much more lucrative. That's what has gone on for
the last 50 years.
That is why 85 percent of African Americans smoke these
products. That's why the majority of African Americans who die,
die of tobacco-related diseases.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
A pleasure to recognize the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Guthrie, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much, and thank you for being
here today. This is very important. I am the ranking member of
this Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, and we had a
hearing right before the break on the deaths--the lung deaths
coming from vaping--and it seems to be two specific issues that
both need to be addressed.
One is the flavors and young people becoming addicted to
the flavors. I think that is a real problem that needs to be
addressed. The second is the THC--that, of the 26 deaths in 21
States, many are due to products containing THC.
And even right before the break, we passed a bill to make
it easier to bank marijuana. I mean, that's the thing. So, as
we are trying to restrict access to nicotine products, which I
agree with, we also seem to be not restricting access to
marijuana-laced products.
And so, Dr. Siegel or Dr. Tanski, maybe this might be--do
you have--and then flavors. I understand you can buy marijuana
gummy bears. I don't know if that's true or not. But if you're
saying that the pleasure from flavor and the pleasure from
getting intoxicant is combined, then it's combined in that. So
maybe we should be looking at banning those products too
instead of expanding the access to them.
But to Dr. Siegel and Dr. Tanski, do you have concerns
about the effects of adolescent brains and their behavior--the
development of their brains and behavior from vaping THC?
Dr. Tanski. Go ahead. You go first.
Dr. Siegel. Absolutely. Absolutely.
I know that we've been testifying that this is an
unprecedented increase in what we are seeing. But in reality,
there was another unprecedented increase.
Just last year, marijuana use among college students rose
to its highest level in 35 years. Forty-nine percent of college
students admitted that they use marijuana.
We have--the legalization of marijuana has led to the
perception among young people that it's just not harmful. The
policies that we set in society are what tell kids what's
harmful and what's not. When they see that this is legalized,
their perception of harm is decreased.
And that's what has gotten us into this mess with the
deaths from respiratory illness because kids--the increase in
marijuana has now transferred into vaping.
They've gone from smoking it to vaping it, and because
they're vaping it and because they're buying products on the
black market that have been contaminated, that's why kids are
dying.
And I think we cannot ignore that problem, and I think it's
naive to think that if we just ban flavored e-liquids
everything is going to be fine. It's not.
Kids are getting these products from dealers--from drug
dealers in their schools who are getting them from actual drug
dealers.
And they're going to continue getting vaping products.
They're not going to stop vaping just because the Government
says you can't sell flavored e-liquids. They're just going to
shift over to what's available, which is going to be THC.
Mr. Guthrie. OK.
So, Dr. Tanski, do you have a view on the THC, or anybody
here on the panel?
Dr. Tanski. Yes. So a couple comments on the THC.
I will comment that it is still federally illegal. So that
is completely an illicit product and there is no--in my State,
there is no legal sale of recreational THC in the State of New
Hampshire.
Mr. Guthrie. But Congress has voted to make it easier to
bank. I mean, not--the House did, not--Congress hasn't passed--
so we are moving in that direction.
Dr. Tanski. I am not familiar with the bill----
Mr. Guthrie. And I am just saying, so we are going down
that pathway much more.
Dr. Tanski. So, but to the point, THC is an intoxicant. It
is something that makes people higher longer, and it impairs
their ability to learn. People get high, and it's not a two-
minute head rush. It's a long-day thing.
So I think that, indeed, we are seeing kind of another
epidemic. There are two separate epidemics, and I think we need
to think about them in two separate ways----
Mr. Guthrie. Need to do it with both, yes.
Dr. Tanski [continuing]. Because they really are two very
different drugs and there is no legal recreational marijuana,
at least in my State and at the Federal level, whereas nicotine
is legally available.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, is THC as addictive as nicotine, or--do
you know? Nicotine is very addictive. I know that----
Dr. Tanski. Nicotine is very addictive. I am not an
addiction specialist----
Mr. Guthrie. You're not an expert in that area?
Dr. Tanski [continuing]. To be able to compare the two. So
I don't have----
Mr. Guthrie. Anybody here? Dr. Siegel?
Dr. Gardiner. It's definitely addictive.
Dr. Tanski. It is addictive, but----
Dr. Gardiner. That's not--that's not the question. There's
very few things as addictive as nicotine, though, and I guess
that's the issue.
You opened your statement with the deaths around the--and I
just want to reassert this. Seventy-eight percent of the people
with the lung illness have reported THC use. Another 22 percent
have not. They said they've only used nicotine. So we are going
to have to look into the interaction of what's in the actual e-
cigarette.
Mr. Guthrie. So yes, eight out of 10 have said--reported
THC, and they would say that it's been self-reporting, so
they're not sure if other--does not have THC as well, but
that's helpful.
Dr. Gardiner. So let's even take it a step further. If
you're mixing flavors, as Matt has pointed out, with some legal
products can't you imagine that there are flavors being mixed
with the THC?
Mr. Guthrie. Well, I would imagine so. But THC seems to be
common, and most of it is----
Mr. Myers. Can I make just one short point, too, that
relates to this? One of the reasons we are so concerned about
flavors hooking kids on e-cigarettes is the data shows that,
even if these are kids who otherwise wouldn't have smoked or
used other products, it increases their likelihood of moving on
to other products. So----
Mr. Guthrie. Like THC gummy bears would be in the same
category.
Mr. Myers. Well, you know, I don't have specific data on
THC. But what it does is, it demonstrates that there's an
increased risk those kids will go on to use other products. So
if you're concerned about other addictions----
Mr. Guthrie. Absolutely.
Mr. Myers [continuing]. Stopping this one helps across the
board.
Mr. Guthrie. That one, and not for Congress to move down
the path that----
Ms. Eshoo. The--yes, the gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Siegel, you--I just want to--you spoke about many
issues in one of your answers, but you didn't demonstrate any
data that supports it.
So would you please get that to us? Otherwise, it's--
they're sentences with lots of words in them, but we need
factual--we need data here.
Dr. Siegel. Well, I can give you the data.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes. OK. That's what I am asking for. If you
would, please.
Dr. Siegel. Absolutely.
Ms. Eshoo. Not now. In writing to me, please.
Dr. Siegel. Sure. Sure.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Now I would like to recognize the very
distinguished gentleman from Massachusetts. It's so wonderful
that we have a Kennedy in the Congress.
Mr. Joseph Kennedy.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you to our
witnesses for being here for this important hearing.
A few weeks ago, I asked the acting head of the FDA what
caused a catastrophic regulatory failure that we are seeing
play out in our schools and our neighborhoods and our hospitals
all over our country.
Just a week ago, Massachusetts experienced our own--the
first death that we have had in a vaping-related death. More
than a thousand people of all ages are currently sick with a
mysterious disease, and our Government still cannot diagnose
its roots.
Our Federal Government's failure to adequately and
proactively address this crisis has had devastating and
immediate and long-term impacts which, again, we don't fully
understand.
Right now, however, patients are sick. Legally operating
businesses in Massachusetts are being forced to shutter, with
small business owners facing bankruptcy, and our Government is
scrambling to do what it should have done an awful long time
ago.
So, to each of our witnesses, with the benefit of
hindsight, what is the one most important regulatory protection
that must be put in place immediately?
Dr. Siegel, we'll start with you.
Dr. Siegel. I think it's regulating the nicotine levels. I
don't think that the nicotine levels in e-liquids should be
allowed to be more than 20 milligrams per milliliter, and I
think if your formulation is a nicotine salt it should be even
lower than that, probably half of that.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you.
Dr. Gardiner.
Dr. Gardiner. Let me speak to that. Mike has mentioned that
a couple of times. There has been a proposal before the FDA to
gradually lower the limit of nicotine in cigarettes. So I think
it's on the table and it needs to be done, and I will just
reiterate what I came to testify about.
I think the single most public health benefit that we could
get in terms of regulation is getting menthol products off the
market. I will just leave it there.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Tanski. So we are looking at the retrospective scope,
right. We are going into the Wayback Machine, and in hindsight
what should we have done when e-cigarettes came on the market?
Is that the question?
Mr. Kennedy. Yes, what should we--well, what should we have
done, but what should we do now?
Dr. Tanski. So I think this bill goes a long way towards
addressing what we need to do now. By putting strict regulation
on these products and addressing age limits and addressing
flavors. I think those are absolutely critical.
I think that 15 years ago, when these first came on the
market, we made a lot of mistakes by allowing them to come in
as a consumer product and being completely unregulated and
allowing these unfettered flavors and access to our kids.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Doctor.
Ms. Fuhrman.
Ms. Fuhrman. I would say that the biggest mistake we made
was not banning menthol cigarettes, and today I think we should
ban all flavors.
If we leave menthol cigarettes out of the equation and we
ban flavored e-cigarettes, it will allow not only multiple
generations of young people to start smoking regular cigarettes
with menthol, but it will also create a loophole and a
precedent to exempt menthol e-cigarettes from the bill. So----
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you.
Mr. Myers. Let me echo Dorian. I think the critical issue
is flavors is what brings people to it. Flavors is how the
tobacco industry has addicted generations of people in the
African-American community.
We need to turn off the on ramp, and the best way to do it
is to eliminate the flavors that appeal to them. But,
simultaneously, long term we need to look at reducing nicotine
in combusted tobacco products so that we ratchet that down,
clearly.
And in the interim we have to make it a priority to figure
out how to help young people who are addicted to quit.
So it's three things, but you really have to do them all.
Mr. Kennedy. So building off your comments there, Dr.
Tanski, can you tell a little bit about--tell me a little bit
about what nicotine does to a young, developing brain,
particularly when it's vaped?
Dr. Tanski. So it hits the brain very quickly, particularly
the new products where there's--the features of the nicotine
get introduced to the brain very, very quickly, kind of
analogous to a combusted tobacco cigarette, and it induces this
feeling of pleasure.
And there's two things that happen. If someone has been
using nicotine for a long time, when you don't have nicotine in
your body, you feel poorly. You have withdrawal systems. You
get irritable. You get anxious. You have trouble feeling
pleasure. And so you also vape or smoke to avoid withdrawal
because otherwise you don't feel normal.
So it's this kind of self-fulfilling need. You start with
nicotine innocently. You don't think it's going to do anything.
You think--you're a teenager--you think nothing bad is going to
happen to you.
But you start, you get hooked, and then you're stuck in
this trap, and you don't feel well until you have more nicotine
in your brain. And so that's what addiction is. That's what
dependence is and, unfortunately, these products that are in
our kids' schools and in our kids' lives have perpetuated
significant addiction to nicotine.
Mr. Kennedy. And just fleshing that out in the last 15
seconds here, why is that more--why are younger brains or
brains that are not fully developed more susceptible to
nicotine?
Dr. Tanski. It's a great question. It's a developmental
pattern, and it's--the pleasure centers kind of become mature
before the inhibitory centers become mature. So they are much--
the addictive potential is much higher with any product in an
adolescent brain.
Whether it's nicotine, THC, anything, the adolescent brain
is in this unique developmental period. It's not to do with
law. It's not to do with people going off to war. It's to do
with brain development, and it's a tempo that doesn't finish
until the mid-20s.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you.
Dr. Tanski. Thank you.
Mr. Kennedy. Yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
It's a pleasure to recognize my friend, the gentlewoman
from Indiana, Mrs. Brooks, for her 5 minutes.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you for
holding this incredibly important hearing.
While Massachusetts has just had its first vaping death,
Indiana, sadly, has had three--three of the 26 that have
occurred, as far as I know, across the country.
In the 2018 Indiana Youth Tobacco Survey, nearly 1 in 5
high school students and 1 in 12 middle schoolers said they
were using e-cigarettes.
And I was at an American Cancer Society event while I was
home the last the two weeks and Dr. Sarah Bosslet, a
pediatrician, said that it is something that she is having
regular conversations with and she is overwhelmed by the number
of kids, which is what I am curious about, Dr. Tanski and Ms.
Fuhrman, is it's interesting to me that the kids are actually
sharing with you that they are vaping.
They are not hiding it. They might hide it in school
because they can get in trouble for it in school. But I want to
talk a little bit more about where are the kids getting it.
I just came from a hearing downstairs on fostering the safe
internet--and when I looked up a product online as we were
passing it out, it asked you the question, ``Are you 21, or are
you legal or not legal''--``Are you 21 or not legal?''
So, truly, where are--having come from law enforcement
background, where are the kids getting it? Is it over the
internet?
Is it--how are middle school kids getting it from black
markets? Share with me what you know. And, Mr. Myers, I want to
ask you very briefly about the marketing specifically to the
kids.
Ms. Fuhrman.
Ms. Fuhrman. Well, I think when you say on--when you go
online and it says, ``Are you 21 or are you not?,'' you click
21, that's it.
Then you can go through and then you can purchase anything.
So there's really no verification beyond that, except on very
few other websites. So they can do it that way.
They can get it at a gas station. They can get it at the
corner store, and a lot of----
Mrs. Brooks. Are they not required to provide an ID at a
gas station?
Ms. Fuhrman. They don't ask. A lot of the clerks don't ask,
and a lot of the kids have fake IDs. But most of them don't
ask. And then a lot of those kids will then purchase them and
go to school and sell them to other kids.
Mrs. Brooks. And what are they selling them for? How much,
roughly?
Ms. Fuhrman. You know, before when you could--when you
could purchase bulk online, they were--the pack of four pods is
$16, and you could break it up and they would sell a pod for
$10.
Mrs. Brooks. Dr. Tanski?
Ms. Fuhrman. Now you can buy them for--I just passed around
a thing--you can buy--the pack of four pods is $7.
Mrs. Brooks. Dr. Tanski, the pediatricians you're
representing, can you share with us what kids are--what they
are sharing with them about availability and why they believe
they're safe?
Dr. Tanski. So I think the flavors go a long way towards
this halo effect that it must be safe, because why would
something called ``gummy bear'' be harmful to you?
And interestingly, a lot of the young people don't think
that they're vaping nicotine. When you ask kids, ``Are you
vaping stuff with nicotine?'' they'll say, ``I am only vaping
flavors.'' But when you actually look at the product or you dig
down deeper, you find that, indeed, they are vaping nicotine,
and they just don't know.
And it is the social pipeline where a lot of the kids are
getting these. The middle schoolers are getting them from their
older brother and sisters in the high school, and an 18-year-
old high school senior in most States is currently legal to buy
vaping products.
My son turned 18 at Christmas in his senior year of high
school, and on the day of his birthday people say, ``Hey, will
you buy me some vapes?'' Thankfully, he said no. Otherwise, we
would have had some family problems.
But this social pipeline needs to be shut off, and that's
where Tobacco 21 can be one part of the solution. But the
flavors are another critical piece of the solution because the
kids don't perceive something that's labeled as cotton candy or
gummy bears as being something that could possibly be harmful.
Mrs. Brooks. So Governor Holcomb of Indiana and our State
health commission are investing $2 million in a public
relations campaign to educate schools and kids and so forth.
Mr. Myers, can you talk to us about what kind of marketing
are you seeing that has made the big--why do the kids believe
it's safe? Aside from flavors, how is it that there is nothing
that indicates that it's filled with nicotine?
Mr. Myers. It's the perfect question. It's because the FDA
rules on advertising have not been applied to e-cigarettes--
that this industry, which comes out of Silicon Valley, figured
out that, if you use social media, we adults wouldn't see it
until long after our children saw it.
They went back and researched and used the exact same
imagery that the cigarette industry used in the '50s and '60s
to make it look like it was cool, it's what you needed to be
socially successful, happy, independent, and healthy--all of
those things.
And so everybody in their ads, everybody in the events that
they sponsored looks like they are the quintessential most
healthy, happiest, most successful person in the world.
You want to be a--figure out how you reach a teenager? They
took the tobacco industry playbook, and they applied it to
precision.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back.
A pleasure to recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
Cardenas, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Appreciate
the opportunity for us to have this open and public discussion
about this important issue.
I will quote the U.S. attorney general--excuse me, the U.S.
Surgeon General: ``The evidence is sufficient to conclude that
advertising and promotional activities by the tobacco companies
cause the onset and continuation of smoking among adolescents
and young adults,'' end quote.
So it appears that the U.S. Surgeon General agrees that
there is evidence by his statement that this epidemic is
something that we should do something about to protect not only
our children but families as a whole.
Dr. Tanski, you have devoted a significant portion of your
research to the effects of marketing tobacco products to youth.
Can you expand on how tobacco companies historically
targeted youth in advertising and why youth might be very
susceptible to tobacco marketing?
Dr. Tanski. Thank you for the question.
So yes, I've done quite a bit of research on marketing and,
specifically, media mentions and product placement.
So back in the '50s, '60s, '70s, even earlier, tobacco
companies would actually pay film companies for product
placement. So there's no such thing as a Marlboro truck, but
there was in the ``Superman'' movie, and the little creepy guys
from ``Men in Black,'' they smoked Marlboro cigarettes.
Those were product placements that were, in the first case,
paid for. There were things that were--documents that were
signed. But what that does when things are placed in media, it
creates this halo effect.
You associate cool characters with the product that they're
trying to sell, and movies and media are kind of a super peer,
and it's a life that you may not live, but it's out there and
it's very attractive.
So marketing and media placements are very effective at
changing social norms and moving people towards behavioral
willingness, which is a term we use to say when people--maybe
they thought they weren't going to do it, but now they've seen
it often enough or they've heard about it often enough, maybe
now ``I will try it.''
They try it because of the flavors or their friend giving
it to them. Then they get hooked, and now we've got a new
patient who is addicted to nicotine.
Mr. Cardenas. Most of what you described in those practices
by the tobacco industry is predigital media. What tactics do
they seem to be using today?
Dr. Tanski. They use a lot of similar tactics, and they
also hire social influencers. Influencers are--we are all
familiar with what they look like. They're the cool people and
they use the products, and then they're basically advertising
that product. There are supposed to be rules about them
disclosing that, they're getting funding for talking about or
promoting those products.
That doesn't always happen. But that is a place where we
know that the tobacco industry and the vaping industry has put
some of their effort to try to get these influencers to get
their product and the word about their products out.
Mr. Cardenas. OK.
Ms. Fuhrman, what types of marketing do you see or that you
think parents are having to contend with?
Ms. Fuhrman. Well, as I said, there's a lot of peer-to-peer
marketing now. The influencers who used to be paid, who may
still be paid or not, they have hundreds of thousands of views
on their vape tricks--#vapetricks. So there's a lot of that
peer-to-peer marketing.
And then, you know, concerts and events, you see a lot of
the placement there. And then, as I said before, homework
websites or apps and games that, you know, middle schoolers are
playing. So it's prevalent.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. I probably would get voted out of office,
but I don't have a problem with increasing the legal age to 25,
26 because, back in the day, we didn't realize as human beings
that the human brain is not fully developed until you're in
your mid-20s. And now that we have those stats, maybe we should
have policy follow the facts and the science.
Mr. Myers, President Trump made some kind of claim on this
matter. What's the status of that implementation with the
administration when it comes to actual actions?
Mr. Myers. Yes, on September 11th President Trump and the
White House announced that they were going to take action
within a few weeks to ban the sale of all flavor----
Mr. Cardenas. So that statement was more than a few weeks
ago?
Mr. Myers. September 11th. We can--I will do--about 5 weeks
ago now.
Mr. Cardenas. OK.
Mr. Myers. Within a few weeks of that they would announce a
policy to ban the sale of all flavored e-cigarettes that had
not been reviewed by the Food and Drug Administration.
Our hope is that they will move and do that as fully and as
completely as they said. But they haven't done it yet.
Mr. Cardenas. So the President said in a few weeks they
were going to come out with something, and it's been more than
a few weeks. So it's been at least 5 weeks, and they haven't
come out with something.
Does anybody at the table know when they are making a
harder claim of when that date's coming?
Mr. Myers. We don't believe that they've announced any hard
date.
Mr. Cardenas. Well, I personally believe that, once again,
we were duped by this President, because I actually ran into
somebody in my district who said, ``Oh, the President's going
to do something about it.'' I said, ``No, he just said
something.''
I personally doubt it. I hope for the best, but I
personally doubt it that there would be follow through. Yet, we
haven't seen that follow through.
Ms. FuhrmanS.
Ms. Fuhrman. One thing. The First Lady last week met with a
group of kids from the Truth Initiative to discuss the youth
vaping epidemic. So we are very hopeful that the First Lady and
the President will fulfill their promise and----
Mr. Cardenas. And she's trying to end bullying as well.
Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Now I would like to recognize the gentleman from Georgia,
the House of Representatives' only pharmacist----
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. For 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank all of you
for being here. Obviously, a very important subject--something
that we are all concerned with.
Dr. Siegel, you mentioned in your testimony that the supply
of e-liquids that the youth are vaping is transforming more to
the THC products, and can you elaborate on that some and tell
us what you see happening here?
Dr. Siegel. Yes. So I think what's happened is that youth
discovered that you can use THC in these devices, and once they
discovered that it became incredibly popular because you can't
tell that someone is using it.
If you're smoking pot, you can smell it. You can't do that
in the school and not get caught. But you can vape THC all you
want. The vapor just dissipates immediately and nobody can
tell.
In addition----
Mr. Carter. Are you--I never knew that. That's one of the
most disgusting smells, is the smell of marijuana, that I can
imagine. So thank goodness, at least we've gotten something
done about that.
Dr. Siegel. So, you know, because the vaping is heating the
liquid it's not--it's not burning it. So that's why it doesn't
create a smoke and you can't smell it.
The other thing is that you can't look at the e-liquid and
tell whether it's a nicotine e-liquid or a THC e-liquid. And so
that's why this is so--becoming so popular, because it's
discreet.
Nobody knows what they're doing and they're able to get a
high without actually having to risk anyone knowing that
they're using an illicit substance.
Mr. Carter. Unbelievable. Can I ask you, have you read this
bill? Have you reviewed this bill that--before us today?
Dr. Siegel. I have.
Mr. Carter. Do you--is it your understanding that the
proposed ban on flavored products would apply to just tobacco-
vaping products, or is it your understanding it would also
apply to CBD and to THC products?
Dr. Siegel. No, just nicotine-containing tobacco products.
Mr. Carter. That's exactly right. You know, it appals me. I
am going to do something I don't normally do, but I would like
to ask each one of you a yes or no question, OK, just like they
ask you.
First of all, I will start with you, Mr. Myers. Do you
think we had sufficient research on public safety before
allowing flavored e-cigarette products to enter the market?
Just yes or no. Do you think we had proper research?
Mr. Myers. No.
Ms. Fuhrman. No.
Dr. Tanski. Not yet. No.
Dr. Gardiner. No.
Dr. Siegel. No.
Mr. Carter. All five of you said no. And yet, here we are,
the Federal Government, whether it be the FDA--and by the way,
Dr. Scott Gottlieb wrote an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal
last week about the pot legalization makes vaping deadly, about
the--just what you were talking about, Dr. Siegel--Mr. Siegel--
about the fact that they were using THC and how this is killing
people--killing our youth.
And yet, here we are. In this bill--and the Federal
Government, we don't even mention THC in this bill. We mention
flavored tobacco, but we don't mention THC. We don't regulate
THC. I mean, it's amazing to me, and if you can't tell, this is
one of my pet peeves.
I am adamantly opposed to recreational use of marijuana and
just think it's awful. And here we have an example of where the
inaction of the FDA, of Congress, of not reclassifying
marijuana like we should so that research can be done on it.
Here we have a national crisis on our hands as a result of
that.
Any comments?
Dr. Siegel. I think that you make a great point, and I
think that, as Dr. Gottlieb wrote in that op-ed, we need to
reclassify marijuana so that it can be regulated and so that we
can prevent these tragic deaths from occurring.
I think part of the problem is that everyone is talking
about e-cigarettes--nicotine e-cigarettes--and because of that,
kids have completely lost sight of the fact that the THC
cartridges are the ones that are causing the deaths, and
because of that the public's perception is completely wrong.
If you ask the public in surveys, they say that they think
this is due to nicotine e-cigarettes, not THC. Very few
understand that THC is even involved. I think our
communications have to be a lot more specific and, rather than
THC vaping being the kind of elephant in the room that nobody
is talking about, I think we have to directly address that
problem.
Mr. Carter. Anyone else want to comment on that?
Mr. Myer.
Mr. Myers. I just think it's important to recognize we have
two separate issues. We have an e-cigarette youth epidemic----
Mr. Carter. And I am not denying that.
Mr. Myers [continuing]. And everybody, I think, agrees that
we need to do something about that issue. The THC issue and the
lung deaths bring greater urgency to have as few kids using any
of these products as possible, whatever their link is.
Mr. Carter. And I understand that. It just amazes me that
we in Congress continue to ignore the fact that we need to
reclassify marijuana--that Federal law says that it is against
the law, and States are approving it. Amazing.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Carter. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. I think it's important to restate again that THC
is prohibited by the Federal Government. It's not just out
there floating around that we need to get our arms around. It
already is a prohibited substance so----
Mr. Carter. It is prohibited, but there are States that are
legalizing it.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, I said earlier before you came back into
the room that we need enforcement of the laws that we have on
the books when it comes to THC.
But I think that it is a conflation to keep referring to it
as if it's the newest shiny object that we have to go after. I
think we need to in terms of enforcement.
But we have an epidemic on our hands, and people are dying.
So I appreciate the gentleman's questioning and his
participation today.
I now would like to recognize Dr. Ruiz from the Golden
State of our Nation, California.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you, Madam Chair.
As a physician, I am all too familiar with the devastation
caused by addiction to nicotine. I've seen firsthand a health
decline in individuals who tried tobacco as teenagers, got
addicted, and never quit.
And there's also reports in the Emergency Department--I am
an emergency physician--of new cases of cardiac pediatric
arrhythmias caused by nicotine overdose in much higher
frequency than before.
While in recent years smoking cigarettes among teens has
continued to decline to the lowest level in decades, on the
other hand, vaping rates have skyrocketed. OK.
In fact, according to a 2016 report by the Surgeon General,
there was a 900 percent increase in teens vaping from 2011 to
2015--900 percent increase.
Part of the problem is that many teens and adults think
that vaping is harmless, or because the vaping industry want to
take addicted cigarette smokers to become addicted vaping
smokers, basically increasing their profit share, then people
think that it's not as bad, right, and therefore it's safer--
i.e., safe to smoke, and I've spoken about this before.
But perhaps it may be slightly safer. It is certainly not
good for you to smoke, and it can still injure your lungs. It
can still cause cancer. There are carcinogens in vaping
products that can cause cancer, period.
You know, there's research done on many different types of
plant-based kind of properties, and some may have some
therapeutic properties, right. There has been research on
cannabis, and maybe there's some benefit, medically speaking.
But there's no benefit for nicotine.
I haven't found that research yet to say that nicotine is
good for any particular ailment, and it's definitely addictive.
It's addictive.
So it's devastating that so many young people and many of
their parents are operating under an assumption, oh, that these
products are harmless when, clearly, there are significant
health risks that we know about as well as many that we still
yet don't know about, OK, and it is our job to weigh the
potential benefits of vaping for people trying to quit nicotine
use against the cost, particularly as more teens are using and
getting addicted to these harmful products.
So, as we tackle this issue, we need to do everything in
our power to decrease access to these products to underage
teens. And, while it is certainly common for high school
students to get vaping and tobacco products from their friends,
many are buying them directly.
So we need to get tough on those who are selling to
underage teens. Clearly, the current punishment isn't enough to
stop retailers from selling to kids. So that means we need to
increase the penalties, and I am working on legislation that
would require the FDA to issue a fine for the first offense.
Right now it's just a slap-on-the-hand letter that you get,
and then for the fines that are already in place, we are
doubling them, and my bill will also require the CDC to conduct
much-needed research on the long-term effects of vaping.
So if e-cigarettes can be used in specific, narrow cases as
a tool to help smokers quit combustible cigarettes--quit
nicotine, period--it makes sense that we should ensure there is
perhaps some safe pathways for smokers to use these devices to
end their addiction to nicotine, not transfer the product for
their addiction.
So, like other policies that affect public health, we must
let the science be our guide. The first question I think we
need to answer is, do e-cigarettes really actually work as a
safe tool to encourage smoking and nicotine use cessation?
I will start with you, Mr. Myers.
Mr. Myers. The answer is the evidence is weak on that
point. More than 60 percent of all e-cigarette adult users also
continue to smoke cigarettes, and they don't reduce their risk
of disease at all.
Mr. Ruiz. In those cases, had there been any literature
showing that e-cigarettes can be better than a nicotine patch
or the nicotine gums for actually ending the use of nicotine?
Mr. Myers. There are one or two studies. There are also a
number of studies that many e-cigarettes actually decrease your
likelihood of success.
The failure of any e-cigarette manufacturer to submit
evidence to the FDA to be objectively evaluated is why we don't
know the answer and why, frankly, the failure of FDA to act is
hurting smokers as well as kids.
Mr. Ruiz. I've run out of time.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Pleasure to recognize the gentleman from Montana, Mr.
Gianforte.
Mr. Gianforte. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to all
the witnesses for being here today.
This is a very important topic that's getting an awful lot
of attention. I hear about it back home all the time.
The bill before this committee is supposed to deal with the
ongoing public health concerns about vaping, particularly among
children, and I am pleased that there's bipartisan agreement on
this committee that we don't want children vaping or smoking.
There's also bipartisan agreement on this committee that we
don't want vapers harmed by dangerous or adulterated substances
sold on the black market.
The proposed legislation we consider today, however, goes
beyond what has been a bipartisan agreement on this committee.
Those bipartisan measures included raising the legal age
for tobacco use to 21, addressing online sales--to prohibit
them--and ensuring a known and evaluated product is on sale. We
agree on that.
Small business owners I talk to back in Montana have told
me they're fine with raising the legal age to 21. They
supported a similar measure before our State legislature just
this year.
What concerns them is the effort to ban flavors. We've seen
efforts in a handful of places, including Los Angeles, New
York, and even Montana, to ban flavors.
Shop owners I have talked to worry that, even though
they're selling products from a known and evaluated supply
chain, they'll be put out of business.
Furthermore, I worry that efforts to ban flavors will lead
to stronger illegal markets with unhealthy, unregulated
products--exactly what we aim to avoid in the first place.
There's a balance we have to strike here as we responsibly
promote public health. I want to get the answers, and I want to
hear from the experts, and I want to rely on sound science to
make these decisions.
We were getting there with our bipartisan work and,
personally, I think we should get back to that bipartisan work
where we have agreement. I would like to direct my first
question to Dr. Siegel.
What evidence is there of cadmium and other heavy metals
being involved in the cases of severe vaping-related lung
injuries?
Dr. Siegel. Right now there is none. The most likely cause
of this outbreak is tainted THC cartridges that have been laced
with Vitamin E acetate, which is a new thickening agent that
just started to be used by the black-market producers late last
year. And either the oil itself or something in it is what's
likely causing this outbreak.
Mr. Gianforte. So--and are these products available in
shops that are down on Main Street?
Dr. Siegel. No. These are black-market products that can
only be obtained through illegal sources.
Mr. Gianforte. So you believe the challenges we've seen
with the cases that have been reported are not from legitimate
products that have been provided through a legal supply chain?
Dr. Siegel. I think there is absolutely no evidence that
that's the case. I think that these are coming from the black
market. They are counterfeit, bootleg, illicit products that
are causing this, not products that are sold in retail stores.
Mr. Gianforte. OK. So what--I heard some of your testimony
earlier, but just to put a bow on it, Dr. Siegel, what advice
would you have for this committee on ways to improve the
legislation we have in front of us?
Dr. Siegel. Well, I think that banning the flavors--I think
every aspect of the legislation is reasonable except for
banning the flavors.
I think you need to consider what's going to happen if you
ban e-cigarette flavors. The first thing that's going to happen
is you're going to be putting 16,000 small businesses out of
business. You have got to consider that effect.
The second thing that's going to happen is you're going to
be having--forcing 2 million ex-smokers who have already quit
smoking using these products to go back to--either go back to
smoking, which is a disaster, or to turn to an illicit black
market, which is also a disaster.
And the third thing you're doing is you are causing more
youth to turn to THC products. Those are the only ones that are
going to be available, and you are actually increasing the risk
of more cases of this outbreak.
But you're doing nothing to actually address respiratory
disease that is occurring. You're doing nothing to prevent
deaths. You're just putting a lot of people out of business and
forcing a lot of ex-smokers to go back to smoking.
Mr. Gianforte. OK, and thank you for that.
And, Madam Chair, I would just encourage this whole
committee, let's get the facts and make decisions based on
public health.
And with that, I yield back.
Dr. Tanski. May I make a comment in the last couple
seconds?
Oh, sorry.
So one of the things that you mentioned is that we need
known and evaluated e-cigarettes, and flavors have not been
proven safe, and I think that's something that we need to
really wrap our hands around.
Many of the flavors are known to be--to cause harm and
cause tissue damage and direct tissue damage to the lung, and
we have young people who are inhaling them directly into their
lungs over and over again every day, and we don't know what the
effects are.
So known and evaluated is not actually true, and tobacco
flavor is still available, yes.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you. The gentleman has yielded back.
I now would like to recognize the gentlewoman from
Illinois, Ms. Kelly, for her 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank all of you for
your testimony today.
In addition to my role in this committee, I am also chair
of the Congressional Black Caucus Health Braintrust. Because of
this, I am invested in working to improve the health of all
communities and reducing health disparities, especially for
vulnerable and minority populations.
Dr. Gardiner, in your testimony you mentioned the impact of
predatory marketing and how it disproportionately impacts
minority communities. We know that the majority of African-
American smokers are using menthol products.
Not only is the youth tobacco epidemic a crisis, but
predatory practices have led to severe disparities in health
outcomes, including increased rates of various morbidities such
as lung cancer and heart attacks among minority populations.
Can you expand upon the extent of these disparities and its
impact on communities of color?
Dr. Gardiner. Thank you very much for the question.
The impact is actually larger than just the statistics
show. We are talking about kids losing parents at an early age
in a poor community that doesn't necessarily have healthcare.
So you have to look at--when we talk about unintended
consequences, the unintended consequences of the tobacco
epidemic in the African-American community, frankly, has been
somewhat overwhelming and has been going on for years.
I want to encourage this committee. The last question about
the black market occurring there--in the 26 cities where this
has been done, there's no black market that has occurred.
And in terms of these folks going out of business, a great
study was done--we should share it with the committee--that was
done in Minneapolis where--what was the impact? Not one person
went out of business. Their sales went down--this is true--but
they didn't go out of business.
So all this discussion about we need to get the science
right and we need to get this right, I want to encourage that.
But I appreciate your question because we know the facts
disproportionately affect Black people. When you look behind
it, kids are losing parents at an early age. This is leading to
folks going to jail for other--the impact is overwhelming,
frankly.
Ms. Kelly. And I know the top 10 diseases that Americans
die from, African-Americans are number one, I believe, in eight
of the----
Dr. Gardiner. Eight of the 10. Right.
Ms. Kelly. Eight of the 10 diseases.
This is personal for me, too, because my son was a smoker
and he vapes. But he's not a kid. He's 35 years old. So we go
back and forth with him, and it has helped him, you know, stop
smoking. Even I bug him every day, every time I hear of
something going on.
But he differentiates between what he does and what he
believes these young folks are dying from or their throats are
being messed up, from what he uses. But I still don't get what
he's--I don't have the argument back for him.
Dr. Gardiner. The distinction that is trying to be made is
that vaping heats the oil or heats the something and--while
smoking a cigarette or smoking a joint burns it. and you're
going to have different chemical reactions. My suggestion to
the committee: They both have a specific chemical footprint,
and that footprint is different, and that does not necessarily
mean that one is healthier than the other.
There is still science to be done. I want to encourage if
we are going to really look into the science to look into when
you--you said it best--when you inhale flavors over a long
period of time, what is that going to mean for your lungs?
And then the latest data out on the deaths is not so much
the concentrated juice. There's actually the scarring that's
been identified in the lung, and that--now, that be other
causes.
And one thing we know is that flavors are aldehydes, and
aldehydes are irritants, and that may be leading to the
scarring. So----
Ms. Kelly. And I don't think he uses flavors but--and, you
know, he says to me, ``Do you want me to go back to smoking?,''
and I said, ``No, but you want to slow down----''
Dr. Gardiner. Do you know--do you know he doesn't use
flavors?
Ms. Kelly. Yes, I don't--yes, because he's done it at my
house, so I should be able to smell it, right? Or no?
Dr. Gardiner. No.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Kelly. I can't? Oh.
Mr. Myers. One of the--one of the diabolical----
Ms. Kelly. I mean, he's not going to lie. He doesn't have
to lie to me.
Mr. Myers. One of the diabolical genius parts about this is
they've created a mechanism so that you can't smell it on their
breath or on their clothes, which is why kids are able to do it
in school and not get caught. I mean, it is really troubling.
You know, the other issue we don't talk about with menthol
that is really important is that menthol is a starter product
for kids all across the country.
More than 50 percent of kids who become addicted to
cigarette smoking start using menthol products. So if we care
about kids all across the board, that's part of the issue.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back.
I now would like to recognize the gentleman from Florida,
Mr. Bilirakis, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate it. I
really appreciate you holding this hearing. It's so very
important and timely, and of course, we have to get it right.
But let me be clear: Under no circumstances should youth
have access to tobacco products, period. That's the way I feel,
and I think most people feel the same way.
So, while this committee and the FDA are working to address
the real epidemic of youth use of tobacco products and lung
injuries linked to illicit black-market vaping products, we
should also be sure we are not creating unintended consequences
that will lead to a future public health crisis or exacerbate
the current one.
I remain committed, of course, to working with the Chair
and all my committee members on both sides of the aisle.
Dr. Siegel, CDC recently highlighted data showing that
cigarette smoking has fallen to historic lows. That's been
mentioned in this committee.
This is a positive advancement for public health, and we
should be providing current adult smokers with more tools. Not
necessarily e-cigarettes but, you know, that's why we are
having this hearing--to get the facts from the experts.
So, but we don't--we want to provide them more tools if
they're less harmful to quit and transition to low-risk
products.
Congress is no stranger to unintended consequences,
unfortunately. Could this bill make it harder for current adult
users of traditional combustible tobacco products to transition
to a modified-risk tobacco product?
And then let me ask--first of all, can you answer that
question, please, sir?
Dr. Siegel. Yes. This bill, if enacted as it is with the
flavored e-cigarette ban, is going to wreak havoc with smokers.
It's going to make it incredibly difficult for them to quit
smoking by using flavored e-liquids, and it's also going to
force many ex-smokers who have already quit to go back to
smoking.
We know that e-cigarettes are the most effective smoking
cessation tool using nicotine. They outperform nicotine patches
by double.
So the New England Journal of Medicine published a clinical
trial--published earlier this year--which showed that switching
to vaping e-cigarettes is twice as effective as a nicotine
patch in helping smokers quit.
So this is currently the best option we have for smokers to
quit. Two million of them have quit using flavored e-
cigarettes. Why would we want to take that away from them?
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes, but we don't want--yes, I agree with
that. But, again, I don't want my kids or, you know, youth
vaping.
I understand, and we heard it today--I've heard it several
times over the last few years that, what is it, the nicotine--
the amount of nicotine is equivalent to--in one e-cigarette or
JUUL, what have you--a pack of cigarettes. I mean, that's
terrible, and then our kids are being addicted, and I just
don't see--I think that there's going to be a rise in the
future, and we've got to do something about it.
But I want to do the right thing. I don't want to just pass
a bill and then--and have the unintended consequences or pass a
bill and we pat ourselves on the back and say we've solved the
problem when we really didn't.
So Dr. Siegel, with recent reports of patients, especially
youth, being hospitalized with lung injuries associated with
vaping illicit black-market THC and flavored nicotine home
brews, does this bill address this public health concern?
And I think I know the answer to that. You have testified.
But if you want to elaborate, that would be good.
Dr. Siegel. It doesn't. It doesn't. This is going to outlaw
the legal sale by retail stores of electronic cigarettes--of
flavored products. These are not the products that are causing
the terrible deaths and severe respiratory failure that we are
seeing.
And, in my opinion, it's actually going to make the problem
worse because I think when youth are no longer--no longer have
access to flavored e-liquids, what the suppliers are going to
start supplying is going to be THC because that's what they can
get their hands on.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. Well, thank you very much, and I look
forward to working with you all.
I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Dr. Siegel, I would like to ask you a quick question. Are
you representing the Public Health School at Boston University
in your testimony today?
Dr. Siegel. Well, I am a professor at Boston University.
Ms. Eshoo. I know you are. But are you representing the
Public Health School?
Dr. Siegel. Well, when professors----
Ms. Eshoo. Are you here as an individual?
Dr. Siegel. No. I mean, when professors speak they're not
representing the school they come from. They're representing
their own opinions.
Ms. Eshoo. Oh, OK. Well, that's important for Members to
understand. Thank you.
Now I would like to recognize Ms. Barragan from California
for her 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Dr. Siegel, you said something earlier that was to the
effect that flavors are not the problem. Is that accurate? Is
that accurate testimony?
Dr. Siegel. Specifically what I said is flavors aren't
causing the harm.
Ms. Barragan. OK. So I just wanted to clarify----
Dr. Siegel. It's not that they're not a problem. I mean,
they're--you know, of course they're the problem.
Ms. Barragan. OK. OK. I have a question that's going to
follow. So I think the issue here is, do you believe that
flavors are hooking children so that they then become dependent
on nicotine? Do you believe the flavor hooks them?
Dr. Siegel. No.
Ms. Barragan. You don't?
Dr. Siegel. I think it's the nicotine.
Ms. Barragan. Do you think that the flavor attracts our
young people to then vape?
Dr. Siegel. Of course.
Ms. Barragan. OK. So there--so at least you admit that
there is some attraction, that the flavor is what gets them
started?
Dr. Siegel. The flavor--I mean, first of all, you have to
understand there is no such thing as a nonflavored e-cigarette.
There is no such thing.
Ms. Barragan. OK. So it's--let's talk about the fruity
flavors. Do you think that kids see the fruity flavors and,
because of that they say, ``I am going to vape''?
Dr. Siegel. Yes, I think that makes it attractive.
Absolutely.
Ms. Barragan. OK. So I just want to make sure we are on the
same page because you kind of sounded like ``Well, the flavors
aren't a problem, why are we going to get rid of them?''
Yet, we know the Surgeon General in 2015 actually warned
that tobacco companies were known to use fruity flavors to hook
children.
And there was a survey that was done by the FDA and the
National Institutes of Health of young people and they asked
them why they did it. More than 80 percent of the children
marked the answer that says ``It comes in flavors I like.''
So I think that, for me, at least, it's clarified because
it was sounding to me like you didn't make a connection at all
on why there would even be a discussion about why we wouldn't
have the flavors anymore.
I also was a little shocked when I was doing some of the
research to see that the FDA actually warned about this problem
and this issue in 2015, and they drafted a ban. So you had made
some--you had provided some testimony that the FDA has to come
up with regulations.
Well, in 2015 the FDA actually came up with a draft ban on
the flavors. What ensued after that draft ban was more than a
hundred tobacco industry lobbyists and small business advocates
met with the White House over the course of 46 days, and when
you took a look at the number of health--public health
advocates, it was, like, 7. And it's pretty remarkable then to
see when the actual rule came out, the ban on flavors was gone.
So this isn't the first time the FDA has looked at it, and
then we have seen some result. Unfortunately, that it got
stripped out and we know the power of advocates and lobbyists
and the industry. You don't have to look too far than the
tobacco industry.
Mr. Gardiner, you--Dr. Gardiner--you brought up an issue
that's very near and dear to me. I represent a district that
includes Compton and Watts--it's a district that's almost 88
percent Latino and African-American--and many of my colleagues
have talked about it already, is the use of menthol cigarettes.
And we've already spoken a lot about it. But do you have
any idea what the impact on smoking rates for children of color
might be if the menthol ban from this legislation goes into
effect?
Dr. Gardiner. We actually do. There's some great research
done at the--in 2011 by Levi and Company that shows that, if
just 30 percent of the people that are using these cigarettes--
just 30 percent, not many more--if 30 percent of the people
stopped using these cigarettes, half a million lives would be
saved, and as it relates to African Americans, over a quarter
million of lives would be saved. I think that says it all. I
can't say it any better.
Ms. Barragan. Great. Thank you, Doctor.
Dr. Gardiner. Can I say something about the----
Ms. Barragan. Sure. Please do.
Dr. Gardiner [continuing]. The menthol--the flavor? In
2016, it was the deeming regulations were put forward by the
FDA, bringing all the products under their roof. There were 19
pages on flavors and why flavors should be restricted, and
menthol was part of that.
Those--maybe it was 16 pages, or 19 pages--they were all
redlined by the Office on Management and Budget. That's why the
deeming regulations--so they tried.
Ms. Barragan. Right.
Dr. Gardiner. So there's been some tries. So we have--this
is another shot at--another bite at the apple, as we----
Ms. Barragan. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Myers, with about 10 seconds left, I was pretty
outraged to hear about the advertising on our youth. What
impact would this legislation have on advertising for vaping
products and e-cigarettes?
Mr. Myers. It would have a dramatic impact, and it would
curtail much of the kind of advertising that the industry has
used to make these products so appealing and so attractive to
youth and made them undo the denormalization we did with
cigarette smoking.
Ms. Barragan. Great. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back.
Mr. Rush of Illinois is now recognized for his 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Madam Chairman, and to all
the witnesses it's been a very informative hearing that we've
had today.
Dr. Gardiner, I am just kind of astounded by some of your
conclusions. I think that you're right on point, and there is a
familiar saying--you might have heard it--that when the White
community gets a cold, the Black community gets pneumonia, and
I've found that to be relatively true.
And I understand the whole issue about menthol-flavored
cigarettes and how they have adversely affected the African-
American community.
Now, the marketing has been predatory in relation to the
African-American community. But maybe I am old school. I just
have not seen the issue of vaping to be as widespread or to be
one of the alarm factors as it relates to the African-American
youth.
That's not to say that it doesn't exist. I just have not
seen it rise up in my district, which is minority African-
American.
When you consider that most of the issues in my district
center around gun violence, that vaping is not really--it is
not really moved to the forefront.
But because I am ignorant of it, I ask will you to kind of
explain to me what is the state of the preponderance of
incidence of vaping that's occurring in my district and other
districts?
Dr. Gardiner. It's a great question. It's right on--it's
right on point. I like to look at it this way. In the Black
community, folks are doing marijuana. Folks are doing little
cigars and cigarillos, and smokers are smoking menthol
cigarettes.
But just like what happened with the skateboarding--
remember, 40 years ago Black folks weren't doing no
skateboards. Today, they skateboard. OK. So this is happening
as we speak here.
This comes up all the time, because I travel around the
country, and you ask--you go to the high school, kids are doing
it and kids are then doing it with their little cigars, too.
So it's happening. The data right now shows that it's less
than in White communities. Like the cold and pneumonia thing,
that's correct.
But that is changing. I love the skateboard analogy. We
have--unfortunately, we have anecdotal evidence from Arkansas,
from Georgia, and parts of Florida where there are
concentrations of Blacks, particularly in Georgia around some
of the HBCUs, where there's some disproportionately high rates
of e-cigarette use.
Things are changing. I think this bill would help to maybe
nip that in the bud. Excellent question. Excellent.
Mr. Rush. [Inaudible.]
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Rush. All my questions have been asked and answered
already. So I do yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. I now recognize the gentlewoman from Illinois,
Ms. Schakowsky, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Schakowsky. As always, I thank the chairwoman for
allowing me to participate in this hearing. Though I am not a
member of this subcommittee, I am very concerned about this.
It appears that at least the first reported death was from
my State of Illinois, and subsequently we are talking about
1,300 people hospitalized and 26 deaths because of e-
cigarettes, and sometimes cause not exactly known.
And we know that last year almost 5 million middle and high
school students indicated that they were using some form of
cigarettes, including e-cigarettes, and I think that number is
on the rise. I think Dr. Gardiner could talk to us about that.
But I wanted to focus right at this moment on Ms. Fuhrman,
and I want to thank you for your very personal testimony and
your personal experience and the willingness that you have to
share it.
If you could talk to JUUL's CEO right now or the CEO of any
of the other e-cigarettes brands, what would you tell them
about the impact of their product on your family and so many
others?
Ms. Fuhrman. I would--you know, the impact is devastating.
It was difficult on our family. However, there are so many
families across America who are experiencing so much worse.
Not even mentioning the lung illness, which is a cause and,
you know, comes out of this, there are families who are dealing
with kids who are so severely addicted they have explosive
anger issues.
They're breaking things. They're throwing things. They're
getting kicked out of school. They're losing scholarships.
They're being kicked off the sports team. I mean, it's a huge
issue, and there is no--as Dr. Tanski said, there is no FDA-
approved cessation method.
So, even if you take these flavors away--and I do want to
add that we are leaving tobacco flavor, the bill leaves tobacco
flavor on the market. So as Dr. Siegel said, smokers who are
using flavors don't have to go to the black market. They can
use their tobacco vape.
It's not like we are banning these vapes. But something
really has to be done, and the flavors--taking those off the
market is the first step.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
Mr. Myers, as chair of the Subcommittee on Consumer
Protection and Commerce, I am very focused on leveraging the
Federal Trade Commission's authority to protect consumers from
deceptive business practices.
How do you believe the FTC could better investigate Big
Vape and Big Tobacco?
Mr. Myers. I think the FTC's Division of Advertising
Practices could do much more. There is no question that the
manner in which these products are being marketed is misleading
kids into believing that these products are much safer than
they are and, in many cases, safe.
They're also misleading kids into believing that they don't
have nicotine, with regard to that. So that if the FTC uses its
authority over false and deceptive advertising, I think it
could do--be much more aggressive in preventing these companies
from misleading our youth. It's what they did with tobacco 30
years ago. They need to be at least as vigilant, if not more
so.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
Dr. Gardiner, the e-cigarettes initially were ``quit
smoking tobacco, and this will--this will be a help.'' But I
what I want to know, are we actually developing more smokers by
creating a nicotine addiction and making it all right?
I mean, I worry that these young people who may be vaping
now for the rest of their lives may be smoking tobacco
cigarettes.
Dr. Gardiner. That's an excellent question. I think it goes
something like this: There are more people getting on the on
ramp than are getting off the off ramp, and that is a problem
that we are facing with the electronic cigarette situation
here.
Let me just say something about the cessation thing. It's
true the New England Journal of Medicine published a great
article that showed that using e-cigarettes allows people to
quit. That's true.
There's been somewhere in the neighborhood of about 35 of
these type of studies done. Somewhere in the neighborhood of 27
have shown that they don't really work that well.
There's some that work, and think of it this way. If you
regulated the nicotine in it, if you got rid of the flavors, if
you decreased the dose, if you couldn't buy it over the line,
if there weren't 15,000 flavors available, too, then maybe it
could actually serve as a cessation device.
Right now it's like--it's like a candy bar, OK, and you can
buy it in any number of different flavors. So, as it's
currently done, I think we have a problem. More people are
getting on than they are getting off.
Dr. Siegel. Can I--can I just say, I think since you
mentioned the 37 other studies, I think it's only fair if you
tell the congresswoman how many of those 37 studies were
clinical trials.
Ms. Schakowsky. My time has expired, and so I yield back.
Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, and thank you for joining us. Ms.
Schakowsky, thank you for joining us, and the excellent
questions.
What I would like to do now is to thank each one of the
witnesses on behalf of all of the members of the subcommittee.
We've been, let's see, 3 hours--3 hours. So thank you for
your patience. Thank you for the substance and the content of
your testimony.
This is a real challenge for our country, and these are
issues that really an individual can't address all by
themselves. This really calls out--I think it cries out for
strong public Federal policy, and that's what the American
people deserve.
We know how we made progress relative to tobacco and
addiction, and now we are right back to addiction again. So I
think that we have a roadmap that we can follow.
And I look forward to working with all the members of the
subcommittee and, again, I thank you for--you know, for being
with us today, and the work that brought you to the table. It
is--it's nothing short of extraordinary.
I would like to place in the record the following
documents: a letter of support from the American Dental
Association, coalition letter from the Campaign for Tobacco-
Free Kids, et al., a letter of support from the National
Medical Association, letter of support from the National
Association of County and City Health Officials, statement of
support from the American Cancer Society and Cancer Action
Network, statement of support from CVS Health, and a statement
of support from the American Osteopathic Association.
So I would like to ask for unanimous consent.
Mr. Burgess. Without objection.
Ms. Eshoo. I thank the ranking member.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Eshoo. And with that----
Mr. Burgess. Madam, may I be recognized for a unanimous
consent request?
Ms. Eshoo. Certainly.
Mr. Burgess. So I have unanimous consent to put into the
record a letter from the Texas Food and Fuel Association, and I
would also like to submit for the record the data I had on the
taxes collected by the Center for Tobacco.
Ms. Eshoo. So ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Eshoo. I want to remind Members that, pursuant to the
committee rules, they have 10 business days to submit
additional questions for the record to be answered by the
witnesses who have appeared today, and I ask each witness to
respond promptly to any such questions that you may receive.
So, at this time, with gratitude again to the witnesses,
the audience that stayed for the duration of this important
lengthy hearing, this subcommittee is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:37 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Chairwoman Eshoo, thank you for holding today's legislative
hearing on the Reversing the Youth Tobacco Epidemic Act. As I
have stated previously, the use of e-cigarettes by minors is an
epidemic that is impacting thousands of families across the
United States. I am glad that this committee and the Trump
administration are working to find solutions that will curtail
youth access to these products.
The upward trend in adolescent use of e-cigarettes in just
the past 3 years is alarming. The 2018 National Youth Tobacco
Survey showed that about 20.8 percent of youth reported using
e-cigarettes. This is a big jump from 11.3 percent reporting
use just 3 years ago. This trend is playing out in States
across the country. In my home State of Oregon, a recent county
health survey of 11th graders in Deschutes County found that
the number of students vaping increased from 19 percent in 2016
to 29 percent in 2018.
The use of these products by children is particularly
troubling since we know that most e-cigarettes contain
nicotine--an addictive substance that the CDC has warned may
harm brain development and increase risk for future addiction
to other drugs. Some recent studies have also found that those
adolescents who use e-cigarettes are more likely to try regular
cigarettes than children who have not used e-cigarettes
previously.
While I look forward to working together in a bipartisan
manner to address the issue of youth access to e-cigarettes, I
want to express my disappointment that representatives from the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) are not here to testify
today. I understand that the Majority feels that the Agency's
participation in today's hearing is not necessary given their
testimony last month at the Oversight Subcommittee hearing.
That hearing, however, was not intended to address and receive
feedback on the various provisions in the legislation before us
today. Very few, if any, questions were directed to the FDA
about the legislation before us today. Moreover, much of the
testimony at last month's hearing was related to the ongoing
epidemic of vaping-related illnesses. It doesn't appear that
anything in the legislation we are considering today will help
prevent vaping-related illnesses like those that have been
reported.
I appreciate that staff was able to verbally receive FDA's
comments on the bill last night. The Agency is actively working
to provide thorough feedback on this legislation and stated
that additional written technical assistance would be
forthcoming to address some of the more complex aspects of the
bill. It is important that we receive this written feedback
before moving forward to ensure the committee is taking actions
that will curb youth access and use, promote the continued
cessation of smoking by adults, and will not lead to unintended
consequences.
I also want to make sure in our conversations about the
youth vaping epidemic, we draw distinctions between the factors
that may be contributing to youth access and use of e-
cigarettes and those factors that have been causing the recent
outbreak in vaping-associated lung illnesses. While no
definitive cause has been established at this time, most of the
reported illnesses appear to be linked to counterfeit products,
containing THC, and purchased on the black market. Some of
these black-market products have been found to contain
contaminants including pesticides and others that, when heated,
produce gases that can directly injure the lungs. For this
reason, I want to echo my earlier request for a full
investigation into counterfeit THC cartridges, as well as the
vaping and cannabis black markets.
Again, I thank the chairwoman for holding a hearing on this
important topic and I yield back.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
