- A PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY: STATE EFFORTS TO CURB THE OPIOID CRISIS

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY: STATE EFFORTS TO CURB THE OPIOID CRISIS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 14, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-87

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
47-788 PDF           WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              GREG WALDEN, Oregon
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York             FRED UPTON, Michigan
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           PETE OLSON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California           DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico            H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PAUL TONKO, New York                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York, Vice     BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chair                            BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa                 LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts                    MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California            RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California                TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DARREN SOTO, Florida
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
------

Professional Staff

JEFFREY C. CARROLL, Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Deputy Staff Director
MIKE BLOOMQUIST, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
Chair
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,                 Ranking Member
Massachusetts, Vice Chair        MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
RAUL RUIZ, California                DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
PAUL TONKO, New York                 JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York           GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado, opening statement.................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Brett Guthrie, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, prepared statement.............................   124

Witnesses

Jennifer Smith, Secretary, Pennsylvania Department of Drug and
Alcohol Programs...............................................    13
Prepared statement...........................................    16
Answers to submitted questions...............................   217
Monica Bharel, M.D., Commissioner, Massachusetts Department of
Public Health..................................................    30
Prepared statement...........................................    32
Answers to submitted questions...............................   228
Christina Mullins, Commissioner, Bureau of Behavioral Health,
West Virginia Department of Health and Human Resources.........    39
Prepared statement...........................................    41
Answers to submitted questions...............................   243
Kody Kinsley, Deputy Secretary, Behavioral Health and
Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, North Carolina
Department of Health and Human Services........................    55
Prepared statement...........................................    57
Answers to submitted questions...............................   255
Nicole Alexander-Scott, M.D., Director, Rhode Island Department
of Health......................................................    84
Prepared statement...........................................    86
Answers to submitted questions...............................   265

Submitted Material

Letter of January 10, 2020, by Arlene Gonzalez-Sanchez,
Commissioner, New York State Office of Addiction Services and
Supports, to Ms. DeGette and Mr. Guthrie, submitted by Ms.
Clarke.........................................................   125
Letter of January 14, 2020, from Rep Frank Pallone, Jr, et al.,
to Uttam Dhillon, Acting Administrator, Drug Enforcement
Administration, submitted by Ms. DeGette.......................   130
Letter of January 14, 2020, by Rep Frank Pallone, Jr, et al., to
Mr. Chad Wolf, Acting Secretary, Department of Homeland
Security, submitted by Ms. DeGette.............................   136
Letter of January 14, 2020, by Rep Frank Pallone, Jr, et al., to
Mr. Alex M. Azar II, Secretary, Department of Health and Human
Services, submitted by Ms. DeGette.............................   142
Letter of January 14, 2020, by Chris Fox, Executive Director,
Voices for Non-Opioid Choices, to Ms. DeGette and Mr. Guthrie,
submitted by Mr. McKinley......................................   148
Article of ``Association of Medicaid Expansion With Opioid
Overdose Mortality in the United States'', JAMA Network, from
Nicole Kravitz-Wirtz, Ph.D., et al., submitted by Mr. Ruiz.....   150
Article of ``The Geographic Distribution of Fentanyl-Involved
Overdose Deaths in Cook County, Illinois'', Research and
Practice, from Elizabeth D. Nesoff, Ph.D., et al., submitted by
Ms. Schakowsky.................................................   161
Article of January 28, 2019, ``Separate, Unequal and
Overlooked'', by Joseph P. Williams, Senior Editor, U.S. News
and World Report, submitted by Ms. Schakowsky..................   169
Letter of October 31, 2019, by Ron DeSantis, Governor, State of
Florida, to Mr. Pallone and Mr. Walden, submitted by Ms.
DeGette \1\
Letter of October 8, 2019, by Eric J. Holcomb, Governor, State of
Indiana, to Mr. Pallone and Mr. Walden, submitted by Ms.
DeGette........................................................   179
Letter of October 17, 2019, by Matthew G. Bevin, Governor, State
of Kentucky, to the Committee of Energy and Commerce, submitted
by Ms. DeGette \2\
Letter of October 18, 2019, by Jessica M. Pollard, PhD.,
Director, Maine Department of Health and Human Services,
Substance Abuse and Mental Health, to Mr. Pallone, et al.,
submitted by Ms. Degette.......................................   189
Letter of October 21, 2019, by Larry Hogan, Governor, State of
Maryland, to Mr. Pallone and Mr. Walden, submitted by Ms.
DeGette \3\
Letter of October 18, 2019, by Marylou Sudders, Secretary,
Commonwealth State of Massachusetts, Executive Office of Health
and Human Services, to Mr. Pallone and Mr. Walden, submitted by
Ms. DeGette \4\
Letter of October 30, 2019, by Michelle Lujan Grisham, Governor,
State of New Mexico, to Mr. Pallone, et al., submitted by Ms.
DeGette \5\
Letter of November 7, 2019, by Arlene Gonzalez-Sanchez,
Commissioner, State of New York, Office of Addiction Services
and Supports, to Mr. Pallone, et al., submitted by Ms. DeGette
\6\
Statement from the State of North Carolina, to Committee of
Energy and Commerce, et al., submitted by Ms. DeGette \7\
Letter of October 24, 2019, by Mike DeWine, Governor, State of
Ohio, to the Committee of Energy and Commerce, submitted by Ms.
DeGette \8\

----------
\1\The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF02/
20200114/110367/HHRG-116-IF02-20200114-SD011.pdf.
\2\The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF02/
20200114/110367/HHRG-116-IF02-20200114-SD013.pdf.

\3\The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF02/
20200114/110367/HHRG-116-IF02-20200114-SD015.pdf.
\4\The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF02/
20200114/110367/HHRG-116-IF02-20200114-SD016.pdf.

\5\The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF02/
20200114/110367/HHRG-116-IF02-20200114-SD017.pdf.

\6\The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF02/
20200114/110367/HHRG-116-IF02-20200114-SD018.pdf.

\7\The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF02/
20200114/110367/HHRG-116-IF02-20200114-SD019.pdf.

\8\The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF02/
20200114/110367/HHRG-116-IF02-20200114-SD020.pdf.
Letter of October 18, 2019, by Kate Brown, Governor, State of
Oregon, to Mr. Pallone, et al., submitted by Ms. DeGette \9\
Letter of October 18, 2019, by Tom Wolf, Governor, Commonwealth
State of Pennsylvania, to Mr. Pallone, et al., submitted by Ms.
DeGette \10\
Letter of October 18, 2019, from State of Rhode Island and
Providence Plantations, by Gina M. Raimondo, Governor, to Mr.
Pallone, et al., submitted by Ms. DeGette \11\
Letter of October 30, 2019, by Bill Lee, Governor, State of
Tennessee, to Mr. Pallone, et al., submitted by Ms. DeGette....   202
Letter of October 18, 2019, State of West Virginia, Department of
Health and Human Resources, Bureau for Behavioral Health, by
Christina R. Mullins, Commissioner, to Mr. Pallone, submitted
by Ms. DeGette \12\
Letter of October 16, 2019, by Tony Evers, Governor, State of
Wisconsin, to Mr. Pallone, et al., submitted by Ms. DeGette....   204

----------
\9\The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF02/
20200114/110367/HHRG-116-IF02-20200114-SD021.pdf.

\10\The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF02/
20200114/110367/HHRG-116-IF02-20200114-SD022.pdf.

\11\The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF02/
20200114/110367/HHRG-116-IF02-20200114-SD023.pdf.
\12\The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF02/
20200114/110367/HHRG-116-IF02-20200114-SD025.pdf.

A PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY: STATE EFFORTS TO CURB THE OPIOID CRISIS

----------

TUESDAY, JANUARY 14, 2020

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:09 a.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Diana DeGette (chair of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives DeGette, Schakowsky,
Kennedy, Ruiz, Kuster, Castor, Sarbanes, Tonko, Clarke, Pallone
(ex officio), Guthrie (subcommittee ranking member), Burgess,
McKinley, Griffith, Brooks, Mullin, and Walden (ex officio).
Also Present: Representative Latta.
Staff present: Mohammad Aslami, Counsel; Joe Banez,
Professional Staff Member; Kevin Barstow, Chief Oversight
Counsel; Jeffrey C. Carroll, Staff Director; Tiffany Guarascio,
Deputy Staff Director; Zach Kahan, Outreach and Member Service
Coordinator; Chris Knauer, Oversight Staff Director; Kevin
McAloon, Professional Staff Member; Lino Pena-Martinez, Staff
Assistant; Emily Ryan, GAO Detailee; Benjamin Tabor, Policy
Analyst; Rebecca Tomilchik, Staff Assistant; C. J. Young, Press
Secretary; Jennifer Barblan, Minority Chief Counsel, Oversight
and Investigations; Mike Bloomquist, Minority Staff Director;
Tyler Greenberg, Minority Staff Assistant; Peter Kielty,
Minority General Counsel; and Alan Slobodin, Minority Chief
Investigative Counsel, Oversight and Investigations.
Ms. DeGette. The Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations hearing will now come to order.
The Chair now recognizes herself for purposes of an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DeGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Today, the subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations is
holding a hearing entitled ``A Public Health Emergency: State
Efforts to Curb the Opioid Crisis.`` The purpose of today's
hearing is to examine states' efforts and successes in
addressing the opioid epidemic, as well as opportunities for
future federal support.
And just to let everybody know, Dr. Alexander Scott, the
reason why we are getting started a little late, the plane was
delayed. But now the doctor is on her way. And so, we will
swear in the witnesses when we get to that point. And if we
have to do that one later, we will.
The Chair will now recognize herself for an opening
statement.
As I said, today, the Committee continues its bipartisan
efforts to combat the opioid crisis.
As we know, the country is in the midst of an epidemic
unlike any in recent history. According to the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, from 1999 to 2017, nearly
400,000 people died from opioid overdoses. In 2017, more than
two-thirds of drug overdose deaths involved opioids.
The crisis has continued to evolve, and the challenges that
we face have continued to evolve along with it. The first wave
of this crisis began in the 1990s with the over-prescribing of
pain medication. The second wave began in 2010, with increased
deaths due to heroin overdoses.
Like the first two waves, the third wave--marked by the
rise of synthetic opioids like fentanyl--has shattered lives,
traumatized families, and devastated communities.
Now, unfortunately, it looks like a fourth wave of the
crisis may have already arrived. The opioid epidemic has fueled
a huge increase in methamphetamine use. In 2018, there were
more than twice as many deaths involving meth as in 2015, and
meth is increasingly turning up in overdose deaths and drug
busts across the country.
Given the complexity of the epidemic and its ability to
evolve, states, federal government agencies, and Congress must
remain vigilant.
To that end, this Committee has taken numerous steps to
investigate the origins and drivers of the crisis so we can
learn from it as we try to get ahead of the next wave. Through
committee hearings, we have heard from states, federal
agencies, and drug distributors about their roles and
responses.
The groundbreaking work by the Committee uncovered some of
the failures that led to where we are today. And looking
forward, we're focused on identifying ways to stem this crisis
and bring relief to the millions of Americans who are
suffering.
As part of that effort, our committee has worked across the
aisle to pass bipartisan legislation designed to give states
the tools and resources needed to help those impacted by
substance use disorder.
These legislative packages provided states with billions of
dollars in federal funding to assist in the opioid response,
treatment, and recovery efforts.
And we have made some progress. CDC provisional data
indicates that drug overdose deaths have fallen for the first
time in decades. While this downward shift is welcome news, the
crisis is far from over, and we must continue to look for ways
to bring relief to struggling cities and towns throughout the
country.
Today's hearing continues those bipartisan efforts. Day in
and day out, states are on the front lines of this epidemic
that kills more than 130 Americans every day. As the epidemic
now enters a new decade, states face the challenge of keeping
pace with an evolving crisis.
In keeping with this Committee's bipartisan commitment to
finding solutions to this national emergency, last September,
the Committee sent letters to 16 states requesting information
about on-the-ground efforts to curb the epidemic.
The Committee has sought to understand whether federal
funds actually reached the hardest hit communities, how states
used the funds provided by Congress, and what strategies have
proven to be successful.
Today, we have five key states that have each received a
letter from this Committee. These states represent the first
line of defense against the crisis, and they each play pivotal
roles in treatment, recovery, and prevention efforts.
I want to thank all of you for coming today.
The states compose a large swath of the country. While
their demographics, geography, and challenges vary, each has
felt the effect of this epidemic, and they all rank among the
states with some of the highest overdose death rates. As such,
each of them has taken a number of steps to curb the epidemic.
For example, Pennsylvania was able to distribute nearly
13,000 naloxone kits free of charge in 2018 and again in 2019,
thanks to a combination of state and federal funding.
North Carolina provided treatment to 12,000 uninsured
persons, thanks again to federal funding.
And Rhode Island has been able to expand medication-
assisted treatment in the prison system, resulting in a 62
percent reduction in overdose deaths.
These are just a few examples of how the states are
fighting this epidemic and helping communities.
As Congress considers future action to address this crisis,
all of our witnesses today provide important insights on how
federal funds are being used to combat the epidemic, what
efforts are proving successful, and what we need to do for
further improvement.
I thank the witnesses for their service, for being here to
testify on behalf of their states. And I look forward to
hearing how we can all continue to work together to find the
desperately needed solutions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. DeGette follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Diana DeGette

Today, the Committee continues its bipartisan efforts to
combat the opioid crisis.
The country is in the midst of an epidemic unlike any in
recent history. According to the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, from 1999 to 2017, nearly 400,000 people died
from opioid overdoses. In 2017, more than two-thirds of drug
overdose deaths involved opioids.
This crisis has continued to evolve, and the challenges we
face have evolved along with it. The ``first wave'' of this
crisis began in the 1990s with the over-prescribing of pain
medication. The ``second wave'' began in 2010 with increased
deaths due to heroin overdoses.
Like the first two waves, the ``third wave''--marked by the
rise of synthetic opioids such as fentanyl--has shattered
lives, traumatized families, and devastated communities.
Now a ``fourth wave'' of the crisis may have already
arrived. The opioid epidemic has fueled a huge spike in
methamphetamine use. In 2018, there were more than twice as
many deaths involving meth as in 2015, and meth is increasingly
turning up in overdose deaths and drug busts across the
country.
Given the complexity of the epidemic and its ability to
evolve, states, federal government agencies, and Congress must
remain vigilant.
To that end, this Committee has taken numerous steps to
investigate the origins and drivers of the crisis so we can
learn from it as we try to get ahead of the next wave. Through
Committee hearings, we have heard from states, federal
agencies, and drug distributors about their roles and
responses.
That groundbreaking work by the Committee uncovered some of
the failures that led to where we are today. Looking forward,
the Committee is focused on identifying ways to stem this
crisis and bring relief to the millions of Americans who are
suffering.
As part of that effort, our Committee has worked across the
aisle to pass bipartisan legislation designed to give states
the tools and resources needed to help those impacted by
substance use disorder.
These legislative packages provided states billions of
dollars in federal funding to assist in opioid response,
treatment, and recovery efforts.
And we have made some progress. CDC provisional data
indicates drug overdose deaths have fallen for the first time
in decades. While this downward shift is welcome news, this
crisis is far from over--and we must continue to look for ways
to bring relief to struggling cities and towns throughout the
country.
Today's hearing continues those bipartisan efforts. Day in
and day out, states are on the front lines of this epidemic
that kills more than 130 Americans every day. As the epidemic
now enters a new decade, states face the challenge of keeping
pace with an evolving crisis.
In keeping with this Committee's bipartisan commitment to
finding solutions to this national emergency, last September,
our Committee sent letters to 16 states requesting information
about on-the-ground efforts to curb the epidemic.
The Committee has sought to understand whether federal
funds reached the hardest hit communities, how states used
funds provided by Congress, and what strategies have proven
successful.
Today, we have before us five key states that each received
a letter from this Committee. These states represent the first
line of defense against the crisis and each play pivotal roles
in treatment, recovery, and prevention efforts.
These states compose a large swath of the country. While
their demographics, geography, and challenges vary, each has
felt the impact of the epidemic, and they all rank among the
states with some of the highest overdose death rates.
As such, each of these states has taken a number of steps
to curb the epidemic.
For example, Pennsylvania was able to distribute nearly
13,000 naloxone kits free of charge in 2018 and again in 2019,
thanks to a combination of federal and state funding.
North Carolina has provided treatment to 12,000 uninsured
persons, thanks again to federal funding.
And Rhode Island has been able to expand medication-
assisted treatment in the prison system, resulting in a 62
percent reduction in overdose deaths.
These are just a few examples of how states are fighting
this epidemic and helping communities.
As Congress considers future action to address this crisis,
the witnesses today provide important insights on how federal
funds are being used to combat the epidemic, what efforts are
proving successful, and what areas need additional improvement.
I thank the witnesses for their service, and for being here
today to testify on behalf of their states. I look forward to
discussing how we can all work together to find solutions to
resolving this public health emergency.

And with that, I am pleased to yield for purposes of an
opening statement, Mr. Guthrie, 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRETT GUTHRIE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEATH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. Thank you, Chair DeGette, for
holding this important hearing on state responses to the opioid
crisis.
Our local communities are suffering. On average, 130
Americans die every day from an opioid overdose. And opioids
were involved in 47,600 overdose deaths in 2017, which
accounted for 67.8 percent of all drug overdose deaths.
In Kentucky, there were 1,160 reported opioid-involved
deaths in 2017.
The Energy and Commerce Committee has been steadfast in its
efforts to help combat the opioid epidemic, with both
investigations and legislation. Whether it was the Committee's
investigations into the prescription drug and heroin epidemic,
opioid distributors, patient brokering, or the major opioid
manufacturers, we have continued to ask questions and get
answers for the American public.
When it comes to legislation, this Committee led the way on
the passage of the 21st Century Cures Act, the Comprehensive
Addiction Recovery Act, and the SUPPORT for Patients and
Communities Act. I was proud to work on all three of these
comprehensive laws, which are designed to combat the opioid
crisis through prevention, advancing treatment and recovery
initiatives, protecting communities, and bolstering our efforts
to fight synthetic drugs like fentanyl.
This hearing is a critical opportunity for us to check in
with the states, those that are on the front lines battling the
nation's opioid epidemic, to see how the federal money Congress
provided has been allocated and spent, what successes they are
having in combating the epidemic, but also what challenges they
are still facing, and what additional authorities and resources
could be helpful.
The good news is that each state testifying before us today
has seen a decrease in their overdose death rates. Federal
assistance is making a difference. In addition, states are
creating and implementing innovative approaches to combating
the epidemic.
Examples include expanding efforts to connect people to
treatment through EMS and emergency departments, expanding and
increasing the availability of naloxone and medication-assisted
treatment, increasing non-emergency transportation options to
treatment for those in rural areas, and expanding neonatal
abstinence syndrome treatment programs for pregnant and
parenting mothers, and efforts to address workforce issues
through the initiatives such as a loan repayment program, and
broadening the curriculum in training in medical schools.
This hearing is a great platform for the states to share
how the federal funding has made a difference in what programs
are working. Not only is it helpful for us in Congress as we
continue to conduct oversight and legislate, but also to the
states as they learn from each other about new ideas or
innovative approaches that can be implemented.
While progress is being made and some of the overdose death
rates are declining, the Director of National Institute of Drug
Abuse, Dr. Nora Volkow, declared this week that this country
still has not controlled its addiction problems. Some states
are continuing to see a high number of first responder
emergency department encounters due to an overdose.
In addition, states are still facing many challenges,
including a lack of qualified workforce and infrastructure,
varying requirements and time length in different federal
funding streams, and restrictions on funding, including that
some funds have been restricted to opioids, impeding
flexibility to address emerging challenges.
In addition to the continuing threat of opioids, states are
starting to see more instances of polysubstance abuse and
polysubstance overdose deaths, with states specifically citing
stimulants such as methamphetamine and cocaine as a growing
concern.
Nationally, since last year methamphetamine, has been
detected in more deaths than opioids such as oxycodone and
hydrocodone. In 14 of the 35 states that report overdose deaths
to the Federal Government on a monthly basis, methamphetamine
is involved in more deaths than fentanyl.
The threats are evolving and the fight is not over. We want
to continue partnering with state and local entities to combat
the opioid epidemic as well as emerging threats, which is why
it is important not to let our foot off the gas. Congress needs
to continue supporting the states, and this Committee needs to
continue conducting oversight of these critical issues.
I want to thank all the witnesses for being here today. I
look forward to hearing from you about all your successes we
have had in combating our nation's opioid epidemic, but also
how the threat has changed, what challenges remain, and what
more we in Congress can do with our partners, you, in this
fight.
And I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Guthrie follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Brett Guthrie

Thank you, Chair DeGette, for holding this important
hearing on state responses to the opioid crisis.
Our local communities are suffering. On average, 130
Americans die every day from an opioid overdose and opioids
were involved in 47,600 overdose deaths in 2017, which
accounted for 67.8 percent of all drug overdose deaths. In
Kentucky, there were 1,160 reported opioid-involved deaths in
2017.
The Energy and Commerce Committee has been steadfast in its
efforts to help combat the opioid epidemic, with both
investigations and legislation. Whether it was the Committee's
investigations into the prescription drug and heroin epidemic,
opioid distributors, patient brokering, or the major opioid
manufacturers--we have continued to ask questions and get
answers for the American public.
When it comes to legislation, this Committee led the way on
passage of the 21st Century Cures Act, the Comprehensive
Addiction and Recovery Act, and the SUPPORT for Patients and
Communities Act. I was proud to work on all three of these
comprehensive laws, which are designed to combat the opioid
crisis through prevention, advancing treatment and recovery
initiatives, protecting communities, and bolstering our efforts
to fight synthetic drugs, like fentanyl.
This hearing is a critical opportunity for us to check in
with states-those that are on the front lines battling the
nation's opioid epidemic-to see how the federal money Congress
provided is being allocated and spent, what successes they are
having in combatting the epidemic, but also what challenges
they are still facing, and what additional authorities and
resources could be helpful.
The good news is that each state testifying before us today
has seen a decrease in their overdose death rates. Federal
assistance is making a difference. In addition, states are
creating and implementing innovative approaches to combatting
the epidemic. Examples include: expanding efforts to connect
people to treatment through EMS and emergency departments;
expanding and increasing the availability of naloxone and
medication-assisted treatment; increasing nonemergency
transportation options to treatment for those in rural areas;
expanding neonatal abstinence syndrome treatment programs for
pregnant and parenting mothers; and efforts to address
workforce issues through initiatives such as loan repayment
programs and broadening the curriculum and training in medical
schools.
This hearing is a great platform for the states to share
how the federal funding has made a difference and what programs
are working. Not only is it helpful for us in Congress as we
continue to conduct oversight and legislate, but also, to the
states as they learn from each other about new ideas or
innovative approaches that can be implemented.
While progress is being made and some of the overdose death
rates are declining, the Director of the National Institute of
Drug Abuse, Dr. Nora Volkow, declared this week that this
country still has not controlled its addiction problems. Some
states are continuing to see a high number of first responders
and emergency department encounters due to an overdose. In
addition, states are still facing many challenges, including a
lack of a qualified workforce and infrastructure, varying
requirements and timelines in different federal funding
streams, and restrictions on funding, including that some funds
have been restricted to opioids, impeding flexibility to
address emerging challenges.
In addition to the continued threat of opioids, states are
starting to see more instances of polysubstance use and
polysubstance overdose deaths, with some states specifically
citing stimulants such as methamphetamine and cocaine as a
growing concern. Nationally, since late last year,
methamphetamine has been detected in more deaths than opioids
such as oxycodone and hydrocodone. In 14 of the 35 states that
report overdose deaths to the Federal Government on a monthly
basis, methamphetamine is involved in more deaths than
fentanyl.
The threats are evolving, and this fight is not over. We
want to continue partnering with state and local entities to
combat the opioid epidemic, as well as other emerging threats,
which is why it's important to not let our foot off the gas.
Congress needs to continue supporting the states and this
Committee needs to continue conducting oversight of these
critical issues.
I want to thank all of the witnesses for being here today.
I look forward to hearing from all of you about successes we
have had in combatting our nation's opioid epidemic, but also
how the threat has changed, what challenges remain, and what
more we, in Congress, can do to be partners in this fight.

Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the chairman of the full committee
Mr. Pallone for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairwoman DeGette.
Today's hearing continues the Committee's ongoing,
bipartisan efforts to combat the opioid epidemic. Whether
fueled by prescription drugs or illicit synthetic opioids, this
epidemic is a constantly evolving threat, putting people,
families, and communities at grave risk.
This is not a crisis that we can solve overnight; and it
requires ongoing federal and state attention.
And states are on the front lines of this national
emergency, providing much of the support for those in need.
They are our eyes and ears on what is occurring on the ground.
And that is why this hearing is so important.
It is the latest in a series of hearings we have held on
the opioid crisis. In the past, we have heard from several
states, including Rhode Island, about on-the-ground efforts to
curb the epidemic. Last year, we also heard from federal
agencies about the urgent threat posed by fentanyl.
The Committee also conducted a 2-year bipartisan
investigation into opioid distribution practices.
The Energy and Commerce Committee has also been at the
forefront of passing critical legislation that gives our
federal, state, and local partners the tools and resources
required to succeed in this fight, including three pieces of
legislation--all bipartisan--that were designed to give states
funding and support.
In 2016, the Committee passed, and President Obama signed
into law, the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act,
``CARA,`` and the 21st Century Cures Act; of course I have to
mention Chairwoman DeGette's major role in that. These two laws
authorized over $1 billion in state-specific grants and helped
states bolster evidence-based treatment, prevention, and
recovery efforts.
In 2018, the SUPPORT Act was passed and signed into law
reauthorizing, opioid-specific funding, increasing opioid abuse
and overdose prevention training, and improving coordination
and quality of care.
And then, in December, the House passed H.R. 3, the Lower
Drug Costs Now Act, which included $10 billion in additional
opioid funding.
This Committee is committed to making sure communities are
receiving the support they need to get relief from this crisis.
And that is why we sent letters to 16 states last year
requesting information on how federal funds have assisted
states in this fight, and what additional help Congress can
provide as we consider future action.
We wanted to know how states are using federal opioid
funds, what is being done to ensure those funds reach the
hardest-hit regions, and how funds have helped transform state
treatment systems. Based on the responses, we heard that the
federal money has allowed states to take important and
innovative approaches to addressing opioid addiction.
One of the most effective tools that are available to the
states is Medicaid. Several states elaborated on the important
role of Medicaid in stemming this crisis in their responses to
the Committee. A study released last week found that about
8,000 lives have been saved from an opioid overdose thanks to
the expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.
We also want to hear about any emerging trends in substance
abuse that they are seeing. For example, several states
informed the Committee that while they continue to fight the
opioid epidemic, they are also seeing an increase in
methamphetamine and polysubstance use. And this, of course, is
an alarming trend that threatens to become the next epidemic.
And I want to hear how Congress can help states confront this
unfolding danger.
So, again, I thank the witnesses. I look forward to hearing
about their efforts.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for continuing your efforts on
this. I don't think anybody wants my time. If not, I am going
to yield back. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Today's hearing continues the Committee's ongoing,
bipartisan efforts to combat the opioid epidemic. Whether
fueled by prescription drugs or illicit synthetic opioids, this
epidemic is a constantly evolving threat--putting people,
families, and communities at grave risk.
This is not a crisis that we can resolve overnight, and it
requires ongoing federal and state attention.
States are on the front lines of this national emergency,
providing much of the support for those in need. They are our
eyes and ears on what is occurring on the ground, and that's
why this hearing is so important.
It is the latest in a series of hearings we've held on the
opioid crisis. In the past, we've heard from several states,
including Rhode Island, about on-the-ground efforts to curb the
epidemic. Last year, we also heard from federal agencies about
the urgent threat posed by fentanyl.
The Committee also conducted a two-year bipartisan
investigation into opioid distribution practices.
The Energy and Commerce Committee has also been at the
forefront of passing critical legislation that gives our
federal, state, and local partners the tools and resources
required to succeed in this fight, including three pieces of
legislation--all bipartisan--designed to give states funding
and support.
In 2016, this Committee passed, and President Obama signed
into law, the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act
(``CARA'') and the 21st Century Cures Act. These two laws
authorized over $1 billion in state-specific grants, and helped
states bolster evidence-based treatment, prevention, and
recovery efforts.
In 2018, the SUPPORT Act was passed and signed into law
reauthorizing opioid-specific funding, increasing opioid abuse
and overdose prevention training, and improving coordination
and quality of care.
And then, in December, the House passed H.R. 3, the Lower
Drug Costs Now Act, which included $10 billion in additional
opioid funding.
This Committee is committed to making sure communities are
receiving the support they need to get relief from this crisis.
And that's why we sent letters to 16 states last year
requesting information on how federal funds have assisted
states in this fight, and what additional help Congress can
provide as we consider future action.
We wanted to know how states are using federal opioid
funds, what is being done to ensure those funds reach the
hardest hit regions, and how funds have helped transform state
treatment systems.
Based on the responses, we heard that the federal money has
allowed states to take important and innovative approaches to
addressing opioid addiction.
And one of the most effective tools that are available to
the states is Medicaid. Several states elaborated on the
important role of Medicaid in stemming this crisis in their
responses to the Committee. A study released last week found
that about 8,000 lives have been saved from an opioid overdose
thanks to the expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care
Act.
We also want to hear about any emerging trends in substance
abuse that they are seeing. For example, several states
informed the Committee that while they continue to fight the
opioid epidemic, they are also seeing an increase in
methamphetamine and polysubstance use.
This is an alarming trend that threatens to become the next
epidemic, and I want to hear how Congress can help states
confront this unfolding danger.
I thank the witnesses for being here today, and look
forward to hearing about their states' efforts in combating
this crisis.
I yield back.

Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the full
committee Mr. Walden for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Good morning, Madam Chair. And thanks for
holding this critically important hearing.
As I was preparing for this, I noticed that in my biggest
country in my district, they have a yellow alert up for
opioids. They have two overdoses on average per week in Jackson
Country, Oregon. They had seven last week--fortunately no
deaths.
The first responders administered naloxone injections in
the county five times last week, and they believe that it is
probably heroin with a pretty heavy dose of fentanyl in it. So,
the deadly scourge continues.
For many years, as you have heard, the Energy and Commerce
Committee, and this subcommittee, in particular, has been at
the forefront of congressional efforts to address the opioid
crisis and substance use disorder issue. And we have done a lot
of work on prevention. We know we have a lot more work to do.
This Committee has held hearings, and conducted
investigations on opioids and the opioid epidemic for nearly
two decades, bringing in Purdue Pharma to testify in 2001 about
the abuse of OxyContin, through our bipartisan investigations
last Congress into the rise of fentanyl, opioid manufacturing,
opioid distribution, and the substance use disorder treatment
industry.
These early hearings helped inform our legislative work,
including the Comprehensive Addiction Recovery Act, or
``CARA,`` the 21st Century Cures Act which authorized the
state-targeted response to the opioid crisis grants, and
billions more in federal appropriations to produce programs
that fight, treat, and stop substance abuse and support access
to mental health services. These efforts culminated in the
signing into law of the SUPPORT Act in the last Congress.
In my home state of Oregon, we have seen the results, a 3.1
percent reduction in opioid deaths based on the most recent
statistics from the CDC.
I am pleased we have continued to work together in this
space. It is important, including by continuing our work on
fentanyl and, with this important hearing today, examining how
the states are utilizing the funding and the authorities
provided by Congress.
But there is so much more we could do together. Earlier
this year Energy and Commerce Republicans published a Request
for Information about the substance use disorder treatment
industry. The RFI was built off the patient brokering
investigation that we conducted in the last Congress. And this
investigation brought us to the question of what is good
treatment and, conversely, what is bad treatment, which is the
central question posed by our RFI.
With the billions of dollars we are sending into the states
for prevention and treatment, we need answers. Just yesterday,
Energy and Commerce Republicans sent a letter to the three
opioid manufacturers we began investigating together last
Congress, asking them to complete production to our request. It
is critical we fully understand the causes of the opioid
epidemic in order to ensure that our solutions are the right
ones. And it is important that they answer our questions.
We should also hold a comprehensive series of hearings to
conduct oversight and implementation of the SUPPORT Act. For
example, relevant to today's hearing, the SUPPORT Act included
the INFO Act, sponsored by Mr. Latta, which calls for the
creation of a public and easily acceptable electronic dashboard
linking to all the nationwide efforts and strategies to combat
the opioid crisis. The INFO Act was designed to meet a specific
need of local stakeholders who were telling us that despite
Congress having devoted record numbers of federal dollars to
combat the opioid crisis, they had trouble finding what
resources were available and where they were--certainly an
issue we heard a lot about from Mr. McKinley and others.
This provision is absolutely critical in helping those on
the front lines of the opioid crisis. And I am really concerned
about its slow implementation.
In addition to oversight of the SUPPORT Act, we also need
to begin working on the next wave of legislation to address not
only the opioid crisis but also substance use disorders more
broadly. Most urgently, we need to reauthorize the fentanyl
ban, which is set to expire in a matter of weeks. Reauthorizing
the prohibitions on various forms of fentanyl has broad
bipartisan support. We should do that expeditiously.
And today's hearing is an important step, though, to
understand the impact that federal grant dollars are having on
states. I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here and
being part of this equation. And I look forward to hearing from
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Madam Chair, thank you for holding this critically
important hearing
For many years, the Energy and Commerce Committee--and this
Subcommittee in particular--has been at the forefront of the
Congressional effort to address the opioid crisis, as well as
substance use disorder prevention and treatment more broadly.
This Committee has held hearings and conducted
investigations on opioids and the opioid epidemic for nearly
two decades--from bringing in Purdue Pharma to testify in 2001
about the abuse of OxyContin, to our bipartisan investigations
last Congress into the rise of fentanyl, opioid manufacturing,
opioid distribution, and the substance use disorder treatment
industry.
These early hearings helped inform our legislative work
including the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act, or
CARA, the 21st Century Cures Act, which authorized the State
Targeted Response to the Opioid Crisis grants, and billions
more in federal appropriations to boost programs that fight,
treat, and stop substance abuse, and support access to mental
health services. These efforts culminated in the signing into
law of the SUPPORT Act last Congress. In my home state of
Oregon, we've seen the results, with a 3.1% reduction in opioid
deaths based on the most recent statistics from the CDC.
I am pleased that we have continued to work together in
this space, including by continuing our work on fentanyl, and
with this important hearing today examining how the states are
utilizing the funding and authorities provided by the Congress.
But there is so much more that we could do together.
Earlier this year, Energy and Commerce Republicans published a
Request for Information about the substance use disorder
treatment industry. This RFI built off of the patient brokering
investigation we conducted together last Congress. This
investigation brought us to the question of what is good
treatment--and conversely, what is bad treatment--which is the
central question posed by the RFI. With the billions of dollars
we are sending into the states for prevention and treatment, we
need answers.
Just yesterday, Energy and Commerce Republicans sent a
letter to the three opioid manufacturers we began investigating
together last Congress, asking them to complete production to
our requests. It is critical that we fully understand the
causes of the opioid epidemic in order to ensure that our
solutions are the right ones.
We should also hold a comprehensive series of hearings to
conduct oversight of the implementation of the SUPPORT Act. For
example, relevant to today's hearing, the SUPPORT Act included
the INFO Act, sponsored by Mr. Latta, which calls for the
creation of a public and easily accessible electronic dashboard
linking to all of the nationwide efforts and strategies to
combat the opioid crisis. The INFO Act was designed to meet a
specific need of local stakeholders who were telling us that
despite Congress having devoted record numbers of federal
dollars to combat the opioid crisis, they had trouble finding
what resources were available and where they were. This
provision is absolutely critical in helping those on the front
lines of the opioid crisis and I am concerned about its slow
implementation.
In addition to oversight of the SUPPORT Act, we also need
to begin working on the next wave of legislation to address not
only the opioid crisis, but substance use disorders more
broadly. Most urgently, we need to reauthorize the fentanyl
ban, which is set to expire in a matter of weeks. Reauthorizing
the prohibitions on various forms of fentanyl has broad
bipartisan support and we should be able to do this
expeditiously.
Today's hearing is an important step to understanding the
impact that the federal grant dollars are having in the states,
and I thank all of our witnesses for being a part of this
conversation. I look forward to hearing not only about the
successes in each of your states--and there are many--but also
understanding the barriers that still exist, either in federal
law or in the conditions of the federal dollars, and the ideas
you have for how the Congress can continue to assist as you and
your communities fight this battle on the front lines.

Mr. Walden.With that, I would yield the balance of my time
to the ranking member on the Subcommittee on Health, Mr.
Burgess.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the gentleman for yielding. And, of
course, it was under your leadership of the full committee that
last year we worked in a bipartisan manner to produce
legislation that ultimately was signed into law by President
Trump in October of 2018. And it really began in this
subcommittee with a member day that we did. And we heard from
over 50 members, of not just the Committee but throughout the
Congress, the problems they had in their districts and the
ideas that they were bringing to the table that we could, we
could work on.
The SUPPORT Act was written to help advance treatment and
recovery initiatives for those affected by opiate habituation.
I, too, want to thank our witnesses for being here today.
You will be helpful in understanding the challenges that we
face continuing this fight against opioid addiction and death,
while ensuring that patients can manage their pain. It is
important for Congress to have hearings like this where we can
ensure the effectiveness of legislative efforts and identify
gaps where they exist.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Walden. And, Madam Chair, I would yield back with the
notation that some of us have the other subcommittee upstairs,
so we will be coming and going between hearings.
So, thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. Thank you.
I ask for unanimous consent that the Members' written
opening statements to be made part of the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
I now want to introduce the witnesses for today's hearing.
Ms. Jennifer Smith, who is the Secretary of the Department
of Drug and Alcohol Programs, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Welcome.
Dr. Monica Bharel. Dr. Bharel is the Commissioner,
Department of Public Health, Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Dr. Nicole Alexander-Scott. I think they beamed you here
from the airport, so congratulations. She is the Director of
the Department of Health, the State of Rhode Island.
Ms. Christina Mullins, Commissioner, Bureau of Behavioral
Health, Department of Health and Human Services, State of West
Virginia. Welcome.
And Mr. Kody Kinsley, Deputy Secretary, Behavioral Health
and Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, Department of
Health and Human Services, State of North Carolina. Welcome to
you.
Thanks to all of you for appearing in front of the
subcommittee today. As you are aware, the Committee is holding
an investigative hearing. And when we do so, we have the
practice of taking all of our testimony under oath.
Do any of you have an objection to testifying under oath
today?
Let the record reflect the witnesses responded no.
The Chair then advises you that under the rules of the
House and the rules of the Committee, you are entitled to be
accompanied by counsel. Does any of you wish to be accompanied
by counsel?
Let the record reflect the witnesses have responded no.
So, if you would, would you please rise and raise your
right hand so that you may be sworn in.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Ms. DeGette. You may be seated.
Let the record reflect that the witnesses responded
affirmatively. And all of you are now under oath and subject to
the penalties set forth in Title 18, Section 1001 of the U.S.
Code.
The Chair now recognizes our witnesses for 5-minute
summaries of their written statements. In front of each of you,
there is a microphone, a timer, and a series of lights. The
timer counts down your time, and the red light turns on at the
end when your 5 minutes have come to an end.
And so now, Ms. Smith, I am pleased to recognize you for 5
minutes.

TESTIMONY OF JENNIFER SMITH, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF DRUG AND
ALCOHOL PROGRAMS, COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA; MONICA BHAREL,
M.D., COMMISSIONER, DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH, COMMONWEALTH
OF MASSACHUSETTS; CHRISTINA MULLINS, COMMISSIONER, BUREAU OF
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN RESOURCES,
STATE OF WEST VIRGINIA; AND KODY KINSLEY, DEPUTY SECRETARY,
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DISABILITIES, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, STATE OF
NORTH CAROLINA; AND NICOLE ALEXANDER-SCOTT, M.D., DIRECTOR OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, STATE OF RHODE ISLAND

TESTIMONY OF JENNIFER SMITH

Ms. Smith. Thank you, Chairman, Ranking Member, and members
of the subcommittee. My name is Jennifer Smith, and I am
Secretary for Pennsylvania's Department of Drug and Alcohol
Programs, as well as a member of the National Association of
State Alcohol and Drug Abuse Directors.
Thanks for your interest in how Pennsylvania is using the
state opioid response funding to promote prevention, treatment
and recovery efforts.
Acting as the state's single authority for substance use
disorder services, my department coordinates efforts with
federal and local entities, as well as across state
departments. Our ability to orchestrate resources and direct
policy during the opioid crisis has been a crucial component in
effecting long-term changes and maximizing resources available
to our communities.
We are grateful for these federal grant opportunities at a
time of hopelessness and despair for families and communities.
I can say with certainty that this funding has saved lives.
With a population of 12.8 million, Pennsylvania is the
fifth most populous state, consisting of 67 counties that range
from large urban centers to rural counties. Our state is among
those hardest hit by the nation's prescription opioid and
heroin epidemic. In 2014, we lost more than 2,700
Pennsylvanians to drug-related overdoses, which equates to
seven deaths per day.
By 2017, that number had tragically doubled to more than
5,400 lives lost, or 13 deaths per day. As statistics rose year
over year, our primary focus became simple: keep Pennsylvanians
alive.
That meant infusing naloxone into communities, implementing
warm hand-off protocols to transition overdose survivors from
emergency departments into treatment, expanding access to
evidence-based practices such as medication-assisted treatment,
and launching a 24/7 Get Help Now Hotline.
I am proud to say that in 2018, Pennsylvania reported an 18
percent decrease in overdose deaths.
While it's not clear whether this promising trend will
continue in 2019, it is clear that the more than $230 million
in federal funding that the state has received is making a
tremendous impact. We have used these resources and the
momentum of the crisis to collaborate, modernize, and innovate,
using dollars across the full continuum.
In prevention, we reduced opioid prescribing by 25 percent,
developed prescribing guidelines, incorporated addiction
content into medical school curriculums, and established over
800 prescription drug take-back boxes across the state.
In treatment, we established a naloxone standing order, and
distributed over 55,000 free kits, developed a warm hand-off
model that's been used over 6,400 times, expanded treatment
capacity through 45 Centers of Excellence and eight hub-and-
spoke programs, increased our DEA X waiver physicians to over
4,000, offered loan repayment, awarded 3. million to expand
supports for pregnant women and women with children, and
expanded MAT into our state correctional institutions.
In terms of recovery support, we awarded 2.1 million to
expand community recovery services, developed a Web site to
share recovery stories and spread hope, and awarded grant funds
to build recovery housing support.
In the coming months, Pennsylvania will be focused on
integrating quality into our four major goals of reducing
stigma, intensifying primary prevention, strengthening the
treatment system, and empowering sustained recovery. Without
sustainable federal funding, the collaboration necessary to
accomplish these goals will be greatly diminished.
Although we've made significant strides, our work is not
done, and we need your help. In terms of funding, we need
flexibility to address the system, not a substance.
We need consistency with funding vehicles and reporting
mechanisms where possible, such as utilizing the block grants,
as well as continued use of the single state authority as the
central coordinating entity; sustainability to allow for the
continued relationship fostering, stigma reduction, and
integration of services.
Moving an entire system of care is a monumental task. We
are working diligently and we've made staggering progress. But
please don't give up. The long-term success of our programs and
communities depends on sustained funding and support.
Just two other quick considerations would be to address
stigma in a more uniform way across the nation through language
and action, and to seek ways to address the dire workforce
shortage challenges experienced by every state.
Thank you again for allowing me to share what Pennsylvania
is doing and our suggestions for moving the system forward. I
look forward to answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Smith follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[
Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much. And don't worry, we don't
intend to give up.
Dr. Bharel, you are recognized now for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF MONICA BHAREL, M.D.

Dr. Bharel. Chair DeGette, Ranking Member Guthrie, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
speak with you today.
In my role as Commissioner of Public Health and as the
state's chief physician, I am dedicated to addressing the
opioid epidemic in Massachusetts. I commend Congress and our
federal agencies for funding those working tirelessly on the
front lines every day.
Our data indicates that in Massachusetts our public health-
centered approach to the opioid epidemic is working. I'm
heartened to let you know that from 2016 to 2018, our opioid
overdose deaths have declined by four percent. We continue to
focus on prevention and education, naloxone availability,
medication treatment, behavioral health counseling, and
sustained recovery support.
We have made progress, but it's still unacceptable that
nearly 2,000 individuals in Massachusetts die from this
preventable disease each year.
In my clinical practice, I cared for people with this
disease. And I will never forget that behind these numbers,
which we will talk about today, are real people, their
families, and their communities.
Since 2016, we have been awarded approximately $159 million
in federal funding specific to opioid use disorder prevention,
treatment, and recovery. And we've allocated approximately $111
million of those funds.
We've used federal funding to support expansion and
enhancement of our treatment system through a data-driven
approach that targets high-risk, high-need priority populations
and disparities, with a goal of reducing opiate overdoses and
deaths.
In 2015, Governor Baker appointed a working group who
developed an action plan emphasizing data to identify hotspots
and deploy appropriate resources. Additionally, a law referred
to as the Public Health Data Warehouse enabled us to link 28
different data sets across state government and establish a
public-private partnership to maximize the use of data to study
this major public health crisis. This is unprecedented in
Massachusetts.
So, our approach started with data analytics and research,
allowing us to gain a deep understanding of who is dying, where
and why, so that new investments could be strategic and
impactful. Our data led us to quickly focus our efforts on five
key populations that we saw were still suffering from overdoses
and overdose deaths:
Persons released from incarceration, communities of color,
persons with co-occurring mental health and substance use
disorders, people with a history of homelessness, and mothers
with opioid use disorder.
Our data showed, in fact, that the rate of opioid overdose
death for mothers with opioid use disorder was more than 300
times higher for mothers without it. In response, one of the
programs we set up was Moms Do Care, which is currently 100
percent federally funded. This innovative approach built a
seamless, integrated continuum of care for pregnant and
parenting women with substance use disorder.
It provides access to medication, prenatal and postnatal
care, maternity and pediatric care, behavioral health
counseling, and peer-to-peer recovery supports, and so much
more.
With federal funds, we are also supporting and expanding
our prescription drug monitoring program, allowing all
Massachusetts prescribers enhanced access to this vital system.
While we have had many successes, we do see opportunities
for federal assistance so we can continue to make progress.
This includes funding that is flexible. When funding
requirements restrict us to addressing only opiates, states are
limited in our flexibility to address the changing landscape of
substance use disorder. Flexibility would enable us to address
other substances connected to this epidemic, such as cocaine
and methamphetamine.
Additionally, there are currently federal barriers to
medication-assisted treatment such as methadone and
buprenorphine, and these barriers should be removed. This would
allow medication-assisted treatment to be regulated more
similarly to other chronic disease treatments, and available in
traditional healthcare settings to increase access and reduce
stigma.
In conclusion, we are grateful to Congress for the
commitment to address this opioid epidemic. Much of our
progress can be attributed to federal funding we receive. And I
encourage Congress to continue these critical funding efforts.
This crisis did not build overnight; and it will take time to
reverse.
Addiction is not a choice; it is a disease. And with the
continued support of our federal partners, we will build a
solution to tackle this epidemic in Massachusetts and this
country.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Bharel follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much.
Ms. Mullins, you are recognized now for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF CHRISTINA MULLINS

Ms. Mullins. Thank you. Chairwoman DeGette, Ranking
Members, and members of the subcommittee, my name is Christina
Mullins, and I am the Commissioner for the Bureau for
Behavioral Health within the West Virginia Department of Health
and Human Resources. And I also serve as a member of the
National Association of State Alcohol and Drug Abuse Directors.
First, I want to thank you for your commitment to address
this crisis. Without the resources provided by this Committee,
West Virginia would be in a considerably worse position.
I also want to thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
importance of the initiatives in West Virginia to address the
opioid crisis and the impact of the funding made available
through this Committee to promote prevention, treatment, and
recovery for substance use disorder.
It is no secret that West Virginia has been Ground Zero of
the opioid crisis, with the highest overdose rate in the
nation. There are award-winning documentaries and Pulitzer-
Prize winning stories that describe what happened to our state.
And I am sure these efforts have played a significant role in
bringing much-needed resources to West Virginia. But today, I
would like to tell you a different story.
With your help, West Virginia has reduced overdose deaths
for the first time in over ten years. Both opioid prescriptions
and opioid doses have decreased by about 50 percent, while
naloxone prescribing has increased by 208 percent.
Additionally, we have distributed over 10,000 doses of naloxone
to local health departments.
Treatment capacity has been transformed. The number of
people that can prescribe buprenorphine has more than doubled,
from 243 to 584 since 2017. We have increased the number of
residential treatment beds from 197 to 740. And our records
indicate that those beds are about 85 percent full at about all
times.
Additionally, nearly all birthing facilities have access to
integrated substance use disorder treatment in their community.
This extraordinary increase in infrastructure and capacity is
the result of a significant financial investment of federal,
state, and drug settlement funds.
West Virginia leveraged federal investment to increase
outpatient treatment capacity, increase the number and quality
of its workforce, distribute lifesaving naloxone, conduct
rigorous provider education on opioid prescribing, increase
evidence-based prevention programs and stood up quickly
response teams to follow up on individuals who experience non-
fatal overdoses.
In addition to these efforts, the state also increased its
infrastructure for surveillance and data analysis. And this
work drives all of our programmatic decision-making.
The state complemented the work of its federal projects by
using settlement funds and general revenue to undertake the
development of construction projects that expanded the
availability of residential treatment, including facilities
that specialize in pregnant and postpartum women. The scope of
this problem required a historic financial investment to
adequately respond to this crisis.
Rating funding sources allowed West Virginia to balance the
need for immediate intervention and services with the long-term
need to address the systemic issues that serve as an ongoing
challenge to the state's opioid response.
While significant progress has been made, certain barriers
and challenges remain. West Virginia continues to experience
substantial workforce shortages. Gaps in training related to
psychostimulants and polysubstance use, and a lack of capacity
to serve children impacted by this crisis.
In addition, a key concern when utilizing time-limited
grant dollars is sustainability of effort in thinking about a
bigger longer-term investment of these endeavors or to have a
continuing impact in increasing treatment availability and
reducing overdose deaths. The predictable and sustained
provision of resources is key to allow states and providers to
plan and rely on future year commitments. It can be tough to
successfully plan and operate programs if providers are not
confident resources will be available beyond a 1-year
commitment.
It would be difficult to believe that West Virginia could
have accomplished so much without the support of this
Committee. These funds have allowed West Virginia to have the
resources that it needed to respond to this crisis, and
resulted in a decrease in overdose deaths, and transformed our
system of care. Our overdose deaths are down at this point, our
records say, by ten percent.
The financial resources are crucial to our continuing
success and maintaining momentum. Ongoing funding for state
alcohol and drug agencies to coordinate substance use
prevention, treatment, and recovery services at the state level
will ensure continued progress.
While barriers remain, West Virginia is better poised to
address future challenges and continue its forward progress.
In summary, West Virginia wishes to say thank you to this
Committee, SAMHSA, and CDC. Thank you for your support. Thank
you for the resources. And thank you for allowing us to share
what is happening and what is working in West Virginia.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Mullins follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Now, Mr. Kinsley, I would like to recognize you for 5
minutes.

TESTIMONY OF KODY KINSLEY

Mr. Kinsley. Good morning. Thank you, Chair DeGette,
Ranking member Guthrie, and the honorable members of the
subcommittee for this opportunity to testify on North
Carolina's response to the opioid epidemic.
On behalf of the 10.4 million North Carolinians,
approximately 426,000 of whom misuse prescription or illicit
opioids; I want to express my deepest gratitude, for your
support of funding that has helped us turn the tide on the
epidemic. This investment has saved lives, transformed
communities, and has made the downpayment on breaking the cycle
of addiction, trauma, and poverty in our state.
I'm also grateful to the committed staff of numerous
federal agencies that have worked quickly to support a
concerted strategy, working across interconnected systems of
healthcare, housing, employment, and justice.
North Carolina was hit hard by the crisis. In 2016, 1,407
North Carolinians died of an unintended opioid overdose. For
each death, there were six overdose hospitalizations. And we
were one of the top eight states for fentanyl overdose deaths.
Since the start of the epidemic, nearly 100,000 workers
have been kept out of the workforce because of the opioid
misuse alone. Today, close to half of the children in North
Carolina's foster care system have parental substance use as a
factor in their out-of-home placement. And, of course, the
human cost, the loss to communities and families, is
immeasurable.
The scale of the problem underpins our magnitude of
accomplishment. Our state's comprehensive response, the North
Carolina Opioid Action Plan, is organized into three pillars:
prevention, harm reduction, and connections to care.
These pillars encompass numerous strategies; all made
possible because of federal funding: cutting the supply of
inappropriate opioid prescriptions; making access to lifesaving
naloxone ubiquitous; supporting syringe exchange programs;
making addiction medicine a core of medical education;
partnering with county and local communities; launching
interventions at the starts of treatment that start treatment
at the time of overdose reversal; and blending together broader
efforts to support recovery in the housing, employment; and
address the root causes of substance use disorder.
With these efforts, North Carolina saw the first decline in
deaths in five years, decreasing nine percent between 2017 and
2018. We have also seen a 24 percent decline in opioid
prescribing, and a 20 percent increase in the number of
uninsured individuals receiving treatment.
One million North Carolinians do not have health insurance.
And half of the opioid overdose visits to the emergency room
are uninsured. Therefore, our highest priority has been
expanding evidence-based treatments to those without insurance.
We have focused on medication-assisted treatment as the
gold standard of care, providing treatment to an additional
12,000 people.
Our success is clear, but with your help, there is much we
can do. We could stretch grant fathers--grant dollars further
if doctors were no longer required to obtain a separate DEA
waiver to prescribe buprenorphine for addiction. There is no
additional waiver requirement to prescribe the exact same
medication that is being prescribed for other conditions.
We should strengthen our focus on justice-involved
populations. A recent study found that exiting North Carolina
prisons were--prisoners leaving North Carolina prisons were 40
times more likely to die of an opioid overdose than the general
population. We are grateful to have recently received a $6.5
million grant from the Department of Justice to create pre-
arrest diversion programs and expand jail-based treatment in
our state. But, with 56 prisons and 96 jails, we have a long
way to go.
But most significant of all would be giving us more time.
Sustaining funding over longer windows of time, or permanently,
would allow states to ready systems for the next waive of the
epidemic. That waive is already cresting, as we are starting to
see rising rates of overdose deaths from methamphetamine and
benzodiazepine.
Before major federal funding for this epidemic became
available, 12,000 people in North Carolina had already died.
Meanwhile, North Carolina's share of the substance abuse,
prevention, and treatment block grant has not changed in recent
years, while North Carolina was one of the fastest-growing
populations in the country, growing nine percent between 2010
and 2018.
Growing the block grant at pace with population and
inflationary costs, and an updated allocation formula would
allow states to make better use of short-term funding, prevent
the next epidemic, and save lives.
Most of all, safeguarding Medicaid expansion and the
Affordable Care Act is critical to our long-term success in
fighting the opioid epidemic. States with higher rates of
insurance coverage have a more sustainable way of providing
treatment, and are able to prioritize their precious federal
block grant dollars and opioid response grants on system
investments. This is why we are working hard every day to
expand Medicaid in North Carolina.
In closing, I want to applaud the flexibility of much of
the federal funding we have received, which has allowed each
state to respond to its own pressing needs. Our strategies are
working, but our eyes are on the horizon. We appreciate your
leadership. And I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kinsley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Dr. Alexander-Scott, you are now recognized for 5 minutes
for your opening statement.

TESTIMONY OF NICOLE ALEXANDER-SCOTT, M.D.

Dr. Alexander-Scott. Thank you. Chairwoman DeGette, Ranking
Member Guthrie, and distinguished members of the Committee,
thank you for inviting me to join you today to discuss Rhode
Island's efforts to address the opioid overdose epidemic.
Collaboration between states, federal agencies, and federal
leaders such as yourselves is critical to our shared goals of
preventing overdoses and saving lives.
This issue has taken a staggering toll on my state. Since I
became the Director of the Rhode Island Department of Health in
2015, an overdose death has occurred in every city and town in
Rhode Island. During this time, more Rhode Islanders have lost
their lives to drug overdoses than to car crashes, firearms,
and fires combined.
Almost immediately after coming into office in 2015,
Governor Gina Raimondo formed an Overdose Prevention and
Intervention Task Force to develop a centralized, strategic,
data-driven comprehensive plan to prevent overdoses. The task
force includes stakeholders and experts in various fields,
including public health, law enforcement, behavioral health,
community-based support services, education, veterans' affairs,
and recovery.
As a co-chair of this task force, I have helped steer our
efforts into our four focused areas: prevention, treatment,
recovery, and rescue or reversal. We have changed the culture
of prescribing in Rhode Island and have dramatically reduced
our prescribing numbers.
We now have a vast statewide treatment network in place.
We have cultivated a group of certified peer recovery
specialists who work side-by-side with people in recovery.
We have put thousands of naloxone kits onto the streets.
And, most importantly, we have started to give people hope.
And we're focusing at the community level.
We have learned that regardless of your race or ethnicity,
regardless of your ZIP Code, income, or insurance status, every
door for every person should make treatment and recovery
services available. We believe that addiction is a disease, and
recovery is possible.
One prime example is the story of Jonathan Goyer from East
Providence, Rhode Island. Jonathan became dependent on opioids
at 15 years of age. At 25, after more than 30 tries, and after
reaching depths that many of us could not fathom, he was
finally able to find, sustain, and maintain a life in long-term
recovery.
He is now thriving as an expert advisor to Governor
Raimondo's task force, and he leads our state's recovery-
friendly workplace program.
When you talk to Jonathan about his journey, he says, ``The
opposite of addiction is not sobriety. The opposite of
addiction is connection.'' This is true for every community.
We are trying to make the connection and the sense of
community that brought Jonathan and so many others back from
the brink a part of every overdose prevention effort we put in
place in Rhode Island. We have had some success.
After the number of drug overdose deaths increased each
year in Rhode Island for the better part of a decade, that
number decreased by 6.5 percent between 2016 and 2018. However,
significant challenges remain. Fentanyl-related overdose deaths
continue to increase. And the opioid conversation must be
considered within the larger context of an addiction epidemic
that has alcoholism, tobacco use, cocaine use, and other
substances involved.
We can broaden the scope even further to talk about the
health implications of social and emotional isolation, and the
need to address the root causes of these challenges in our
community. All of this requires us to look beyond what many
believe to be our traditional focus areas in public health.
We need to look at the socioeconomic and environmental
determinants of health which determine roughly 80 percent of
what makes you healthy and what makes me healthy. These are
factors like access to quality education, access to fresh
fruits and vegetables, and reliable transportation.
We need to ensure that all children grow up in homes and go
to schools where they feel safe, supported, and loved; to
ensure that people have the houses that are healthy, safe, and
affordable; and to ensure that people have jobs that offer fair
pay. This is a part of our response.
The efforts and the progress that I've outlined today would
not have been possible without the tremendous contributions of
Congress and the federal agencies you fund. I thank you for
that sincerely. I look forward to partnering with you to
address what lies ahead on behalf of Rhode Island and on behalf
of the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials,
where I served as immediate past president.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Alexander-Scott follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Doctor.
It is now time for members to ask questions. And the Chair
will recognize herself for 5 minutes.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, and as many of you
mentioned--and thank you--the Committee has really been
focusing on the opioid epidemic for quite some number of years.
And this subcommittee, in particular in the last few
Congresses, I was the ranking Democrat, now I am the chair, but
it has been a real bipartisan effort over the years to help
address this crisis.
And, ultimately, under, of course, a number of pieces of
legislation and the 21st Century Cures Act which Congressman
Upton and I sponsored, we provided the states with a
considerable amount of funds to address substance abuse. And
so, we are happy to see that some of those funds have been used
as part of your efforts.
But several of you mentioned that we need to give more
flexibility to the states to address; I believe, Ms. Smith, you
said to address the system, not the substance. And I'm
wondering if some of you can talk about what we need to do to
give that flexibility as some of the substances shift.
Ms. Smith, do you want to expand on that a little bit?
Ms. Smith. Yes, I'd be happy to. Thanks for asking that
question.
And this goes to in many of your opening remarks you
mentioned about the polysubstance use and the increase in
particularly methamphetamine and cocaine that many states
across the nation are seeing. And I think one of the challenges
has been for us, with the funding being so focused on opioids,
it's been a little bit challenging depending on the types of
programs that we wanted to establish in making sure that we
were appropriately tying it to opioids, while at the same time
recognizing that some folks who benefit from the program may
not identify opioids as their primary substance, or even
identify them at all as a substance that they're utilizing.
Ms. DeGette. Do you think that that is getting more, more
noticeable, that people are moving from opioids?
Ms. Smith. Absolutely.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Kinsley, you are shaking your head yes.
Are you seeing that as well?
Mr. Kinsley. Absolutely we're seeing that in North
Carolina. And I think that in North Carolina, the substance
abuse prevention and treatment block grant is the only real,
sustainable tool we have to build the workforce and build the
treatment sources for those individuals to go to to get ahead
of the problem.
Ms. DeGette. Dr. Alexander-Scott, you talked a lot about
what Rhode Island is trying to do. What about this crisis are
you dealing with now that you weren't able to see a couple of
years ago? Are there some new things that you're seeing now?
Dr. Alexander-Scott. Certainly, the increase in the percent
of fentanyl with overdose deaths that are occurring.
We are seeing, also, an increase in polysubstances, and
multiple substances involved with overdose deaths. And we
recognize the importance of going upstream more, to really get
at the root causes of what is driving many of the challenges
associated with both mental health and substance use.
Ms. DeGette. And do you think that the federal, the
language with some of the federal funds you are getting is too
restrictive for trying to address some of those issues?
Dr. Alexander-Scott. There is opportunity to be more
deliberate in allowing for the flexibility so that we can look
more upstream and engage more at the community level.
Ms. DeGette. Ms. Mullins, what would you say the key
challenge you are facing, your state is facing right now with
addiction?
Ms. Mullins. Right now, my key challenge is a workforce. I
do not have enough people to deliver the treatment that is
needed for the state. We could open more days for prescribers,
but we do not have the therapists to be able to support that
prescribing.
Ms. DeGette. And Dr. Bharel, I wanted to ask you, in your
written testimony, you said that Massachusetts utilized federal
funding to support expansion and enhancement of our treatment
system. Can you tell me specifically about how the federal
funds enabled you to do that?
And what could be done more if you had more flexibility?
Dr. Bharel. Absolutely. Thank you for your leadership in
this area. What we have been doing in our public health
approach to this opioid epidemic is focusing on, of course,
prevention and intervention, but really enhancing our treatment
system.
And as has been said before, what we're dealing with now,
many of us, is trying to build a system in a place that where
for behavioral issues in general, for many, many decades have
been underfunded. So, we're really trying to build up systems
of care so that these individuals can get the treatment that
they need.
We have used some of our federal funding to enhance
treatment opportunities, including increasing our treatment
beds within our system to over 1,200, including increasing
training and availability of office-based opioid treatments,
and enhancing the availability of methadone through opioid
treatment programs.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. So, I just want to, again; I want
to thank all of you for your efforts and let you know this
Committee and the full Energy and Commerce Committee is
committed to helping make the maximum flexibility.
I will remind you that in the recent federal 2020
government funding bill, Congress continues to invest $1.5
billion in SAMHSA's state opioid response grants. And so, in
response to the changing drug abuse landscape, we allow
grantees to use this funding to address stimulant use. But if
there is more we can do, please let us know, because you, we
want you to consider ourselves to be your partners with that.
I will recognize Mr. Guthrie for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much. I appreciate it. And
appreciate you all being here and telling your stories. And
talking about bipartisan, you asked a lot of the questions that
I had originally. So, moving forward, and you all have answered
them well.
And I guess one thing I want to get at, flexibility. And I
remember when we did the markup on I guess it was the SUPPORT
Act, or it might have been the Comprehensive Recovery Act, but
our colleague on the Committee Bobby Rush, I don't know if he
had an amendment or he just made a point, that different
communities have different, different issues. And opioids are
in every community. He was speaking specifically on his.
I remember the discussion being on there are X amount of
resources we are going to--we are focusing on here. And I guess
my hope is as you bring more workers, using the money you can--
you can't always use the opioid money, for somebody on another
substance, but it helps you build the infrastructure that has
the same kind of moving forward. And we do need to open up and
look at that. That is something I think we absolutely need to
look at.
Something that was interesting to me is that as we were
having our hearing, it was a hearing or a roundtable; we had a
couple, we had some that had passed away. We had some members
who experienced that. And they talked about the patient
brokering. And I just walked away with this appalling that
there seem to be, not any states that you represent, but he was
in a state and was just being sent from one broker to the
other.
And I know a couple of you guys, a couple of states have
looked at that. And I think Dr. Alexander-Scott, Rhode Island,
has looked at patient brokering. So, it is my understanding
that Rhode Island certifies recovering housing and started this
certification two years ago.
Can you talk about the certification process, why Rhode
Island started it, and about how many recovery homes you have
certified?
Dr. Alexander-Scott. Yes, thank you.
Well, I will be happy to provide additional information to
support this. Our sister agency, the Department of Behavioral
Health Care, Developmental Disabilities, and Hospitals,
recognized the importance of having social determinants of
health addressed, such as housing. And recovery housing is a
critical tool for supporting those living the lives of
recovery, like Jonathan that I mentioned earlier.
We wanted to make sure that there was a level of quality
and standards across all of the recovery houses that were
available. And this sister agency in Rhode Island oversees the
certifications to help establish those standards.
I can get back to you on the official number that we have
of recovery houses that are available. But this has been a
quality and data-driven program that we have felt to be
critical to supporting this opioid epidemic.
Mr. Guthrie. OK, thank you.
Also, I think, Pennsylvania, it is my understanding that in
the last year, Pennsylvania passed legislation that enables the
Department of Drug and Alcohol Programs to regular and license
recovery housing that receives federal funding. Can you talk
about why you needed to do this, and the effect of it, and when
it goes into effect?
Ms. Smith. Yes, absolutely. I mean, I think it was passed
by the legislature and our governor for the same reasons that
it was in other states like Rhode Island. We were definitely
identifying issues both through parents, through advocacy
groups, through individuals who were attending recovery housing
events and noticing that there seemed to be some
inconsistencies with practices. And so, we felt it was really
critical to pass some kind of legislation that enables us to
have some oversight of these entities.
What's interesting is in Pennsylvania, we don't really know
the exact number of current recovery houses operating. We know
that it's in the thousands. And so, what this legislation will
enable us to do is create regulations so that any house that
receives referrals or funding from state or federal entities
will have to be licensed by our department.
So, it won't require that every recovery house in
Pennsylvania be licensed, but the hope is that folks are
utilizing the Web site that contains the licensing information
to utilize those licensed entities that they know have some
level of quality services. And maybe it will reduce business at
some of the more scrupulous entities.
Mr. Guthrie. OK, thank you.
I have a cousin who is a neonatologist. And he never talks
about any individual patient but just the issue in general when
we talk a lot about this. And so, I know that for the opioid
mother, the neonatal abstinence syndrome, so I--and I only have
a few seconds--so maybe one of you, have any of you used
federal dollars for neonatal abstinence syndrome? And has that
reduced it in your state?
And whoever wants to go first. Probably one of you has time
to answer. Is anybody working with that specifically?
Ms. Mullins. West Virginia is working very specifically to
provide treatment to women affected by a substance use
disorder. It doesn't--the treatment itself sometimes can
increase neonatal abstinence syndrome with the use of
medication-assisted treatment. But our babies are being born
healthier. Their birth outcomes are better.
So, we're really optimistic that with continued effort
there, we can make more progress.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Pallone for 5
minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Madam Chair.
As Congress and the Committee consider further action on
the opioid crisis, I would like to hear more about how federal
funds have been used to make a difference. And based on the
states' submissions to the Committee, which I mentioned in my
opening, it appears several states have successfully used
federal funds to respond to the crisis.
So, let me see how many I can get through here.
Mr. Kinsley, in your testimony, you noted that federal
funding had enabled North Carolina to provide opioid use
disorder treatment for 12,000 uninsured people. In the same
testimony, you mentioned that, and I quote, ``Since 2016, when
the first of the major federal bureau grants were received,
North Carolina saw its first decline in opioid overdose deaths
in five years, decreasing nine percent from 2017 to 2018.''
So, what factors do you attribute to North Carolina's
success in reducing overdose deaths and providing treatment to
people who really need it?
Mr. Kinsley. Thank you. Our focus has been 100 percent on
medication-assisted treatment and naloxone distribution in
communities. I believe the naloxone distribution has been
directly tied to the halt in deaths and the reduction in deaths
that we have seen.
And after that, important programs that have linked
individuals into care have been able to sustain that treatment
and move individuals in recovery. Programs like Peer Support
Specialists, individuals who are in recovery themselves, we
place them in emergency departments.
We've worked with our local EMS providers to actually
induct people into treatment, so that if an individual who has
an opioid reversal through an EMS visit does not want to go to
the hospital, they can actually begin their treatment then. And
there's a follow-up group of folks that come out and see those
individuals after the fact.
There's been a lot of very scaled, very strategic focused
interventions like that that have moved people into recovery
and into the treatment pipeline that have been really important
for us in North Carolina.
Mr. Pallone. Thanks.
Let me go to Ms. Smith. I was encouraged to hear from your
testimony that Pennsylvania has witnessed an 18 percent
decrease in overdose deaths from 2017 to 2018. So, what factors
do you attribute the reduction to?
And what are the few key areas that Pennsylvania should
focus on to continue that trend, if possible?
Ms. Smith. Yes. I think the keys for us are not all that
different, actually. A big focus on getting naloxone into
communities. Big focus on what we call a warm hand-off process,
which is getting overdose survivors from the hospital into
treatment.
We had a major issue in our hospitals and health systems
with individuals overdosing and then being quickly released
back out onto the street to overdose again repeated times.
So, I think those two things have been key for us. I think
moving forward, what we'd like to do is spend a little bit more
time and energy in the prevention space trying to prevent
before we get to worrying about needing naloxone and needing to
activate the warm hand-off process.
But our primary focus was really keeping people alive. Now
that we've started to get a handle on that through naloxone,
and warm hand=off, and expanding treatment, now I think we can
spend some time and energy really thinking about looking
upstream and how do we improve our prevention efforts.
Mr. Pallone. OK, thank you.
Let me go to Dr. Alexander-Scott with regard to Rhode
Island's response to the Committee. You noted that federal
funds had enabled the state to improve data, and surveillance,
and treatment capacity, and support innovations in delivery and
treatment.
Can you give us some specific examples of how federal funds
have helped Rhode Island in those areas?
Dr. Alexander-Scott. There are multiple examples, similar
to what has been mentioned.
Since you asked about data specifically, we use data in as
real-time as possible. We obtain 48-hour reporting from our
emergency departments for any suspected or actual overdose that
has occurred. And on a weekly basis we have a cross-agency team
that assesses where overdoses are, GIS-mapped across the state.
And we release advisories to municipalities, key stakeholders,
and providers to focus their areas when the overdose deaths
have increased beyond a certain threshold.
That allows us to drive out the resources and services that
we have based on data in real-time at the local level, which is
one example.
We continue to expand treatments and recovery services with
the intention of meeting people where they are. So, going out
to reach folks through a mobile recovery and treatment vehicle
is another example.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
I don't know if I can get West Virginia in. Ms. Mullins
noted that the state treatment system has been completely
overhauled in response to the opioid crisis, and much of the
positive work to date has occurred with and was made possible
as a direct result of the federal funds awarded since 2016.
Do you want to give us briefly some examples of how federal
funds have let West Virginia provide treatment and recovery
services, particularly in rural and financially-disadvantaged
parts of the state, if you could?
Ms. Mullins. Specifically really, it has given us the
ability to expand our clinical providers who could provide MAT.
We now have people in all of our 55 counties able to
receive MAT. And then we have prescribed in, located physically
in most counties. That's been the number one success we really
experienced with the federal funds.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Oregon for 5
minutes.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Madam Chair. And thanks again for
the hearing. And to our witnesses, thanks for your
participation as well.
I want to start with a question about transportation
issues. It is a big problem in districts like mine. Just to put
it in perspective, mine would stretch from the Atlantic to
Ohio, bigger than almost any state east of the Mississippi. At
my roundtables for the 2nd District of Oregon, 2017, I heard
from a witness in Hermiston. She had to travel five hours to
another state, Washington State, just to find a provider who
would help her with treatment and get her off of her addiction.
For each of the witnesses, what is your state doing to
address access to treatment faced by rural patients where there
is no local help? If you could be kind of brief on that,
because I have another one on 42 CFR Part 2 I want to get to as
well.
So, if anybody wants to weigh in on how to help in the
rural areas. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kinsley. Thank you for the question. North Carolina has
100 counties. We have, we are dosing currently about 20,000
people a day at our opioid treatment programs. I think our
largest two strategies to address rural access has been first
and foremost moving as much care into office-based outpatient
treatment programs as possible. That's why we'd love to see the
DEA X waiver requirement removed to try to make that easier.
We've doubled the number of physicians in North Carolina.
We have a long way to go. We're not going to get large-scale
OTP providers there.
The second, we've been heavily investing in Project ECHO,
which is leverage our ability to try to train providers to give
them the support they need to take on these patients.
Mr. Walden. Yes, we, as you know, in the SUPPORT Act
expanded who could administer Suboxone and other treatments.
Anybody else want to weigh in on this?
Ms. Smith. Yes, I'd be happy to very quickly.
So, Pennsylvania is really fortunate in that we have a
large number of opioid treatment providers already in the
state. So that's an advantage for us. But beyond that, to
assist rural communities, we have a particular RAMP grant we
call it, Rural Access to Medication, where we are expanding
access to medication-assisted treatment in rural areas thanks
to the grant from the Federal Government.
As well as we've offered a loan repayment program for
practitioners in areas that are hard hit by the opioid epidemic
but also have workforce shortages, which you can imagine is
mostly rural areas. And the commitment for that loan repayment
program is that you have to have two years of experience
treating SUD patients, and you have to commit to an additional
two years of treating in that area.
Mr. Walden. Ah, an incentive to stay. OK.
I want to move on to this 42 CFR Part 2 issue, the
confidentiality of alcohol and drug abuse patient records.
I heard a lot from providers about how this impacts
negatively the effective exchange of information regarding
individual substance use disorder treatment and there are other
health issues. We passed legislation in the House
overwhelmingly to try and address this, protect patient privacy
but allow the right flow of information to other medical
providers. Tragically, it went up on the rocks in the Senate.
And I would like to see us renew our efforts here.
Can you all tell me briefly just are you seeing patients
impacted by this? I sure heard it from providers in my
district.
Yes, Doctor?
Dr. Bharel. In Massachusetts, we provided comments related
to a 42 CFR and some of the obstacles that that produces. As we
have started to think about what is the next step or what needs
to happen to fight this opioid epidemic, one of the issues is
around appropriate behavioral health integration, both with
mental health issues and substance use issues, as well as how
to connect that to the medical care that an individual needs.
And there are many aspects of 42 CFR that are an obstacle
there.
Mr. Walden. Did others run into this? Yes, Doctor?
Dr. Alexander-Scott. The other place to be aware of where
it may be considered is within the school system, making sure
that school nurses and psychologists are able to exchange the
information needed to care for children who have mental health
or even substance use challenges.
Mr. Walden. OK. Do others want to comment on this?
Mr. Kinsley.
Mr. Kinsley. North Carolina is fully supportive of
modernizing 42 CFR in an attempt to both maintain privacy but
also move us to integrated care. I think what's important is
that we have to also systematically address stigma to help
reduce----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Kinsley [continuing]. The systematic exclusion of
individuals from employment, housing, and everything else that
they experience as well.
Mr. Walden. Exactly. Anyone else? Ms. Smith?
Ms. Smith. He said exactly what I was going to say, that
really addressing stigma----
Mr. Walden. He was looking at your notes, I think.
Ms. Smith [continuing]. Has to be, has to be the primary
concern here, you know.
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Ms. Smith. I think it's important to protect those
individuals----
Mr. Walden. Absolutely.
Ms. Smith [continuing]. Who suffers from this disease. But
at the same time, I don't know how we move to a truly
integrated system of care when we treat their record
differently.
Mr. Walden. Right.
Ms. Smith. We keep talking about treating them the same as
everyone else. Treat them the same as someone who has heart
disease or diabetes, but access their medical record.
Mr. Walden. Right.
Ms. Smith. I think we need to change that conversation.
Mr. Walden. This has led to death. So, we need to fix this.
I hope we can, Madam Chair, renew this effort to pass
reform here. I know the Administration's done some things they
could within the existing law, but I don't think that gets far
enough. And you have been generous with the time.
Ms. DeGette. This is an issue we have been working on for a
long, long time in this Committee. And we do need; we do need
to find a resolution.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you to all of you.
Ms. DeGette. The Chair now recognizes the gentle lady from
Illinois Ms. Schakowsky for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Madam Chair.
In 2018, the overall rate of opioid overdose deaths in
Illinois fell for the first time in five years. The decrease
was likely impacted by the efforts of this Committee and
Congress to combat the opioid epidemic. But, this trend was
primarily driven by the decline in deaths among white
residents.
Today, in Illinois, opioid overdose deaths among blacks and
Latinos continue to rise. In fact, my hometown of Chicago
experienced more opioid overdose deaths than homicides in 2017.
Of the 796 people who died from opioid overdose--opioid deaths
that year, 400 were African American.
And a recent study from the American Journal of Public
Health found that black and Hispanic residents of Cook County,
Illinois, were more likely to experience a fentanyl-involved
overdose than whites. That doesn't square with the sort of
public perception of the opioid crisis as a white suburban and
rural issue.
So, I wanted to ask you, Dr. Alexander-Scott, I know you
have experience not only in your state but, as the president,
former president of the Association of State and Territorial
Health Officials, can you tell us how the Congress, how we can
help states to address the overlooked racial disparity in the
opioid epidemic?
Dr. Alexander-Scott. Thank you so much for this question.
It's such a critical issue for us.
We in Rhode Island are also starting to take a more
deliberate approach to addressing this by really making sure
that we have the health equity lens in terms of how we are
implementing our overdose prevention and intervention efforts.
We have to make sure that every community that is impacted by
this has the opportunity to have access to the treatment
services, as well as continue to look upstream to address the
root causes that exist.
We cannot overlook the socioeconomic and environmental
determinants that are occurring in various communities----
Ms. Schakowsky. And I appreciate that. Congressman Guthrie
raised this question to some extent as well. So, go ahead.
Dr. Alexander-Scott [continuing].To be able to tackle this.
The start is with what you have done, which is really
expose the fact that different races and ethnicities are
impacted by this epidemic in different ways. And we have to
make sure that we are taking into account the cultural and
socioeconomic and environmental influences that are
contributing to why we have different outcomes, and really
focus on addressing the root causes and making sure that the
funding that you appropriate is able to take place at the
community level and be driven by what the community needs to
make the difference.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you very much.
Dr. Bharel, is that right? Your testimony mentioned, in
your testimony, you mentioned that you are focusing on
communities of color in your state responses. And so, what does
that look like?
Dr. Bharel. Yes, thanks for bringing up this important
issue. One of our five areas where we found an increase in
overdoses and overdose deaths is in our communities of color.
So we have been using federal funds to assist us in those
efforts. To give you an example, as we have all noted as, our
opiate overdose deaths thankfully have begun to decline; from
2016 to 2017, when we broke down our death data by race and
ethnicity, we found that the only group still with an
increasing rate of opiate overdose deaths was black men. So we
have rerouted some of our efforts to be able to focus on
communities of color. Just to give you a few examples, we redid
some of our campaigns, including prevention campaigns to
address different communities and provide them in different
languages.
Additionally, another example is we have a licensed
addiction counselor program that we have now focused on Latino
and African American members of our community so that more
individuals can be trained and then go back to their
communities to provide services.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. I think the statistics are just
completely unacceptable in Chicago and a lot of metropolitan
areas and especially among communities of color. And it would
be a terrible mistake to go with just this overall data and not
look at the particular communities. Thank you for responding to
this question. I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentle lady. I now recognized the
gentlemen----
Ms. Schakowsky. Oh, I wondered if I could offer something,
something for the record as well, I forgot.
Ms. DeGette. Well, what is it?
Ms. Schakowsky. If I could put in the study that I
mentioned. The geographic distribution of fentanyl involved
overdose deaths in Cook County, in Cook County, Illinois. And
U.S. News & World Report article titled ``Separate, Unequal,
and Overlooked.''
Ms. DeGette. Without objection, both items will be entered
into the record.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the Chair for the recognition. Dr.
Bharel, just briefly, Mr. Guthrie had talked a little bit about
patient brokering. I will share with you some of the most
troubling testimony we have had in this subcommittee on this
issue was from your Assistant Attorney General, I think his
name was Eric Gold, who came and testified to one of our
oversight investigation subcommittees about sober homes that
were located in other states. So his Massachusetts residents
would be lured to other locations to have their treatment and,
of course, all covered by my insurance with no real,
identifiable metrics as to whether or not anyone was getting
better. And in fact, I think he shared with us data that not
only did they not get better, but he had had a number of deaths
of Massachusetts residents that had happened as a result of
being farmed out to a sober home.
So, as a kind of follow-up to his testimony, is there
anything that the--you is the state's sort of Chief Medical
Officer, is there anything else that you can share with us
about what he told us that day?
Dr. Bharel. Absolutely, so the quality of care that our
patients receive in this system is absolutely critical that we
all make sure it reaches the highest standards for a very
vulnerable population.
There are several things we do at the state level. We take
very seriously our responsibility to license and contract with
all of the substance addiction services that we provide through
the Department of Public Health. And through that licensing and
contracting authority, which has recently been enhanced
actually through Massachusetts law, we are able to set the
criteria and have a feedback loop. We also respond to
complaints, do re-licensing every two years, and can at any
time go in to inspect a site.
Specifically, in terms of sober homes, we now in
Massachusetts have a voluntary, sober home certification
program which must meet certain criteria and standards, and we
have seen improvement and have over 2,000 beds in that system
as well.
Mr. Burgess. Very good about that and just to be clear,
when Mr. Gold came and testified to us, he wasn't talking about
sober homes within the state or within the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts. He was talking about sober homes that might be
in the more agreeable Southern climate, not that there is any
more agreeable climate than Massachusetts in January, I am
sure, but I have never experienced that. But that was the deal,
that people would be--get lured, say OK, you can come to spend
your winter in a sunny location and you all sort of lose
control of the situation when that happens.
So I guess what I am asking, are we doing any better as far
as being able to communicate between states about when this
type of activity happens when you lose a resident to addiction
in another state? Is there some type of follow-up that is done
on that?
Dr. Bharel. So, I don't have any specific examples of
patient brokering to give you, and I can have the Attorney
General's Office follow up to see what they can provide.
Mr. Burgess. Sure.
Dr. Bharel. But I will say one of the things we need to do
in our state if people are leaving is making sure that we have
the facilities and the appropriate access to care in the state.
And we have been working really hard on that.
One really important success that many of us have in terms
of cross-state communication is the prescription monitoring
programs.
Mr. Burgess. Sure.
Dr. Bharel. And ours in Massachusetts, which now providers
are required to use before prescribing opioids and
benzodiazepines, is connected to 37 other states and
Washington, DC. And that really helps understand care that
individuals may have received in other states as well.
Mr. Burgess. And of course, the whole NASPER program was a
product of this Committee many, many years ago. I remember us
working on it, as did we work on Project Echo when Orrin Hatch
was over in the Senate Finance Committee. So thank you for
mentioning Project Echo.
And Mr. Kinsley, let me just ask you if I could, and Mr.
Walden already addressed the 41 CFR Part 2 issue, but do you
feel that within your state that your programs are able to
share the appropriate addiction medical records so that they
can coordinate care with people undergoing treatment for opiate
use disorder, substance use disorder?
Mr. Kinsley. The simple answer is no. We have invested a
lot of resources through peer support and other tools to try to
support that coordination of care, care management, et cetera,
but there is still a huge limitation. And even doctors within
the same systems can't easily talk to one another to coordinate
care around their patients.
Mr. Burgess. Again, I would just in agreement with Mr.
Walden; I think we should redouble our efforts. We got 42 CFR
Part 2 reform done on the House floor in 2018. We were not
able--it didn't survive the Senate. So when President Trump
signed the big bill into law, that part was removed. We need to
continue to work on that because it is critically important.
Thank you, Madam Chair; I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Massachusetts for five minutes.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to thank the
witnesses for being here today, your testimony. I want to thank
our colleagues as well on this Committee for their attention.
Dr. Burgess, you are welcome to Boston any time in winter.
The weather might not be the warmest. The Super Bowl rings tend
to warm you up, though, so we have had our share of those.
Hopefully, it might be something you guys can experience some
time soon. But we will move right along, Dr. Bharel.
You sit on the Massachusetts Harm Reduction Commission,
which in March 2019 recommended exploring the use of evidence-
based safe injection facilities or safe consumption sites.
These sites are shown to reduce the risk of infection, improve
public health outcomes, and increase outreach to treatment
services. Safe injection facilities are supported by the
Massachusetts Medical Society and the implementation of these
sites is currently being explored by the Massachusetts State
Legislature.
So Dr. Bharel, can you elaborate a little bit about how the
Harm Reduction Commission came to recommend highlighting
evidence-based safe injection facilities. And additionally, as
addressed briefly in the report, could you explain why the
state-operated facilities do not violate federal law?
Dr. Bharel. So thank you, Congressman, and thank you for
your support of the work happening in Massachusetts and around
the country.
Talking broadly about the Harm Reduction Commission, first
to address the safe injection facilities, these were reviewed
and the evidence was reviewed, and a recommendation was to look
at this further through our legislative process, and I
understand there to be legal barriers both at the states and
federal level.
Talking about harm reduction broadly and what we currently
have the capacity to do in public health, we have really been
focusing our effort on the high-risk populations I have
mentioned, and one of the important harm-reduction pieces
including syringe service programs, we have expanded those in
Massachusetts several years ago to less than 10 to over 30 now
and have had markedly good response rates of not only
collecting syringes, but also providing harm-reduction
services, decreasing infections, and connecting people to care.
One statistic that has been very helpful for individuals is
that for every 100 syringes that are handed out, 120 are
returned, so we are also cleaning our neighborhoods and
communities as well, so we have a focused effort in that, as
well as outreach to communities at highest risk.
Mr. Kennedy. Are there evidence-based treatment strategies
such as FDA-approved drugs like buprenorphine, methadone, and
naltrexone that are considered the gold standard for treating
those who suffer from opioid use disorder?
Doctor, our Commonwealth's response to the Committee
indicated that the state had increased access to medication-
assisted treatment to those who have been incarcerated and are
reentering the community. Can you describe the types of
treatments Massachusetts is providing to the incarcerated
population in the state and if there is any disconnect seeing
as individuals who are incarcerated lose Medicaid once they are
incarcerated to any roadblocks that come from that bureaucratic
disconnect?
Dr. Bharel. Absolutely. I am proud to say that one of the
areas where we have had a lot of improvement is in training
individuals with incarceration. As I mentioned in my testimony
that one of our five high-risk groups, in fact, we see from our
data that when individuals are released from incarceration, the
risk of opioid overdose death is 120 times higher than other
individuals, especially in the two to four weeks after release.
That data and information really helped us open up dialogue in
new ways with our criminal justice colleagues. And now, the
Department of Corrections is offering FDA-approved medication
for opioid use disorder, as well as a pilot happening in seven
of our jail systems.
We also are expanding our program of post-release
assistance because as has been mentioned earlier, individuals
not only need to be connected to medications when they leave,
but also employment and housing opportunities.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Doctor. Mr. Kinsley, a study
published just recently found that states that expanded
Medicaid had a six percent overall lower rate of opioid use or
opioid overdose deaths than states that did not choose to
expand Medicaid. For specific opioids, this rate was as high as
11 percent lower mortality. Unlike the other four states
represented here, obviously, North Carolina decided not to
expand Medicaid.
Sir, has that diminished the state's ability to provide
long-term-evidence-based treatment options to uninsured
citizens?
Mr. Kinsley. Absolutely, and thank you for the question,
Congressman. We estimate 426,000 people have an opioid or
prescription misuse. We have been able to provide treatment to
12,000 uninsured folks. Half of everybody coming into an ED
room with an opioid overdose are uninsured. We are digging out
of this hole with a teaspoon. We are proud of our progress. We
have so much further to go. Based off the recent JAMA report
that came out, we estimate 415 North Carolinians would be alive
today had we expanded Medicaid in 2014.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. The gentleman from West Virginia is now
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I would like to
enter into the record this letter from the Voices for Non-
Opioid Choices. It deals with the non-opioid options to treat
in acute pain. I ask unanimous consent we enter that.
Ms. DeGette. Without objection.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you. I guess maybe to focus back on Ms.
Mullins on some of your testimony and first, I want to
congratulate you for West Virginia the work you have done. Like
you said, we have been the epicenter of this problem. We have
grown from 52 to 57 deaths per 100,000. It is just incredible
to see what is happening.
My concern has been from the day one on this that we never
really understood the contributing factors that have led to
abuse. We have had people in here from NIH, and CDC. They will
talk about the socio-economic issues. And we have been able to
quibble back and forth about it, but there are states like New
Hampshire that have an absolute opposite socio-economic
contributing factor as compared to West Virginia, and for
years, they were the number two in the country.
So I would like to understand more about what we are doing
about prevention rather than the treatment. From my engineering
perspective, that is how we--when we have a building collapse
or a building failure, we go back and find out what caused it.
And then we can fix it, but let's so it doesn't happen again.
So my question back to you, what do you think the
contributing factors are? Because I look at, for example, and I
agree with Dr. Scott, who said it is connectivity. I want to
see how that goes together because Texas, Texas has a rate of
only 10.5 to our 57. What are they doing right in Texas that
we, in West Virginia or maybe around the country, can learn
about what are they doing there? Because we know the drugs are
coming across. It is not like we don't have access to these
illegal drugs. We know where they are coming from. What can we
learn from that to prevent people from abusing drugs?
Ms. Mullins. So, I think in terms of contributing factors
West Virginia experienced a perfect storm when we had
prescribers trying to treat pain. We have individuals in high-
injury occupations, coal mining. And some of the other
industries that we have in West Virginia are prone to
accidents. So we had influxes of pills coming into the state.
We had easy availability. And those things were how the perfect
storm, if you will, got started with low incomes and people--
the recession and the different things that were happening,
people becoming frustrated.
But in my opinion, we have to go further backstream. We
have to start with our kids. We have kids in absolute crisis.
They are not living with their parents. Many of them are living
in foster care.
Mr. McKinley. Let me interrupt. I would like to have more
of a dialogue with you about this. So rather than take all the
time, there are a couple more things because I am concerned if
we don't stop the prevention, if we don't get into the
prevention, we are going to see even more neonatal abstinence
problems with our children. We are going to see the impact it
is going to have on foster families, and foster children in our
foster homes as a result of this. So I am really curious about
how we stop it in the first place or how we mitigate the
problem into the future.
So let me go to the last comment. I would like to hear from
any of you on the panel is that we know when the tobacco
settlement occurred years ago, 97 percent, 97 percent of the
money that came in for tobacco settlement payments went for
non-tobacco use. They were used for fixing potholes. They were
balancing state budgets. Should we do the same thing? Because I
would imagine that we are going to see quite a bit of
litigation over this opioid. And there are going to be some
federal settlements on this.
Is there a role for us for the Federal Government to try to
step in to make sure that that money doesn't go for fixing
potholes and balancing budgets? Is there some way that we can
assure it will go for things like prevention, or foster care,
or neonatal to assure long-term funding for people that are
making investments in treatment?
How would you react to a federal involvement in these
settlements? Any of you.
Dr. Alexander-Scott. Thank you for the question,
Congressman. We would welcome the opportunity to have
sustainable funding that allows us to really focus on this
epidemic comprehensively and over the long term.
Many of us have referenced the importance of stability with
the funding, particularly when you look at making sure that the
funding can be implemented at the community level. The
community entities that we are engaged with need to know that
the funding that is available to them to address determinants
of health and to address the comprehensive system will be in
place for a long enough time for there to be an impact and the
improvement that we want to see. So the assistance that is
welcome to help us do that across the board is certainly to be
well received.
Ms. DeGette. The gentleman from California is recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you very much and thank you all for being
here for the incredible work that you are doing in your states.
This Committee has worked in the bipartisan manner over the
last several years to pass legislation to help states implement
programs to help curb the opioid crisis sweeping our nation.
But more can and more must be done.
While members on both sides of the aisle are committed to
addressing this issue, at the same time, there are continued
efforts not to expand Medicaid in some states and even to make
access to Medicaid more difficult overall, despite the fact
that increased access to care means increased access to life-
saving treatment.
In fact, just last week, a new study was published in the
Journal of the American Medical Association, JAMA, found that
expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act may have saved
as many as 8,000 people from a fatal opioid overdose. I would
like to ask unanimous to insert this for the record.
Ms. DeGette. Without objection.
Mr. Ruiz. And according to the Kaiser Family Foundation,
another study, in 2017, Medicaid covered 54 percent of people
who received treatment for opioid use disorders. So despite the
words about wanting to increase access to mental health and
addiction treatment, there are also efforts to roll back the
Affordable Care Act, which would eliminate coverage of the
essential health benefits like mental health services and
addiction treatment. And we feel the Medicaid expansion, if we
truly want to address this crisis in a meaningful way, we need
to work to increase coverage, and expand Medicaid, not take it
away.
Time after time, I have cared for a patient who is
overdosing in the emergency department. They usually come
unresponsive and blue. And in the emergency department, we
treat everybody with a life-threatening illness regardless of
their ability to pay. But once they are stabilized and leave
the emergency department, leave the hospital, they need to find
treatment to help them beat their addiction. They need to go to
the facilities that offer the programs that receive the grant
money and those facilities often benefit if they have Medicaid.
And if they don't have Medicaid, they won't go because the
opioid epidemic is an unprecedented crisis. States have needed
to make fundamental changes to their treatment systems to
combat opioid addiction and substance abuse disorder.
So I would like to hear how federal funding has played a
role in supporting these treatment systems.
Ms. Mullins, West Virginia's response to the Committee,
notes that the state's treatment infrastructure was initially
not capable of meeting rising demands for opioid treatment
services. How have the federal funds helped West Virginia
enhance the treatment infrastructure system, including the role
that Medicaid has played?
Ms. Mullins. So Medicaid has been a key component. We have
used Medicaid--we were approved for an 1115 SUD waiver. So we
have used that as part of our backbone to pay for treatment
services. But the 1115 waiver doesn't enable us to train our
providers. It doesn't enable us to build our infrastructure. So
we use the grant funds to wrap around that waiver and build
infrastructure, as well as cover people with no insurance or
who are under insured. That has been our strategy, to braid
those funds together. And I don't think that we could have done
one without the other.
Mr. Ruiz. And according to a recent study, opioid treatment
is much more widely accessed in states that expanded Medicaid.
Rhode Island and West Virginia, two Medicaid-expanded states,
both noted in their responses to the Committee the importance
of federal Medicaid dollars and their ability to address the
opioid crisis.
Mr. Kinsley, from North Carolina, correct, you raised in
your written statement that Medicaid is ``the most important
tool in a sustainable response to the opioid epidemic. It would
bring an additional $4 billion into North Carolina for
healthcare.''
How would expanding Medicaid help the state further develop
its treatment infrastructure to address the opioid crisis?
Mr. Kinsley. Thank you for the question. The
interconnection with substance use disorder and employment and
the fact that the vast majority of individuals get their health
insurance through employment cannot be overlooked. I remind my
team every day that they are potentially one drug test away
from losing their health insurance and ending up in a place
where they have no way to pay for the treatment that they need
to recover and get back into the employment workforce.
In North Carolina, we estimate that 500,000 additional
people would have insurance with Medicaid expansion. This would
be our ability to then ship those individuals to get treatment
through Medicaid, through the 1115 waiver and then use our
resources to invest in building the system capacity with scale
and leverage our results.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you. You see, we have done some good work
here that we took a step forward in combating the opioid
epidemic, but if we make it harder for people to enroll in
Medicaid, such as repealing the Medicaid expansion from the
Affordable Care Act, repealing the essential health benefits
that mandate mental health coverage, by making it difficult for
people to enroll like work requirements and actually block
granting Medicaid as well, then we are going to take five steps
back. And so it is very important to keep that big picture
perspective in our efforts. I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. We turn now to the
gentleman from Virginia for five minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Let me
first answer a question that Mr. McKinley asked of you all and
that was how do we treat this money? And we had the tobacco
settlement and a lot of--many states went for naught.
In Virginia, they created a separate commission that
handled the Tobacco Commission Money for economic development
purposes. Whatever purpose your individual states might want, I
recommend that model because then you can take that lump sum of
money and have it stretch out to assist. In this case, it would
be with whatever issues you all have with substance abuse, but
that Virginia model has worked well for economic development in
the former tobacco producing areas of the Commonwealth.
My district is the area stretched between West Virginia and
North Carolina, down to Kentucky and Tennessee. And while
Virginia's numbers look better than West Virginia, my district
does not. I have both Martinsville in the North Carolina side
that is heavily impacted and then all the areas in coal country
in Virginia that look very much like West Virginia when it
comes to the opioid crisis. And so I am very concerned about a
lot of these issues.
And we all are moved by testimony from time to time, and
earlier, you all had a discussion related to privacy versus
integrated medical care. The testimony I remember is the man
who came in to testify for his brother, who could not testify
because he had died. He had licked the opioid problem and then
was in a major car accident, and because the doctors had no
idea that he had an opioid problem and because he was
unconscious and could not tell anybody don't give him the
opioids, they gave him the opioids. He survived the injuries
from the accident. He did not survive the reintroduction of
opioids to his system. So we have to work on that problem and I
appreciate all of your testimony in that regard.
Foster care. Mr. Kinsley, you said half of the children in
foster care, their parents had some form and it was one of the
factors, some form of drug addiction, but I didn't see in your
written testimony how many young people that were.
Mr. Kinsley. I can get you the exact number. We have about
12,000 individuals in North Carolina in the foster care system.
Mr. Griffith. So roughly 6,000?
Mr. Kinsley. Yes, sir.
Mr. Griffith. And I thought it was interesting that Dr.
Alexander-Scott, in your answer to another question, mentioned
the school systems and making sure that there was money there.
I know several families that have first gone through foster
care and then adopted children who came out of households where
the parents were addicted to various drugs, but particularly
opioids. And they have significant behavior problems, and it is
taking a lot of effort.
What can we do to help our school systems deal with the
next generation? They may not have drug problems themselves,
but there are lots of behavior problems.
Dr. Alexander-Scott. In Rhode Island, we have introduced a
student assistance services program that allows for counseling,
peer recovery, and support for both the students and their
families. And the ability to have that be integrated with
physical health services are for students in school really will
allow for a comprehensive approach to addressing the needs to
our youth and that is----
Mr. Griffith. Including behavior problems that are a result
of being around folks who were using drugs at the time of those
first couple of years. Would that also be included?
Dr. Alexander-Scott. It does address the mental health, as
well as behavioral challenges that youth often face.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate that. Thank you very much. And
Ms. Smith, I really want to learn more about what Pennsylvania
is doing with its drug--excuse me, its doctor loan repayment
program.
Ms. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. Because representing an area that has both
significant, as Pennsylvania and West Virginia do, we are all
right there in the Appalachian Mountains together. We need more
healthcare providers out in our most affected areas, the rural
areas, particularly the coal counties that have been affected
by this. Tell me about that program some more.
Ms. Smith. Sure. So this was an innovative program that we
decided to use some of our federal funding for. So we are a
Medicaid expansion state which means for treatment dollar
purposes, a lot of our patients are Medicaid patients, which
means the federal grant dollars we are getting, we can really
use to be innovative and think of creative ideas. So we have
done some housing things.
In this case, we decide how do we address the workforce
issue because it really is an issue all across the nation. So,
we decided that you had to be practicing in an area with high
opioid use. You had to have at least two years of experience
treating patients with substance use disorder. And you had to
commit to an additional two years in order to make good on that
loan repayment.
Mr. Griffith. Have you had the program long enough to know
if the doctors, or healthcare providers, stay after their two
years or their additional two years?
Ms. Smith. So two years have elapsed. It is the first.
Mr. Griffith. I look forward to getting that information in
the future, and my time is up.
Ms. Smith. I am happy to share some additional information
about how many we have granted, et cetera.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate that and I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. I turn now to the
gentle lady from New Hampshire for five minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I just want to say
thank you to you for your leadership. In my seven years in
Congress, this is one of the best, most productive hearings I
have been at, and it is an honor to be on this Committee.
I am the founder and co-chair of the bipartisan Opioid Task
Force that has close to a hundred members. Just to give you a
sense of the scope, New Hampshire, as my colleague, Mr.
McKinley, suggested, was hit very hard, along with West
Virginia. A perfect storm situation. But what I am proud of is
that New Hampshire has some very innovative models coming out
of the opioid epidemic. Yes, indeed, we need to include
methamphetamines and cocaine and the rest.
And I want to focus in on a particularly vulnerable
population and a particularly expensive population, for the
taxpayers, for our communities, and for individuals' personal
lives. And that is the incarcerated population where we know
that at least 65 percent, in some of our counties as high as 85
percent, of our incarcerated population have co-occurring
mental health and substance use issues.
And one of my big a-ha moments in the last seven years was
to discover that something that passed Congress many, many
years ago at the inception of Medicaid, called the Medicaid
Inmate Exclusion, caused people to lose coverage and lose the
funding for healthcare, namely mental health treatment,
substance use treatment during that period of incarceration.
New Hampshire is a Medicaid expansion state, thank God, given
the discussion today. But literally, the day you go in, you
lose your coverage. And to me, if we were to design a system
that would fail American taxpayers, families, and communities,
it would be this system because what happens is people live
with very, very high recidivism rates. And we all do. We are
the taxpayers. And we have people incarcerated for drug-related
crimes, getting no treatment for their mental health or
substance use disorder, and when they come out, we all act
shocked that they go back to their addiction. We are not
shocked that they go back to their diabetes. And we shouldn't
be shocked that they go back to their addiction.
So I have introduced legislation that we call the Humane
Correctional Health Care Act and what this would do is continue
Medicaid coverage during incarceration so that we can ensure
treatment for substance use disorder and mental illness. And
what happens that we have already demonstrated in New Hampshire
is a dramatic drop in the recidivism rate, from the upwards of
50 to 60 percent down to 18 percent. And I don't care if you
are a Republican or a Democrat, left, right, or center, that is
saving lives and saving taxpayer dollars and I am very pleased
that Mr. McKinley agreed to join today, as did Dr. Ruiz.
So quickly moving on to questions, Dr. Scott, in 2016, I
know Rhode Island implemented a state-wide treatment program
for opioid addiction within your Department of Corrections. I
would love to get the JAMA studies for the record and to share
them with my colleagues. But can you just explain the overall
decrease in overdose deaths and what the outcomes so far of
that program have been?
Dr. Alexander-Scott. Thank you for that question. The key
to the program has been making sure that we have all three FDA-
approved medications for medication-assisted treatment
available to those who are incarcerated. We also allow for
screening of all incarcerated inmates or substance use
disorder, so that if they weren't previously on an MAT option
that was made available to them. And the final key is making
sure that prior to release from incarceration, they are
connected to one of our community-based behavioral health
agencies. They become a client in advance and make sure that
once they are released, they are able to have a warm handoff
directly to continue to receive recovery and treatment services
at the community level.
Ms. Kuster. And that is one of the key components for our
programs as well, so as I continue to build bipartisan support
for this legislation, I would love to work with you and others.
I know, Ms. Smith, you mentioned housing or maybe the doctor,
but I would like to work on what those supports are to
eliminate the barriers to recovery so that people can be
successful in their lives, get back to raising their children,
get back to work, get back to paying taxes. So thank you. I
yield back and I appreciate this hearing.
Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentle lady. The gentle lady from
Indiana is recognized for five minutes.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you so
much to you and ranking member for holding this really
important hearing. I am really pleased that we are focusing
once again on opioids. It is some of the most important work
that I have done in my time here in Congress and I want to
thank each of you and particularly all the states that
responded to the Committee's questions. It really is wonderful
to see all of the progress and all of the efforts that each of
your states are making.
I think while it is not getting much media attention any
more, I mean there was a period of time in the last few years
where opioid issues were on the front pages and on TV all the
time. And it is not anymore. It has fallen off of the radar,
sadly, of the American people except for those families and
those professionals and people who are dealing with this day in
and day out. So I really want to thank you for your work.
I want to focus, go back to the workforce issues because
all of this, whether it is prevention, whether it is treatment,
whether it is the work that you all are doing, if we don't have
the workforce, I say the workforce even beyond physicians in
addiction; we need to stay focused. My friend across the aisle,
Brad Schneider, from Illinois and I introduced the Opioid
Workforce Act and it is meant to try to raise the cap on
graduate medical education residency slots by a thousand more
residencies across the country in addiction medicine. I know
that I have spoken to IU Med School in Indiana. I represent
Indiana and you know, IU has, with its grand challenge, tried
to put a lot more emphasis on addiction medicine in all levels,
whether it is in nursing, whether it is in prescribing
practices, whether it is in addiction medicine.
I want to go back just briefly to start on your loan
repayment program and to learn if any other states are doing
that.
Ms. Smith, building on what my colleague said, you wanted
to say a little bit more about your loan repayment and then I
just want to do like lightning rounds to find out if your
states are doing it, and if not, why not?
Ms. Smith. Yes. So very quickly to add, I was able to find
the data here in my notes. We made 91 awards to individuals
from 23 different counties that totaled $4.7 million for that
program. And it was a combination of both mental and behavioral
health practitioners, so more of the clinician level. And then
$1.8 million of it was for actual medical professionals, which
include CRNPs, physician assistants, and physicians. So we
tried to really capture the full range of professionals as part
of that program. And the second round of awards is currently
out, so applications are being submitted to us for a second
round of awarding for that program.
Mrs. Brooks. And do you believe if we increased the number
of residency slots in addiction medicine would that be helpful?
Ms. Smith. I do believe it would be helpful.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. Dr. Bharel?
Dr. Bharel. Thank you for this important attention to the
professional training. In Massachusetts, we were the first
state to develop voluntarily with all four of our medical
schools' core competencies that were standardized for all
medical students. That was quickly then taken up by all of our
three dental schools, as well as our advanced practice nursing
programs, physician assistant programs, and training over 8,000
individuals in a standardized way so that they could balance
the needs of pain management with the potential for opioid
misuse.
Additionally, our social work schools have taken up that
training as well as physical therapists. So it is enhancing the
capacity for individuals to treat this medical illness.
Mrs. Brooks. I know one of the challenges with med schools
is in the past, they have given very little time to addiction
medicine and pain issues. Are they starting with the first year
now in your med schools?
Dr. Bharel. So the trick with our core competencies is we
allow each individual medical school to create the curriculum
the way that they needed to based on what their curriculum is,
so they imposed it in multiple different ways, but that
allowed--usually curriculum changes take two to three years.
This we were able to do in a matter of weeks because the core
competencies were broad enough for them to incorporate. And we
know from graduating medical students, they are saying that
they are seeing the difference and they feel more prepared.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. Ms. Mullins?
Ms. Mullins. Sure. We are very excited. We just did a loan
repayment program this year. We had over a hundred applicants;
I think 102. We funded 22 of those applications in the first
round with a 2-year requirement to practice within the state.
That was focused on therapists because some of West Virginia's
existing loan repayment programs focus on the medical, the
physician end, so we really wanted something to focus on the
therapy level. But in addition to that, we also provided about
154 scholarships which with the same types of requirements that
eliminated the front-end investment and some of the student
loan debt as well.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. Mr. Kinsley, very briefly.
Mr. Kinsley. We have a loan repayment program for both
doctors and mid-levels; we have worked to train over 900
residents in North Carolina and currently four of our five
medical schools have built the training into their core
curriculum.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, and with the chair's indulgence, if
we could get Rhode Island to answer.
Ms. DeGette. Absolutely. I am not leaving Rhode Island out.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. Dr. Alexander-Scott.
Dr. Alexander-Scott. Thank you. Our loan repayment program
has also expanded to include behavioral health providers and
our medical school does now incorporate the data waiver
training into our medical school curriculum so that as students
graduate, they automatically have the data waiver to be able to
prescribe buprenorphine.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you all for working so hard with your
higher ed institutions. It is critically important. It will
make a difference. I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. The gentle lady from Florida is recognized for
five minutes.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Chair DeGette. I want to thank
you as well for calling this hearing on the public health
epidemic that is the opioid crisis and thanks to all of you,
all of our expert witnesses for everything that you are doing
to help families deal with the dire consequences.
In Florida, in the past few years, we have lost well over
5,000 of our neighbors per year; and while I am really proud of
the work of this Committee passing 21st Century Cures and the
Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act and the SUPPORT Act;
there is one glaring problem that has been highlighted by a few
of my colleagues here today, and that is the lack of continuity
of care and resources in the minority states that have not
expanded Medicaid. And unfortunately, the State of Florida is
one of those.
Mr. Kinsley, North Carolina has not expanded Medicaid. I
believe all of the other states have here today, Pennsylvania,
Massachusetts, West Virginia, and Rhode Island. In your written
testimony, you noted that ``for every single person who is
brought to the emergency department, nearly half has no health
insurance at all.'' Further, you stated that expanding Medicaid
``would bring an additional $4 billion into North Carolina for
healthcare.''
All of the Democratic members of the Florida congressional
delegation yesterday sent a letter back home to the opening day
of the Florida legislature. And our message to the governor and
to our members back in Florida was that you are not doing right
by our citizens.
One recent study said if Florida expanded Medicaid, we
would draw down almost $14 billion for our state over the next
five years alone. It would improve people's health. It would
improve people's access to healthcare, and it would do so much
for families who suffer the consequences of substance use
disorder.
Mr. Kinsley, talk to us again about how expanding Medicaid
in North Carolina would allow the state to better target the
use of federal grant dollars to address the opioid epidemic.
Mr. Kinsley. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman. At
present, more than two-thirds of the Federal state opioid
response and state targeted response grants that North Carolina
received are just going for treatment or expanding care for the
individuals that are uninsured. And that is a laudable and
notable purpose for those dollars, but we do not have those
dollars available to building our workforce, to training our
individuals, to increasing the way that our system works
together and coordinates care. Instead, we are expanding
treatment because we do not have Medicaid expansion in North
Carolina.
The North Carolina state legislature reopened and
reconvened today around a budget that has not been able to be
passed primarily in the debate on Medicaid expansion in North
Carolina. And I, too, hope that we are able to expand and
increase access in North Carolina.
Ms. Castor. Other recent studies have shown that now 37
states plus the District of Columbia have expanded. The other
states that haven't, we are sending our dollars to and
subsidizing the budgets in healthcare of some of these other
states. Congresswoman Kuster wants to take me to lunch for
something.
Ms. Smith, how many lives have you saved in Pennsylvania
because Pennsylvania expanded Medicaid?
Ms. Smith. So, in Pennsylvania, as a result of Medicaid
expansion, we have been able to treat about 125,000 additional
patients. So for us, that is huge. I can tell you with the
large amount of funding, over $230 million coming to the state,
if we did not have Medicaid expansion, you would not be hearing
me talking about a loan repayment program, about how things--
about expanding MAT and corrections, about any of those things
because the reality is we would be spending all of those
dollars just on I will call it plain old treatment.
So, as a result of Medicaid expansion, we have been able to
repurpose those dollars in ways that allow us to modernize the
system, to integrate with physical health, mental health, and
behavioral health, all together in one system moving forward.
So I really can't stress enough the importance of having
participated in Medicaid expansion and certainly, hope that it
continues for years to come.
Ms. Castor. Dr. Bharel, how about you in Massachusetts?
Dr. Bharel. In Massachusetts, the foundation of our
treatment is having access to the medical treatment that is
proven and evidence based. Because we have that, we have been
able to tackle the very challenging and complex issues related
to getting individuals to that care, preventing disease in the
first place, and making sure that individuals who are at the
highest risk not only obtain that care but stay in with
recovery coaching which is, by the way covered by our Medicaid
1115 waiver now.
Ms. Castor. Thank you. And Ms. Mullins, West Virginia, I
believe, has the highest share of population served through
Medicaid. And you talked about the importance of
predictability. How important has Medicaid expansion been to
opioid and substance use, treatment. You talked about the
predictability of care and the predictability of those
resources.
Ms. Mullins. It is very important in terms of sustaining. I
talked about the infrastructure that we have been building
without Medicaid paying for residential treatment. There is no
way to sustain those valuable services. And according to my
notes, we have over 21,000 West Virginians receiving
medication-assisted treatment in our state.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much. The gentleman from
Maryland, Mr. Sarbanes, is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks to the panel
of witnesses, very compelling testimony today, and I thank you
all for coming.
We have learned, of course, that one of the root causes is
inappropriate prescribing practices and a number of you have
spoken to that today and we know that many states such as
Virginia and Maine and Rhode Island have set prescribing limits
for opioids.
Dr. Alexander-Scott, you highlighted that as part of the
response to addiction crisis, your state enacted regulations in
2017 that limited the initial prescription of an opioid for a
new patient to no more than 30, what are called morphine
milligram equivalents, or MMEs, per day.
Could you describe a little bit more for us the danger to
some patients of exceeding that limit? And do you think that
the policy has been successful in steering providers to make
better prescribing decisions for their patients?
Dr. Alexander-Scott. Thank you, Congressman. We had data
that said the higher the morphine milligram equivalence a
patient is on for, the longer period of time, the higher their
risk is of becoming addicted to opioids over time, and thus
their risk of an overdose.
We wanted to make sure that there was flexibility for the
provider in determining what was needed for the patient; we
also thought it critical to distinguish between acute pain and
chronic pain in limiting the opioids prescribed.
So by cutting off the MME at 30 for an acute reason for
pain, we have seen a substantial decrease in the number of
opioids prescribed for an initial use of pain, particularly for
acute pain scenarios.
We have chosen to handle chronic pain needs separately
because oftentimes, people already have an addiction or a
tolerance to opioids that require a more multi-disciplinary
approach to addressing that.
Mr. Sarbanes. Let me drill down on that a little bit more.
Because I know the CDC, in their recommendations, has indicated
that providers should avoid prescribing over 90 MMEs a day and
many states have put that kind of recommendation into code. I
think Nevada and South Carolina have limited opioid
prescriptions to 90 MMEs or under in most patient cases. There
are a lot of products on the market, especially extended
release and long-acting opioid products, that do exceed that
even 90 MME a day limit. And some of them even double or triple
that limit.
So I understand that the products are intended for patients
who have become opioid resistant, as you mentioned to these
lower dose-products, but do these high dosage opioids pose
enough of an overdose risk that we should at least begin to
explore methods to limit their market availability in your
judgment?
Dr. Alexander-Scott. We have certainly considered that in
our regulation's approach for acute pain management in addition
to the 30 morphine milligram equivalents limitation. We have
also required that long-acting opioids are not used for acute
pain in those scenarios as well because of the challenge that
can occur, and again, distinguishing from those patients that
already are dealing with chronic pain and would need to be
handled separately.
Mr. Sarbanes. Well, thank you. I know FDA has taken
previous action to limit the use of these high-dose products
and they have imposed something called a REMS, a risk
evaluation and mitigation strategy program on providers who
prescribe these products. I also know that there was a recently
released JAMA study on this topic that failed to find any
evidence that the REMS program was actually successful at
achieving those goals of reducing inappropriate prescribing.
Given the CDC recommendations, state precedent on
prescribing limits, and the lack of existing action, it may be
time for FDA or Congress, or both of us, to explore options for
limiting the market availability of high-dose opioid products
that are currently on the market and limiting these new high-
dose products, restraining them from entering the market in the
future. So I think that is something we want to look at, and I
look forward to exploring a wide array of solutions to
combating the opioid crisis and making sure states have the
funding and flexibility to support these affected communities.
And thank you again for your testimony. I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. The gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you to our panel
for an interesting and very helpful conversation. In your
testimony, many of you hit on a topic that is near and dear to
my heart and that is eliminating bureaucratic and unnecessary
barriers to substance use treatment. Research has shown that
individuals who are being actively treated with buprenorphine
lower their risk of opioid overdose by up to 50 percent, even
when provided without corresponding comprehensive psychosocial
supports or services. With any other medication that lowered
mortality by 50 percent, we would be rightfully hailing this as
a miracle drug and doing everything in our power to get it out
to anyone who could possibly need it. Unfortunately, here in
the United States, we continue to make it harder to obtain
these medications than the powerful opioids that got us into
the problem in the first place.
So Secretary Smith, I was pleased to see that in your
testimony, you called for the elimination of the requirement
for providers to obtain a waiver from the DEA in order to
prescribe buprenorphine for treating opioid dependence. I have
introduced the bipartisan Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment Act
with over 100 co-sponsors to do exactly that.
Can you describe for the Committee why this is such an
important step to take in expanding access to addiction
treatment?
Ms. Smith. Absolutely, and thank you so much for sponsoring
that legislation that we are fully supportive of. So I
mentioned earlier in my opening that we have expanded our DEA X
waivered physicians to over 4,000. And we are near the top of
the list when you look at states in terms of number of X
waivered physicians. But looks can be deceiving. So when you
actually take a look at those 4,000 waivered doctors, and you
look at what are their prescribing capacities, and then whether
or not they are actually prescribing up to their capacity or
not, it is pretty staggering. So we have got a very large
percentage who are still at that 30 patient capacity level and
most of them are not even prescribing up to 30 patients. And so
we have worked with an organization called Vital Strategies to
design a survey that is going to go out to all 4,000 of our X
waivered physicians in the state to ask some very specific
questions about why they aren't treating more patients. Would
they be willing to treat more patients? Is it an education
issue? Is it a barrier because of additional oversight?
And so anecdotally, we definitely heard that efforts to
over-regulate are what they often say. Doctors who were trained
to administer any and all kinds of medications but to
specifically call out this kind of medication and say you need
a special waiver to administer this; they just don't want to be
bothered with that. And so Pennsylvania believes that any steps
we can take to eliminate those barriers, to change the
conversation around the idea that treating addiction is a
clinical necessity and we rely on trained physicians to be able
to provide that treatment.
Mr. Tonko. If I could have the rest of the panel respond
yes or no. Do you agree with the assessment just made by
Secretary Smith?
Dr. Bharel. Yes, hello. Thank you for that question. The
access to MAT and decreasing the barriers are critical and we
often spoke about it in our testimony.
Mr. Tonko. Do you agree with the waiver?
Dr. Bharel. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. I want to use my time here wisely. So thank you.
Yes.
Ms. Mullins?
Ms. Mullins. Yes, but we don't have a therapist to really
support those physicians once they are--can prescribe. For us,
the workforce shortage is way more impacted on the therapy and
the counseling side.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Kinsley, please.
Mr. Kinsley. Yes, we are supportive.
Mr. Tonko. And Doctor?
Dr. Alexander-Scott. Yes, we support and also look to
expand the services available as well.
Mr. Tonko. OK, and many of you also mentioned individuals
released from incarceration as a population particularly
vulnerable to opioid overdose, with Commissioner Bharel noting
that the justice-involved population has death rates of 420
times higher than the general population. I heard your exchange
with my colleague from New Hampshire.
So, while federal grant opportunities such as the
Medication and Assistive Treatment Reentry Initiative are
helping to fill in some of the gaps, I believe a more
comprehensive and sustainable strategy is required, therefore;
I have championed the Medicaid Reentry Act which would allow
states to restart Medicaid benefits for incarcerated
individuals 30 days prior to release providing a sustainable
funding stream for medication-assisted treatment, case
management, and recovery support services, and creating a more
seamless transition back into community care.
Commissioner Bharel, would be allowing states the
flexibility to restart Medicaid benefits for eligible
incarcerated individuals 30 days prior to release help to
reduce overdose deaths for that population?
Dr. Bharel. Making sure there is a continuity of care is
critical both to medical and the other support mechanisms that
you stated.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. I have exhausted my time. I have
several other questions which I will submit to the
subcommittee, and with that I yield.
Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. The gentle lady from
New York is recognized now for five minutes.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and I thank
our ranking member. We have heard a lot of encouraging stories
from the states today about how they would be able to put
federal funds to use and make progress. But it is also clear
that there are still unmet needs and unresolved challenges that
states face as they work to address the ongoing crisis.
I would like to explore some of the remaining challenges as
we consider further support.
Ms. Mullins, in your testimony, you noted unresolved
challenges around building a robust addiction treatment
workforce, including attracting and retaining people to work in
rural areas throughout the state. Can you describe what steps
the state is undertaking to address this challenge and what
additional hurdles remain?
Ms. Mullins. So there are multiple challenges for this. It
is a pervasive workforce shortage in all areas of employment in
West Virginia. We do not have enough people to fill our
vacancies. But it also is about parity in terms of what we pay
our mental health and addictions workforce. It is not the same,
so when students graduate with debt, they are graduating with
levels of debt that cannot really expect to earn salaries that
are commensurate with their levels of education. So to me, that
is a fundamental thing that we must address and end the student
loan debt to go with it. So we have really been focusing on
those loan repayment programs, scholarship programs, anything
that we can to really increase A, our pipeline, but then also
to provide the ongoing education that we can. And we are
finding that our individuals that are entering recovery have a
really strong interest in providing services, so we are paying
particular attention in our loan repayment programs, even to
persons who might be in recovery and wishing to take those next
steps to enter the workforce.
Ms. Clarke. So is that at the state level? Is it something
at the federal level that you think can be helpful in sort of
undergirding and helping to unearth individuals who would move
into that line of work?
Ms. Mullins. I think the flexibility to use the funds in
those creative ways would really be very beneficial.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. Secretary Smith, in your written
testimony submitted to the Committee, you also referenced a
lack of additional treatment, excuse me, addiction treatment
workforce, and noted that ``Demand on addiction treatment
workforce will increase as more people move toward treatment
and recovery.''
So can you describe how the lack of addiction treatment
workforce has inhibited Pennsylvania's ability to provide
services to vulnerable populations? And what steps has your
state taken to address this problem given, that more people are
moving toward treatment and recovery?
Ms. Smith. Yes, certainly. Our workforce challenges,
particularly in urban centers like Philadelphia and Pittsburgh,
have really inhibited the ability for some of those more
vulnerable populations to access treatment. To give you an
example, we have an advisory council that advises my department
and one of the members of that council is a practicing
addiction medicine physician who happens to also treat
adolescents. But he is part of the Latino community and his
practice is so overwhelmed with patients that he is working
well into the night beyond his office closure hours because
those individuals have nowhere else to go.
And so part of the challenges that we hear in building a
workforce where you don't have communication barriers, so where
you have got doctors who are treating patients that really
understand them and communicate with them, a lot of the
challenges come down to the education and training requirements
and some of those language barriers that exist in being able to
meet those requirements.
Ms. Clarke. So you have ID'd a cultural competence
essentially.
Ms. Smith. Yes.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. Mr. Kinsley, in North Carolina's
response letter to the Committee, the state notes that ``in
many of North Carolina's communities hardest hit by the opioid
epidemic it is difficult to implement programs and build
treatment and recovery access because the community lacks basic
infrastructure including broadband and cell phone service.''
So can you describe how broadband and cell phone services
are important to helping North Carolina address the opioid
epidemic in these communities; what more could Congress do to
overcome this challenge?
Mr. Kinsley. Thank you for the question. Telehealth access
in our rural communities is the key strategy for our efforts to
expand access to treatment, yet there are many parts of North
Carolina that can't sustain more than a 4G signal digitally or
have access to broadband. And so, without those, we are not
able to sustain those services. That, of course, is built on
the fact that it is a sustainable approach for education, for
all these providers, for parity. I agree with what all of my
colleagues have said.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. I have run out of time and Dr.
Scott, I did have a question for you, but I will submit it for
your response at a later time.
But Madam Chair, I would like to ask for this letter from
the New York State Office of Addiction Services and Support to
be added to the record.
Ms. DeGette. Without objection, it is entered.
Ms. Clarke. OK, thank you. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. DeGette. The Chair now recognizes the very patient, Mr.
Latta for five minutes and welcome to the subcommittee.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Madam Chair, and first, I want
to thank you very much for letting me to waive on today. I
really appreciate it because this is a really important and
very relevant topic.
Just in one of the major newspapers in the State of Ohio
yesterday had an article that just came out and something we
have heard coming. But we know that in 2009 we had 1,423 people
die of an overdose in the State of Ohio. That number went up in
2017 to 4,854. And the trend right now, thank heavens, it is
going down. It was 3,764 last year, but these are all deaths
that we don't want to see at all, these overdose deaths.
I know when I have gone around my district, it is very
important when I am talking to my healthcare providers and
other folks out there. One of the things they were telling me
for several years is we can't find help. And it is everything
from finding the dollars to finding where they can get
services. So in the last Congress, I introduced what we call
the INFO Act, which established a dashboard through HHS so that
states and communities could go out there and find help.
What I would like to ask you all today are just some
questions as to what is going on in your states, if I may, and
if I could ask everyone, I don't have a lot of time, but maybe
be brief on your answers, but some of your states have
developed public-facing dashboards. When were these dashboards
created and what information do you have in them? If we could
just go right down the line.
Ms. Smith. Sure. I will be as brief as possible.
Pennsylvania does have an interactive opioid data dashboard. If
you go to pa.gov/opioids, you are able to access that. It
contains information like prescription drug monitoring
information, overdose deaths, naloxone distributions, NAS, EMS
leave-behinds, treatment statistics, and the number goes on and
on and on. So happy for you to check that out and if you have
questions, let me know.
And was there a second part to your question?
Mr. Latta. It was mainly about what information do you have
contained in them.
Ms. Smith. Yes, and it was established about two years ago.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Ms. Smith. You are welcome.
Dr. Bharel. Thank you for the question. Since 2015,
Massachusetts has put out a quarterly dashboard that contains
much of the same information related to a number of deaths,
both reported and predicable using a predictive model, as well
as by town and city, so all 351 towns and cities get a report
on the number of deaths in their communities so they can do
local-based planning as well, as well as EMS and healthcare
data.
We also, since 2015, have put together for the first time
data across state government, so we are looking for the first
time at house data as it relates to public health, but also
criminal justice, schools, et cetera.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Ms. Mullins. So for West Virginia, over the last couple of
years, we have been using reports uploaded quarterly that
highlight things like overdose deaths, prescription drug
monitoring, and different data points that we have been
focusing on through our grants with the Centers for Disease
Control and surveillance. We do that quarterly. But this week,
actually, we expect to upload and make public a dashboard that
tracks nonfatal deaths, nonfatal overdoses, and stay tuned. We
are really looking forward to releasing that this week.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Mr. Kinsley. North Carolina launched its opioid action plan
dashboard in 2017. This dashboard not only has key data points
and is updated consistently around the opioid epidemic, but it
also broadens into other aspects of substance use disorder. It
allows counties and local communities to drill down into the
information in their community which we have seen as being
incredibly powerful at aligning all of us to the same
strategies and also getting foundations, nongovernmental
entities, and private/public partnerships onboard with focusing
their dollars in the same way that we need to focus.
And the other thing is that all of these indicators relate
back to our strategy, those key performance indicators that
help us measure our success in this effort.
Dr. Alexander-Scott. Similar to what has been heard, in
Rhode Island, when the governor activated the Overdose
Prevention and Intervention Task Force, we understood that
having a dashboard would be critical to that. And that was
activated in the 2015 time frame.
Our dashboard does serve as a metric for each of our
strategic initiatives on prevention, recovery, reversal, and
treatment, and also allows for the public to be able to access
where treatment services are. And naloxone is available, as
well as access to other recovery services that are needed.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. In my last 15 seconds, if I could do
this real quick, if I could just real quick, maybe it is a yes
or no. Have your communities had problems finding those federal
dollars out there to get that help? Yes or no, down the line.
Ms. Smith. Yes and no.
Mr. Latta. OK.
Ms. Mullins. Mostly no because of the way our procurement
system has worked and the capacity to put data out into the
communities so they know what problems they are seeing and they
can then ask us for the appropriate funding targeted.
Ms. Mullins. I would go with Secretary Smith's answer yes
and no. Many people have no trouble, but there are still some
folks out there struggling to find that information.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Mr. Kinsley. We have been able to deploy funds to more than
50 local communities. Our issue is primarily that we don't have
enough funds because they are all going to augment treatment.
Dr. Alexander-Scott. We use a data-driven process to target
which communities need it most and are really looking, given
that it is Rhode Island, to make sure that every town and city
has access to the services needed.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. Madam Chair, again, I would
like to thank you very much for allowing me to waive on today.
Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. But I want to thank all
of our witnesses. One of the members said this was one of the
best hearings we have had this session and I agree. It is
really excellent and very good information as we move forward
to see what our next steps are.
In response to the Committee's September 18th letter, the
Committee received responses from 16 states regarding how the
states address the opioid crisis with the support of federal
funding. And I move to enter all of those responses into the
record. And in addition, let us see, we are going to enter them
all from Florida, Indiana, Kentucky, Maine, Maryland,
Massachusetts, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Tennessee, West Virginia,
and Wisconsin. Without objection, those will be ordered.
And in addition, in continuation of our bipartisan work
looking at addiction and treatment issues today, the Committee
is sending a bipartisan letter signed by the ranking member,
myself, and others, letters to the DEA, DHS, and HHS about the
emergence of what this panel was talking about methamphetamine
and polysubstance use and what the administration is doing
about this. I would ask for unanimous consent to enter those
three letters into the record. Without objection, that will be
ordered as well.
The Chair would like to remind Members that pursuant to the
Committee rules; they have ten business days to submit
additional questions for the record to be answered by the
witnesses. Several of the members did ask the witnesses to
answer additional questions and I would ask all of you to
respond promptly if you receive any of those questions. And
with that, this subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:31 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Michael C. Burgess

Thank you, Madam Chair. Last Congress, the Energy and
Commerce Committee worked in a bipartisan manner to produce
legislation that was signed into law by President Trump. The
Substance Use-Disorder Prevention that Promotes Opioid Recovery
and Treatment for Patients and Communities Act, or SUPPORT Act,
was written to help advance treatment and recovery initiatives
for those affected by opioid addiction.
I thank our witnesses for being here today. Your testimony
will be helpful in understanding the challenges we face in
continuing this fight against opioid addiction and death, while
ensuring that patients can manage their pain. It is important
to Congress to have hearings like this one, where we can ensure
the effectiveness of our legislative efforts and identify gaps
in which we can improve the health of Americans.
I yield back.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
