- EPA'S LEAD AND COPPER PROPOSAL: FALLING SHORT OF PROTECTING PUBLIC HEALTH

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EPA'S LEAD AND COPPER PROPOSAL: FALLING
SHORT OF PROTECTING PUBLIC HEALTH

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-99

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

51-560 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman

BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              GREG WALDEN, Oregon
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York             FRED UPTON, Michigan
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           PETE OLSON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California           DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico            H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PAUL TONKO, New York                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York, Vice     BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chair                            BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa                 LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts                    MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California            RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California                TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DARREN SOTO, Florida
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
------

Professional Staff

JEFFREY C. CARROLL, Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Deputy Staff Director
MIKE BLOOMQUIST, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change

PAUL TONKO, New York
Chairman

YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York           JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
SCOTT H. PETERS, California            Ranking Member
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California    CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware       BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
DARREN SOTO, Florida                 BILLY LONG, Missouri
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              BILL FLORES, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
JERRY McNERNEY, California           JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California, Vice Chair    GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    10

Witnesses Statement

Mona Hanna-Attisha, M.D., Director, Pediatric Public Health
Initiative, C. S. Mott Endowed Professor of Public Health,
Division of Public Health......................................    12
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Deborah Kim Gaddy, Environmental Justice Organizer, Clean Water
Action of New Jersey...........................................    22
Prepared statement...........................................    24
Angela Licata, Deputy Commissioner, New York City Department of
Environmental Protection.......................................    29
Prepared statement...........................................    31
Cathy Tucker-Vogel, Public Water Supply Section Chief, Kansas
Department of Health and Environment...........................    42
Prepared statement \1\
Steve Estes-Smargiassi, Director Of Planning And Sustainability,
Massachusetts Water Resources Authority........................    43
Prepared statement...........................................    46
Cindy Bobbitt, Commissioner, Grant County, Oklahoma..............    55
Prepared statement...........................................    57
Mae Wu, Senior Director Health and Food, Senior Attorney Healthy
People and Thriving Communities Program........................    65
Prepared statement...........................................    67

----------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF18/
20200211/110501/HHRG-116-IF18-Wstate-Tucker-VogelC-
20200211.pdf.

Submitted Material

Letter of February 11, 2020, to Mr. Tonko and Mr. Shimkus, by
Dominick Longobardi, Regional Director Region II, from American
Public Water Works Association, submitted by Mr. Tonko.........   118
Letter of February 10, 2020, by William E. (Bill) Spearman III,
P. E. President, and Scott D. Grayson, CAE, Cheif Executive
Director, from American Public Water Works Association to the
Energy and Commerce Committee, submitted by Mr. Tonko..........   122
Letter of February 10, 2020, to Subcommittee on Environment and
Climate Change, by Mike Keegan, National Rural Water
Association, submitted by Mr. Tonko............................   128
Letter of February 10, 2020, to Mr. Tonko and Mr. Shimkus, by Tom
Cochran, CEO and Executive Director, U.S. Conference of Mayors
and Clarence E. Anthony, CEO and Executive Director, National
League of Cities, submitted by Mr. Tonko.......................   130

EPA'S LEAD AND COPPER PROPOSAL: FALLING
SHORT OF PROTECTING PUBLIC HEALTH

----------

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 2020

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m., in
room 2322 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Paul Tonko
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Tonko, Clarke, Peters,
Barragan, Blunt Rochester, Soto, DeGette, Matsui, McNerney,
Ruiz, Dingell, Pallone (ex officio), Shimkus (subcommittee
ranking member), McMorris Rodgers, McKinley, Johnson, Long,
Flores, Carter, Duncan, and Walden (ex officio).
Staff present: Jacqueline Cohen, Chief Environment Counsel;
Adam Fischer, Policy Analyst; Anthony Gutierrez, Professional
Staff Member; Rick Kessler, Senior Advisor and Staff Directory,
Energy and Environment; Brendan Larkin, Policy Coordinator; Tim
Robinson, Chief Counsel; Nikki Roy, Policy Coordinator; William
Clutterbuck, Minority Staff Assistant; Jordan Davis, Minority
Senior Advisor; Tyler Greenberg, Minority Staff Assistant;
Peter Kielty, Minority General Counsel; Mary Martin, Minority
Chief Counsel, Energy and Environment and Climate Change; and
Peter Spencer, Minority Senior Professional Staff Member,
Environment and Climate Change.
Mr. Tonko. The Subcommittee on Environment and Climate
Change of the Committee on Energy and Commerce will now come to
order.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes for the purposes of an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

In 2004, EPA initiated a review of the lead and copper Rule
following the lead crisis in Washington, DC 16 years later, we
are still waiting for EPA to finalize its long-term revision.
The intention at that time was to take action to prevent the
next crisis. Since then, we have witnessed one water crisis
after another, upturning the lives of millions in Flint, in
Newark, in Pittsburgh, and other communities which have had to
suffer at least partially due to an unproductive standard,
unprotective standard.
Last year, EPA proposed its long-awaited revision for the
Lead and Copper Rule. The deadline for public comment is
tomorrow. I expect we will hear today that the proposal still
needs work and, in my opinion, it falls far short of the
meaningful protective action necessary to get lead out of our
drinking water systems.
Today's panel includes witnesses representing health
experts, environmental advocates, state regulators, local
governments, and utilities. I appreciate everyone's perspective
and hope we can find some common ground around which a goal can
be developed, a common that we share in those efforts in
ensuring that Americans have safe drinking water. The Lead and
Copper Rule was first promulgated in 1991, so we have known for
decades that there is no safe level of lead for children. We
also know that the impaired brain development these children
experience from lead exposure will follow them the rest of
their lives.
Unlike other contaminants, lead enters into drinking water
from within the system. It can be found in millions of service
lines and fixtures within homes. Action to get the lead out of
our water systems starts with identifying existing service
lines and making that information publicly available. I support
EPA's proposal to require inventories of service lines, but
identifying these lines must be followed with full replacement,
removing lead service lines and prohibiting unsafe partial
replacements.
Many of the communities currently responding to lead
contaminations are doing this at no cost to residents.
Unfortunately, the proposed Lead and Copper Rule revision does
not require proactive service line replacement. It also fails
to establish a health-based household lead action level or even
reduce the current action level of 15 parts per billion.
The proposal does include a new trigger level for utilities
to begin to plan for future action at ten parts per billion.
But we already have challenges with risk communication and lead
contaminations and, in practice, this new level adds complexity
to an already complicated rule without directly improving
public health outcomes. I know replacing all lead service lines
will not be easy or cheap. That is why I strongly support
additional federal funding to ensure that state and local
governments, schools, daycares, and water utilities have the
resources necessary to map and replace water infrastructure
containing lead as quickly as possible.
Today, we will also hear about other aspects of the
proposal, including treatment requirements, sampling
procedures, public notification, and monitoring at schools and
child care facilities. Ultimately, the revision as proposed
will not require the action needed to get lead out of our
drinking water systems. This EPA proposal has further
demonstrated the major deficiencies of the Safe Drinking Water
Act which have prevented EPA from setting enforceable standards
that are truly protective of public health.
The past 24 years of SDWA, including recent considerations
of PFOS, have made it clear that the regulatory framework for
standard setting has left Americans dangerously exposed. I look
forward to today's discussion on EPA's proposal and hope that
we can continue to explore the reforms necessary to ensure the
Safe Drinking Water Act is able to guarantee the safe water
that our constituents expect, our constituents require, and our
constituents deserve.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonko follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Paul Tonko

In 2004, EPA initiated a review of the Lead and Copper Rule
following the lead crisis in Washington, DC.
Sixteen years later, we are still waiting for EPA to
finalize its long-term revision.
The intention at that time was to take action to prevent
the next crisis. Since then we have witnessed one water crisis
after another, upturning the lives of millions in Flint,
Newark, Pittsburgh, and other communities who have had to
suffer, at least partially, due to an unprotective standard.
Last year, EPA proposed its long-awaited revision for the
Lead and Copper Rule. The deadline for public comment is
tomorrow.
I expect we will hear today that the proposal still needs
works.
And in my opinion, it falls far short of the meaningful
protective action necessary to get lead out of our drinking
water systems.
Today's panel includes witnesses representing health
experts, environmental advocates, state regulators, local
governments, and utilities.
I appreciate everyone's perspective and hope we can find
some common ground around a goal I know we share: ensuring
Americans have safe drinking water.
The Lead and Copper Rule was first promulgated in 1991, so
we have known for decades that there is no safe level of lead
for children.
We also know that the impaired brain development these
children experience from lead exposure will follow them the
rest of their lives.
Unlike other contaminants, lead enters into drinking water
from within the system. It can be found in millions of service
lines and fixtures within homes.
Action to get the lead out of our water systems, starts
with identifying existing service lines and making that
information publicly available.
I support EPA's proposal to require inventories of services
lines, but identifying these lines must be followed with full
replacement--removing lead service lines and prohibiting unsafe
partial replacements.
Many of the communities currently responding to lead
contaminations are doing this at no cost to residents.
Unfortunately, the proposed Lead and Copper Rule revision
does not require proactive service line replacement.
It also fails to establish a health-based household lead
action level or even reduce the current action level of 15
parts per billion.
The proposal does include a new ``trigger'' level for
utilities to begin to plan for future action at ten parts per
billion.
But we already have challenges with risk communication and
lead contaminations.
And, in practice, this new level adds complexity to an
already complicated rule without directly improving public
health outcomes.
I know replacing all lead service lines will not be easy or
cheap. That is why I strongly support additional federal
funding to ensure state and local governments, schools,
daycares, and water utilities have the resources necessary to
map and replace water infrastructure containing lead as quickly
as possible.
Today we will also hear about other aspects of the
proposal, including treatment requirements, sampling
procedures, public notification, and monitoring at schools and
childcare facilities.
Ultimately, the revision as proposed will not require the
action needed to get lead out of our drinking water systems.
This EPA proposal has further demonstrated the major
deficiencies of the Safe Drinking Water Act, which have
prevented EPA from setting enforceable standards that are truly
protective of public health. The past 24 years of SDWA (``sid-
wah''), including recent considerations of PFAS, have made it
clear that the regulatory framework for standard-setting has
left Americans dangerously exposed.
I look forward to today's discussion on EPA's proposal and
hope we can continue to explore the reforms necessary to ensure
the Safe Drinking Water Act is able to guarantee the safe water
that our constituents expect, require and deserve.

With that, I will now recognize Mr. Shimkus, our ranking
member of the Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change,
for 5 minutes for his opening statement, please.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Tonko.
Mr. Chairman, lead is a potent neurotoxin, exposure to
which is known to cause serious educational deficits in
children. Our country has made significant strides in reducing
harmful exposure to lead by removing it from gasoline and
paint. Even still, preventing lead from entering drinking water
remains a serious issue and it deserves this committee's
attention.
Over the last 15 years, breakdowns in oversights,
engineering, enforcement, and leadership have caused and
highlighted some of the more troubling incidents of increased
levels of lead in drinking water. In Washington, DC, Flint,
Michigan, and Newark, New Jersey, and every community we
represent, our constituents should be drinking safe water from
their taps.
What is troubling to me today is not that we are
addressing the subject, but that we are not giving it the
serious attention it deserves. Almost three months ago, the
Environmental Protection Agency issued its first major revision
of the Lead and Copper Rule since 1991. This is obviously long
overdue, and I am glad they at least released this in November.
This updated rule has been greatly anticipated by the regulated
stakeholders and the general public and since its release, many
have expressed strong feelings about its contents and whether
it does too much or not enough. Meaningful oversight is
imperative, but that is not what is happening here today. Why?
To the best of my knowledge, the decision to have this
hearing was made just over seven days ago, an amount of time
that barely meets the requirements of the committee's rules.
This might be less of a problem if this were an easy subject
which we all agreed upon, but it is not. It is a highly
technical, emotionally charged matter that demands time and
attention to be done right. Moreover, it seems we are
continuing a pattern of complaining about the Agency without
affording them the opportunity to explain themselves.
The EPA has been clear with us in the past that a week's
notice isn't sufficient to provide members the detailed context
and answers that we expect. I understand the Agency offered to
provide us with a witness on other dates if the committee
wanted them. It appears they did not. I am not the only one who
thinks the EPA was unwanted here today. The Agency itself has
publicly asserted some of these same points in a press
statement, which they released this morning, which I would ask
unanimous consent to place into the record, Mr. Tonko.
Mr. Tonko. We will review it.
Mr. Shimkus. Had EPA been here, I would want to ask where
the Agency sees pipe replacements versus optimized corrosion
control, considering from 1991 to 2001, the number of large
systems exceeding the action level for lead dropped by 90
percent. I would ask how the 2012 amendments tightening the
amount of copper and brass in fixtures was impacting drinking
water levels. I would ask what time, effort, and resources EPA
planned in undertaking to assist water systems, especially in
rural and low-income areas, to comply with the proposed rule as
well as make information available for managing the rule. And I
would ask how the Agency expects communities to pay for new
mandates.
The reality is, this rule will increase costs and the
Drinking Water State Revolving Fund will not be able to meet
all these needs. Moreover, the funds should not be viewed as a
way to federally subsidize rates, and I want to ask about the
Agency's thinking on this question too. These are just my
questions, but they are worthy of a live, public discussion
that addresses these and other concerns raised in the
testimony.
For our witnesses that are here today, thank you for being
with us. Most of you are not local and had to rearrange your
schedules to make hotel and travel arrangements, written
testimony, finished your comments to the Agency on this rule,
and travel here in a few days' time. We appreciate your
sacrifice under the expedited timeframe and we look forward to
what you have to tell us.
Before I yield back my time, I want to ask unanimous
consent to have the following letter inserted in the hearing
record from the honorable Dominick Longobardi, mayor of Floral
Park, New York, president of the Hempstead, New York, board of
directors, and member of the American Public Works Association
board of directors. We believe his views are important and
should be included in the hearing record, even though we were
refused an additional witness.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. John Shimkus

Lead is a potent neurotoxin, exposure to which is known to
cause serious educational deficits in children. Our county has
made significant strides in reducing harmful exposure to lead
by removing it from gasoline and paint.
Even still, preventing lead from entering drinking water
remains a serious issue and it deserves this committee's
attention. Over the last fifteen years, breakdowns in
oversight, engineering, enforcement, and leadership have caused
and highlighted some of the more troubling incidents of
increased levels of lead in drinking water.
In Washington, DC, in Flint, Michigan, in Newark, New
Jersey, and in every community we represent, our constituents
should be drinking safe water from their taps.
What is troubling to me about today is not that we are
addressing this subject, but that we are not giving it the
serious attention it deserves.
Almost three months ago, the Environmental Protection
Agency issued its first major revision of the Lead and Copper
Rule since 1991. This updated rule has been greatly anticipated
by regulated stakeholders and the general public and, since its
release, many have expressed strong feeling about its contents
and whether it does too much or not enough.
Meaningful oversight is imperative, but that is not what is
happening here today.
Why?
To the best of my knowledge, the decision to have this
hearing was made just over seven days ago--an amount of time
that barely meets the requirements of the Committee's rules.
This might be less of a problem if this were an easy subject on
which we all agreed, but it's not--it's a highly technical,
emotionally charged matter, that demands time and attention to
be done right.
Moreover, it seems we're continuing a pattern of
complaining about the Agency without affording them the
opportunity to explain themselves. The EPA has been clear with
us in the past that a week's notice is insufficient to provide
Members the detail, context, and answers we expect. I
understand the Agency offered to provide us a witness on other
dates if the Committee wanted them--it appears they did not.
Had EPA been here, I would want to ask where the Agency
sees pipe replacement versus optimized corrosion control--
considering from 1991 to 2001 the number of large systems
exceeding the action level for lead dropped by 90 percent.
I would ask how the 2012 amendments tightening the amount
of copper and brass in fixtures was impacting drinking water
lead levels.
I would ask what time, effort and resources EPA planned in
undertaking to assist water systems--especially in rural and
low-income areas--to comply with the proposed rule as well as
make information available for managing lead.
And I would ask how the Agency expects communities to pay
for new mandates. The reality is this rule will increase costs,
and the Drinking Water State Revolving Fund will not be able to
meet all these needs. Moreover, the fund should not be viewed
as a way to federally subsidize rates and I would want to ask
about the Agency's thinking on this question too.
These are just my questions, but they are worthy of a live,
public discussion that addresses these, and the other concerns
raised in the testimony.
For our witnesses that are here, thank you for being with
us. Most of you are not local and had to rearrange your
schedules, make hotel and travel arrangements, write testimony,
finish your comments to the Agency on this rule, and travel
here in a few days' time. We appreciate your sacrifice under
the expedited timeframe and look forward to what you have to
tell us.
Before I yield back my time, I want to ask unanimous
consent to have the following letter inserted in the hearing
record from the Honorable Dominick Longobardi, Mayor of Floral
Park, New York; President of the Hempstead, New York Board of
Directors; and members of the American Public Works
Association's Board of Directors. We believe his views are
important and should be included in the hearing record even
though Majority refused to include Mayor Longobardi as a
witness for today's panel.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.

Mr. Tonko. OK. We will submit that, without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Mr. Tonko. The release from the EPA seems to have some
inaccuracies in it, so perhaps we should have the staff go
through it and----
Mr. Shimkus. OK. That would be fine.
Mr. Tonko. OK.
Mr. Shimkus. So we will just hold that off until further
review.
Mr. Tonko. Right. So the gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Pallone, chair of
the full committee, for 5 minutes for his opening statement,
please.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Today's hearing focuses on a widespread and pressing public
health crisis, lead contamination in drinking water. Safe
drinking water is a fundamental right and duty of our federal
government. Every American should be able to turn on their tap
confident that the water coming out is safe, and this should be
true for all communities and it must be safe for pregnant
women, infants, children, and the elderly.
But we are falling short and failing communities like
Washington, DC, Flint, Michigan, and Newark, in my home state
of New Jersey. The Environmental Protection Agency has an
important opportunity to strengthen our protections against
lead by revising the Lead and Copper Rule, but, unfortunately,
the Trump EPA's recent proposal squanders that opportunity.
Lead is a known toxin and Congress banned lead pipes in '86,
but those pipes remain in the ground leaching lead into the
drinking water that comes into our homes and schools.
Since 1991, EPA has set the maximum contaminant level goal
for lead and drinking water at zero, but nearly 30 years later,
EPA is still saying we can't achieve that goal or even get
close to it. To make matters worse, the Trump EPA's proposed
rule would not even set us on the path to achieving the goal of
lead-free water because it doesn't require aggressive
replacement of lead service lines.
And the proposal also falls short of providing the
certainty and clarity states and localities need in
implementing the Lead and Copper Rule. It ignores the lessons
of Flint, so it will fail to prevent the next Flint. It also
doesn't properly reflect some of the lessons from the drinking
water issue in Newark, New Jersey, where aggressive lead
pipeline replacement appears to be working.
Any final rule that fails to aggressively replace lead
service lines will fail to solve the problem of lead in
drinking water and those shortcomings should be addressed as
EPA works to finalize this important rule. Ultimately, if EPA
were to finalize this proposal, there is a real possibility
that 30 years from now, we could be no closer to ensuring lead-
free water for the American people and we can't allow that to
happen.
The inactivity over the last 30 years certainly highlights
the weaknesses in the Lead and Copper Rule. The fact is that
the Safe Drinking Water Act instructs EPA to set drinking water
standards based on cost-benefit analysis, not public health and
this is a fundamental flaw in the statute that leaves
vulnerable populations and disproportionately exposed
communities unprotected.
This hearing is the beginning of work in this subcommittee
to explore how the Safe Drinking Water Act should be reformed.
I thank chairman Mr. Tonko for undertaking this work. The Safe
Drinking Water Act should absolutely ensure that drinking water
is safe and that means health protective, not defined by cost-
benefit analysis. Chairman Tonko and I have worked together
repeatedly over the years to provide more funding for drinking
water infrastructure. That funding not only helps cities and
towns modernize their infrastructure and protect public health,
but it also creates jobs.
We will continue to work to provide the resources water
utilities need, the resources that those utilities need to
address lead and other threats to public health. The cost of
replacing lead service lines should be addressed through
infrastructure funding and financing. It should not dictate how
safe our water can be. Now the science is clear; there is no
safe level of lead exposure. The time for action is overdue.
EPA has to strengthen this proposal to protect public health,
including the health of vulnerable populations, and we in
Congress should strengthen the Safe Drinking Water Act to do
the same.
So, I just want to welcome Kim Gaddy from Clean Water
Action of New Jersey for joining us today. I look forward to
hearing from Kim and from all our witnesses about ways we can
strengthen the Safe Drinking Water Act for the future to better
protect the American people.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Today's hearing focuses on a widespread and pressing public
health crisis--lead contamination in drinking water. Safe
drinking water is a fundamental right and duty of our federal
government. Every American should be able to turn on their tap,
confident that the water coming out is safe. This should be
true for all communities, and it must be safe for pregnant
women, infants, children, and the elderly. But we are falling
short and failing communities like Washington, DC, Flint,
Michigan, and Newark in my home state of New Jersey.
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has an important
opportunity to strengthen our protections against lead by
revising the Lead and Copper Rule, but unfortunately the Trump
EPA's recent proposal squanders that opportunity.
Lead is a known toxin and Congress banned lead pipes in
1986. But those pipes remain in the ground, leaching lead into
the drinking water that comes into our homes and schools.
Since 1991, EPA has set the maximum contaminant level goal
for lead in drinking water at zero. But, nearly 30 years later,
EPA is still saying we cannot achieve that goal or even get
closer to it.
To make matters worse, the Trump EPA's proposed rule would
not even set us on the path to achieving the goal of lead-free
water because it doesn't require aggressive replacement of lead
servicelines. The proposal also falls far short of providing
the certainty and clarity states and localities need in
implementing the Lead and Copper Rule.
It ignores the lessons of Flint, so it will fail to prevent
the next Flint. It also doesn't properly reflect some of the
lessons from the drinking water issue in Newark where
aggressive lead pipeline replacement appears to be working. Any
final rule that fails to aggressively replace lead service
lines will fail to solve the problem of lead in drinking water.
These shortcomings should be addressed as EPA works to finalize
this important rule.
Ultimately, if EPA were to finalize this proposal, there is
a real possibility that 30 years from now we could be no closer
to ensuring lead free water for the American people.
We simply cannot and will not allow that to happen. The
inactivity over the last 30 years certainly highlights the
weaknesses in the Lead and Copper Rule. The fact is that the
Safe Drinking Water Act instructs EPA to set drinking water
standards based on cost-benefit analysis, not public health.
This is a fundamental flaw in the statute that leaves
vulnerable populations and disproportionately exposed
communities unprotected.
This hearing is the beginning of work in this Subcommittee
to explore how the Safe Drinking Water Act should be reformed.
I thank the Chairman Tonko for undertaking this work. The Safe
Drinking Water Act should absolutely ensure that drinking water
is safe, and that means health protective, not defined by cost-
benefit analysis.
Chairman Tonko and I have worked together repeatedly over
the years to provide more funding for drinking water
infrastructure. That funding not only helps cities and towns
modernize their infrastructure and protect public health, but
it also creates jobs. We will continue to work to provide the
resources water utilities need to address lead and other
threats to public health. The cost of replacing lead service
lines should be addressed through infrastructure funding and
financing--it should not dictate how safe our water can be.
The science is clear--here is no safe level of lead
exposure. The time for action is overdue. EPA must strengthen
this proposal to protect public health, including the health of
vulnerable populations. And we in Congress should strengthen
the Safe Drinking Water Act to do the same.
I would also like to welcome Kim Gaddy from Clean Water
Action of New Jersey for joining us today. I look forward to
hearing from Kim and from all of our witnesses about ways we
can strengthen the Safe Drinking Water Act for the future to
better protect the American people. I would now like to yield
my remaining time to Representative Dingell.

I now yield the rest of my time to Congresswoman Dingell
from Michigan.
Ms. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Pallone, for yielding. I would
like to briefly recognize an important witness here today, Dr.
Mona Hanna-Attisha, from the great state of Michigan, who has
done some truly amazing work to help bring critical attention
to the dangerous levels of lead in Flint, Michigan's drinking
water, and she has become a national champion.
Dr. Mona, as the kids call her, thank you for being here.
We are all grateful to you for all the work that you have done
during the Flint water crisis and all the good that you
continue to do as a pediatrician, professor, and public health
advocate. There is much that the committee can learn from her
today and it is an honor to have you here.
This is actually a very true story. I met Dr. Mona early
on, like before any of you had heard about Flint water, and it
was the first sick child that I met. And you all can picture me
doing this; I was going to take the child in my arms, put him
in the car, and take him to the best hospital I could in the
country. And she said, ``OK, Debbie. Take a deep breath. It is
systematic. There are a lot more kids like this.''
And she has taught me much ever since that first day I met
her. Welcome, and I welcome all the witnesses for being here
today. I yield back.
Ms. Dingell. It is a true story.
Mr. Pallone. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Representative Walden, ranking member of the full
committee, for 5 minutes for his opening statement, please.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Good morning, Chairman.
Mr. Tonko. Good morning.
Mr. Walden. And I will say at the top of this; we have
another subcommittee meeting concurrent with this one, so I
will be, so some of us will be going back and forth. But we all
believe the issue of lead exposure in drinking water is of
great concern to the safety of our citizens, safety of our
children, to our communities, and our overall health and well-
being.
The question is, how do we tackle this issue in a way that
makes the most sense for public health in a broad sense, in a
constitutionally permissible manner, and that best leverages
finite public and private resources on this task? No matter how
simple people want to make this issue, from engineering to
policy choices, the Lead and Copper Rule and its proposed
revisions are one of the most technical and challenging
drinking water rules that EPA has. It is really hard work.
Lead is typically not present in drinking water sources,
nor is it removed at the treatment plant. Moreover, as raised
in testimony of the witnesses from the Association of
Metropolitan Water Agencies, even if every lead service line in
the country were replaced, lead-tainted home plumbing fixtures
and piping would continue to present lead exposure issues, is
my understanding. So getting EPA to agreement in 1991 on the
existing Lead and Copper Rule was no small feat, and the fact
that its revisions have taken three decades to formally propose
is both frustrating, but not surprising.
While they are not here to accept congratulations,
Administrator Wheeler and the staff in the EPA's Office of
Ground Water and Drinking Water deserve great credit for
finally getting a proposal out the door when many had given up
on its prospects altogether. As we all know though, the
proposed rule is still very early in the process. Tomorrow, the
public comment period closes and the EPA will be busy digesting
and assembling responses to the many issues the public is
raising on this rule, which I expect today to be just a brief
preview.
While I wish we had this oversight hearing at a time when
the EPA and a broader set of witnesses could be heard, it is
important that we learn these issues on the front end to
understand their impacts when decided by the EPA. So I am
especially interested in learning more from Mr. Estes-
Smargiassi--did I get close to that?
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. That was good.
Mr. Walden. Oh, good. Well, don't expect me to do it twice
and get it right--and other municipal officials about the
impact the mandates this proposed rule will place on drinking
water systems, particularly unfunded mandates because that is
something we have to be aware of. The Drinking Water State
Revolving Fund program in the Safe Drinking Water Act owes its
existence entirely to a congressional desire to address
unfunded mandates posed by federal regulations, not to
subsidize rates or chase other collateral goals.
I also want to understand from these same folks whether
this rule strikes the correct balance between addressing lead
pipes, their treatment or replacement in a cost-effective way
for citizens and local governments, so we must also be careful
not to avoidably have federal law and state and local
requirements conflict with each other and make simultaneous
compliance impossible. We have all seen that happen before in
different areas. In addition, because of continued disturbances
that rattle pipes in turn shakes new lead into the system, I
also want to better appreciate what economic and practical
impact this rule might have on local planning related to other
emergency services like fire safety, sewage, and
telecommunications.
And, finally, I am interested in learning from Commissioner
Bobbitt as a rural elected official. I think we must look at
the cost of this rule to taxpayers, states, communities, and
the Federal Government. Every finite dollar we spend here is
one dollar less we can spend on other public health priorities,
and we have a lot of those.
So, Mr. Chairman, thanks again for having this panel. And I
want to welcome our witnesses and some of you, I know, are
making return appearances and we appreciate that. We are
fortunate to have the level of expertise that many of you bring
to this subject and I look forward to the question-and-answer
period to get behind your written statements. So thanks again
for your participation. We share a goal here and hopefully, we
will get a good outcome. And with that I yield back and I have
to go to the other sub.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Greg Walden

The issue of lead exposures in drinking water is obviously
of great concern to the safety of our communities and our
children's health and well-being. The question is how do we
tackle this issue in a way that makes the most sense for public
health - in a broad sense, in a constitutionally permissible
manner, and that best leverages finite public and private
resources on this task?
No matter how simple people want to make this issue, from
engineering to policy choices, the Lead and Copper Rule and its
proposed revisions is one of the more technical and challenging
drinking water rules that EPA has. Lead is typically not
present in drinking water sources, nor is it removed at the
treatment plant.
Moreover, as raised in testimony of the witness from the
Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies, even if every lead
service line in the country was replaced, lead tainted home
plumbing fixtures and piping would continue to present lead
exposure issues.
Getting EPA to agreement in 1991 on the existing Lead and
Copper Rule was no small feat and the fact that its revisions
have taken three decades to formally propose is both
frustrating and unsurprising. While they are not here to accept
congratulations, Administrator Wheeler and the staff in EPA's
Office of Groundwater and Drinking Water deserve credit for
finally getting a proposal out the door when many had given up
on its prospects.
As we all know, though, the proposed rule is still very
early in the process. Tomorrow, the public comment period
closes and EPA will be busy digesting and assembling responses
to the many issues the public is raising on this rule, of which
I expect today to be a brief preview. While I wish we had this
oversight hearing at a time when EPA and a broader set of
witnesses could be heard, it is important that we learn these
issues on the front end to understand their impacts when
decided by EPA.
I am interested in learning more from Mr. Estes-Smargiassi
and other municipal officials about the impact of the mandates
this proposed rule will place on drinking water systems--
particularly an unfunded mandates, The Drinking Water State
Revolving Fund program in the Safe Drinking Water Act owes its
existence entirely to a congressional desire to address
unfunded mandates posed by Federal regulations--not to
subsidize rates or chase other collateral goals.
I also want to understand from these same folks whether
this rule strikes the correct balance between addressing lead
pipes--their treatment or replacement--in a cost-effective way
for citizens and local governments. We must also be careful not
to avoidably have Federal law and state and local requirements
conflict with each other and make simultaneous compliance
impossible.
In addition, because continued disturbances that rattle
pipes in turn shakes new lead into the system, I also want to
better appreciate what economic and practical impact this rule
might have on local planning related to other emergency
services, like fire safety, sewage, and telecommunications.
Finally, I am interested in hearing from Commissioner
Bobbitt, as a rural elected official. I think we must look at
the cost of this rule to taxpayers, states, communities, and
the Federal Government. Every finite dollar we spend here is
one dollar less we can spend on other public health priorities.
Mr. Chairman, I want to welcome our many witnesses here
today--some making return appearances. We are fortunate to have
the level of expertise that many of our witnesses bring to this
subject and I look forward to the question and answer period to
get behind their written statements.
I yield back the balance of my time.

Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back. We thank him. And the
Chair would like to remind Members that pursuant to committee
rules, all Members' written opening statements shall be made
part of the record.
I agree with Representative Walden's assessment that this
is an expert panel that we are very much helped by your
presence here today, so thank you for joining in this
discussion which will lead us to, I think, strong advocacy.
I will now introduce the witnesses for today's hearing. We
begin with Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha, Director of Pediatric Public
Health Initiative with C. S. Mott, Endowed Professor of Public
Health, Division of Public Health, Associate Professor of the
Department of Pediatrics and Human Development at Michigan
State University with the College of Human Medicine.
So, quite the credentials.
Next, we have Kim Gaddy, who is with the Environmental
Justice efforts. She is an organizer with Clean Water Action of
New Jersey. She has joined us in the past, so welcome on the
return.
Ms. Angela Licata, New York City Department of
Environmental Protection, and she is appearing on behalf of the
Association of Metropolitan Administrators.
Next, we have Ms. Cathy Tucker-Vogel, Public Water Supply
Section Chief with the Kansas Department of Health and
Environment, and she is appearing on behalf of the Association
of State Drinking Water Administrators.
Mr. Steve Estes-Smargiassi, Director of Planning and
Sustainability at Massachusetts Water Resources Authority, and
he is appearing on behalf of the American Water Works
Association.
And we then have the honorable Cindy Bobbitt, Commissioner
of Grant County, Oklahoma and she is appearing on behalf of the
National Association of Counties.
And, finally, Ms. Mae Wu, Senior Director of Health & Food,
Senior Attorney, Healthy People & Thriving Communities Program
with the Natural Resources Defense Council.
Again, to each and every one of you, thank you for taking
the time and for informing us. Before we begin, I would like to
explain the lighting system. In front of you are a series of
lights. The light will initially be green. The light will turn
yellow when you have 1-minute remaining. Please begin to wrap
up your testimony at that point. The light will turn red when
your time has expired.
At this time, I recognize Dr. Hanna-Attisha for 5 minutes
to provide her opening statement, please.

STATEMENTS OF MONA HANNA-ATTISHA, M.D., DIRECTOR, PEDIATRIC
PUBLIC HEALTH INITIATIVE, C. S. MOTT ENDOWED PROFESSOR OF
PUBLIC HEALTH, DIVISION OF PUBLIC HEALTH; DEBORAH KIM GADDY,
ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE ORGANIZER, CLEAN WATER ACTION OF NEW
JERSEY; ANGELA LICATA, DEPUTY COMMISSIONER, NEW YORK CITY
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION; CATHY TUCKER-VOGEL,
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SECTION CHIEF, KANSAS DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
AND ENVIRONMENT; STEVE ESTES-SMARGIASSI, DIRECTOR OF PLANNING
AND SUSTAINABILITY, MASSACHUSETTS WATER RESOURCES AUTHORITY;
HONORABLE CINDY BOBBITT, COMMISSIONER, GRANT COUNTY, OKLAHOMA;
AND, MAE WU, SENIOR DIRECTOR HEALTH AND FOOD, SENIOR ATTORNEY
HEALTHY PEOPLE AND THRIVING COMMUNITIES PROGRAM

STATEMENT OF MONA HANNA-ATTISHA, M.D.

Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Good morning.
Mr. Tonko. Good morning.
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. I would like to begin by thanking
Chairman Paul Tonko, Ranking Member John Shimkus, and all the
distinguished members of the subcommittee for the opportunity
to present today. A special thank you to Michigan Congresswoman
Debbie Dingell for all of her leadership and support of Flint
kids during the crisis and since.
Like all of you, I also took an oath. As a pediatrician, I
literally put my hand up and dedicated my career to serve and
to protect the children entrusted in my care. Much of that work
centers around the child in front of me to make sure that they
are healthy today but, more importantly, my work as a
pediatrician is nestled in protecting and promoting the promise
of our children. Yet in Flint, there was something in our
water, something that you couldn't see or taste, or smell that
was threatening the tomorrows of all of our children.
In a breakdown of democracy and driven by austerity, our
drinking water was changed without proper corrosion control
treatment. The corrosive water leached lead from our
infrastructure into our water in the hundreds and thousands of
parts per billion. It has been said that pediatricians are the
ultimate witnesses to failed social policies. It is in our exam
rooms where we see the everyday consequences of policy
decisions like Medicaid cuts and action on gun violence and lax
public health protections.
Our children disproportionately share, bear the burden of
these consequences both in their bodies and in their blunted
potentials. And as a pediatrician in Flint, I can attest that
once again, our children were the victims of a failed policy,
specifically the Lead and Copper Rule that provided the vehicle
of loopholes, minimal oversight, confusion, and nonhealth-based
standards that helped create and perpetuate our crisis.
I wish there was a magic pill that could take away what
happened, but when it comes to lead the treatment is
prevention. Lead is an irreversible neurotoxin with lifelong
multisystem, multigenerational impacts. There is no safe level.
Children should never be exposed to lead. What we should be
practicing is what we call in public health, primary
prevention. And that is why in Flint, after our citywide
exposure, our only option has been to move forward to create a
sanctuary where children can recover and thrive.
Critical to our recovery has been the congressionally
supported Flint Lead Exposure Registry, with funding set to
expire next year absent congressional action. The Flint
Registry has been an essential resource for identifying
individuals exposed to our crisis, connecting them to public
health promoting resources, and sharing best practices with
similarly impacted communities.
Flint's crisis is an extreme case, but not the first, not
the last, and not the worst. A positive ripple effect of our
crisis has been the growing awakening across our country that
our drinking water regulations never intended for us to consume
lead-free water. A troubling number of our cities across the
country are now recognizing and struggling with elevated lead
in their drinking water.
On behalf of children everywhere, we need a stronger Lead
and Copper Rule that catches policy up with science, rights
historic wrongs, and prioritizes public health over a minimal
compliance. Unfortunately, the proposed revisions are a missed
opportunity and fail to rebuild trust in our nation's drinking
water.
With further details in my written testimony, I recommend
that the EPA make the following improvements: One, lower the
action level and remove the trigger level; two, mandate removal
of all lead pipes and ban partial line replacements; three,
improve sampling to better detect lead and water, especially
the contribution from service lines; and four, improve
communication, public health, and transparency.
Michigan has decided that we can do better and we revised
our state Lead and Copper Rule in 2019. It exceeds national
standards. It is now implemented and Michigan's Lead and Copper
Rule now better locates service lines through mandatory
inventory, improves education and transparency, mandates the
replacement of lead lines, and more optimally samples for lead
and will eventually lower the action level. Our nation can
learn from Michigan and do better.
In conclusion, in 1969, a scientist warned that the problem
of lead is so well defined, so neatly packaged with both causes
and cures known that if we don't eliminate the social crime,
our society deserves all the disasters that have been forecast
for it. We have come a long way, but we have more to go. We
have not eliminated the social crime and as a pediatrician, I
continue to diagnose in the bodies of our children the
consequences of our collective inaction and paralysis. Thank
you for the opportunity to testify and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Hanna-Attisha follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Doctor.
And now we recognize Ms. Gaddy. You are recognized for 5
minutes, please, and again, welcome.

STATEMENT OF KIM GADDY

Ms. Gaddy. Good morning, Chairman Tonko and Ranking Member
Shimkus and all members present as well as Congressman Pallone
from my home state of New Jersey. My name is Kim Gaddy and I am
the Environmental Justice Organizer for Clean Water Action of
New Jersey.
Clean Water Action is a national organization working in 14
states on environmental and health issues with a focus on
drinking water and water pollution. Thank you for the
opportunity to address the subcommittee today. Although I live
in Newark, I am also here to lift up the voices of residents in
environmental justice communities to speak about the needs of
all communities in New Jersey and to comment on how this
Environmental Protection Agency can improve its proposal to
revise the Safe Drinking Water Act Lead and Copper Rule.
Our experience with elevated lead levels in Newark points
to the need for clear federal requirements for water systems
and state primacy agency. We also sorely need increased federal
investment in water infrastructure in EPA and state
implementation and enforcement and in promoting improved
managerial, operations, and communications capacity for water
systems.
In Newark, we experienced the difficulty of communicating
health risk and technical information. At a time when residents
needed the clearest possible information, some felt that city
officials were not being transparent. The role of our state
agency in overseeing our water system's compliance with
regulations was not obvious to residents, nor was the role of
the EPA regional office.
Rules and procedures for water systems need to be
straightforward and the states' responsibilities need to be
well defined as well. Newark has taken significant steps to
reduce the risk of lead at the tap, including partnering with
the state to fully replace, at no cost to the homeowners,
18,000 lead service lines in three years. New treatment has
been installed and is expected to reduce lead levels by the end
of the year. Filters and replacement cartridges have been made
available to impacted residents as well as free water testing.
We are relieved to see progress, but we think this crisis
could have been avoided and if we can prevent similar problems
in other New Jersey communities and around the country, we must
act now. Revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule are not the only
solution, but they can help to prevent communities from
experiencing what we have gone through in Newark.
While water chemistry and treatment play a role in whether
lead leaches from pipes and fixtures, removing sources of lead
in contact with water is the best way to reduce lead at the
tap. Lead service lines are the largest source of lead in tap
water. EPA has missed an opportunity to address this source of
lead by requiring full lead service line replacement at all
regulated water systems. This is an ambitious undertaking, but
momentum toward full replacement has never been greater.
Water systems across the country are prioritizing
replacement and some have committed to fully replacing all lead
service lines, including Newark. States are taking action to
support this activity and New Jersey as well. EPA's own
proposal signals throughout that full lead service line
replacement is a desirable goal that is achievable. EPA
proposes that water systems submit lead service line
replacement plans that include a wide range of details that
would be involved in setting up a replacement program.
While EPA's proposal envisions these plans being used in
the event of elevated lead levels, the requirements suggest
that EPA has determined that all systems with lead service
lines are able to develop such plans. Many other aspects of the
proposal indicate that EPA knows that full lead service line
replacement is the most obvious way. Clean Water Action is
calling on EPA to require full lead service line replacement at
all water systems with a baseline goal of ten years. Had such a
requirement been in place, perhaps Newark could have been
spared the crisis that erupted in the wake of Lead Action Level
exceedances. We need to start now to get the lead out of
contact with drinking water to prevent elevated lead levels and
similar crises in other communities in New Jersey and across
the country.
As we learned in Newark, full replacement programs are
impeded when customers are required to pay for replacement of
the portion of the line on the customer's side. It is more
equitable and efficient for water systems to cover this cost.
When Newark's lead service line replacement program started,
the homeowner was originally going to contribute $1,000 toward
the cost of the full replacement while less than the cost in
homes' owners.
In Newark, over 75 percent of residents are renters who did
not receive water bills or information about replacement
programs and other issues. I am a Newark renter who experienced
this firsthand. We know that there is no safe level of lead. We
know that there is no safe level of lead. We know that health
impacts of lead are of particular concern of children under
six. That is why we are urging EPA to strengthen its proposal
and urging Congress to support a vision of modernized drinking
water systems by making bold investments now. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gaddy follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much.
Next, we will move to Ms. Licata, please, for 5 minutes
with your opening statement. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF ANGELA LICATA

Ms. Licata. Chairman Tonko, Ranking Member Shimkus, and
members of the subcommittee, the Association of Metropolitan
Water Agencies, or AMWA, appreciates the opportunity to offer
our thoughts today on EPA's proposed revisions to the Lead and
Copper Rule. I am Angela Licata, deputy commissioner of the New
York City Department of Environmental Protection, or DEP. Each
day, DEP delivers more than one billion gallons of fresh, clean
water to the taps of millions of customers throughout New York
State. That is nine million people.
I also serve as vice president of AMWA's board of
directors. AMWA is an organization representing the nation's
largest publicly-owned drinking water systems. AMWA's members
collectively serve more than 155 million Americans with quality
drinking water, and the Association has developed detailed
comments in response to EPA's proposed revisions to the Lead
and Copper Rule.
These comments, which will be formally submitted to EPA
this week, are the basis of the Association's testimony today.
And please note that I address you as a representative of the
AMWA board of directors and that tomorrow New York City will
submit its own written comments to EPA. AMWA's comments outline
a number of places where we agree with EPA's approach, but
identify numerous areas where we believe there is room for
improvement.
Addressing lead in drinking water is a particularly vexing
challenge, because unlike most other contaminants, lead is
typically not present in drinking water sources. Instead, lead
may be introduced into the drinking water of communities when
the water reacts with lead in buried service lines and premise
plumbing in homes.
Making things even more complicated is the fact that
homeowners are responsible for their interior plumbing and
ownership of service lines are typically divided between the
public water system and the private homeowner. There is no easy
solution that can quickly eliminate this problem. Even getting
rid of every lead service line in the nation would not
eliminate exposure to lead as lead solder in plumbing fixtures
would remain in millions of homes throughout the country.
In terms of the proposed Lead and Copper Rule revisions,
AMWA believes the most effective regulations must be
achievable, practical, and enforceable. AMWA appreciates that
the proposal avoids setting mandates such as a deadline for the
replacement of all service lines nationwide. While removing all
lead service lines is a worthy aspiration and should be a goal,
in reality, doing so would take decades, cost billions of
dollars, and require the cooperation of millions of individual
homeowners. It would prevent water systems from allocating
their limited budgets to other initiatives that may deliver
greater public health benefits such as other emerging
contaminants such as PFOS and dealing with aging infrastructure
and resilience to climate change.
We also support aspects of the rule that require water
systems to complete an inventory that specifies the composition
of service lines and that require large systems to post these
inventories online. Armed with this information, individual
homeowners will be empowered to direct their water system to
replace the publicly-owned portion of the lead service line
when the homeowner simultaneously replaces their privately-
owned lead line.
AMWA has a number of suggestions to make this process as
seamless as possible, but we generally agree with the intent.
AMWA also agrees with steps the proposal takes to discourage
partial lead service line replacements such as making them
ineligible to count towards mandated replacement rates. AMWA
agrees that a total ban on partial replacements would be ill-
advised. For example, emergency water replacement work may
require a water system to replace the publicly-owned portion of
the household's lead service line. Because customer consent to
replace the private portion of the lead service line cannot
always be quickly obtained, it would be impractical to
completely ban partial replacements in these circumstances.
Other parts of the proposed rule require improvement and we
harbor deep concerns requiring a water system to notify all
customers within 24 hours of any 90th percentile lead action
level exceedance. This goes far beyond the mandate set by
Congress in the 2016 WIIN Act, which only requires this urgent
notification if the exceedance has the potential for serious
adverse human health effects as a result of short-term
exposure. We believe an urgent notification in the absence of
such health risks could unnecessarily alarm the public.
We also have strong concerns with aspects of the proposed
rule that would require water systems to obtain and distribute
high quantities of pitchers that may not readily be available,
prompt adjustments to a water system's corrosion control based
on only a small number of samples showing elevated lead levels,
and task water systems with compelling school and child care
centers to give water quality testing in their facilities.
In closing, AMWA supports achievable, practical,
enforceable action to reduce public exposure to lead in
drinking water. This concludes my statement and I will be happy
to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Licata follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much, Ms. Licata.
And next, we will go to Ms. Tucker-Vogel. You are
recognized for your opening statement of 5 minutes, please.

STATEMENT OF CATHY TUCKER-VOGEL

Ms. Tucker-Vogel. Good morning, Chairman Tonko, Ranking
Member Shimkus, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me to speak today. I am the president-elect of the
Association of State Drinking Water Administrators whose
members include the 50 state drinking water programs, five
territorial programs, the District of Columbia, and the Navajo
nation.
ASDWA members have primary oversight responsibility for
implementing the Safe Drinking Water Act, and provide technical
assistance, support, and oversight of drinking water systems
which is critical to ensuring safe drinking water. I am also
chief of the Public Water Supply Section within the Kansas
Department of Health and Environment.
Today, I will discuss ASDWA's perspective on EPA's proposed
Lead and Copper Rule revisions and how to strengthen the rule
to more effectively address lead in drinking water and protect
public health. I would also like to note that this testimony
reflects recommendations of ASDWA and may not necessarily
reflect the position of the Kansas Department of Health and
Environment.
Lead in drinking water has long been a concern for
communities across the nation. Although considerable progress
has been made in reducing lead in water since implementation of
the 1991 Lead and Copper Rule, large-scale crises in Flint,
Michigan and Washington, DC stand as proof that lead continues
to be a public health concern. States' water systems and the
public need national leadership to continue making progress in
reducing exposure to lead through drinking water.
As was key issues on the LCRR include the following: First,
it is time to get the lead out. Replacing all lead service
lines is the long-term solution for reducing exposure to lead
in drinking water. The first step towards removal is an
inventory of all service lines. ASDWA supports regulatory
requirements for water utilities to develop a lead service line
inventory and replacement plan or demonstrate the absence of
lead in their distribution systems. EPA must clarify its lead
service line definition for galvanized lines, goosenecks, and
pigtails and should include unknown service lines as lead.
ASDWA also recommends strengthening the rule to require a
minimum of ten percent lead service line replacement over a 3-
year period for any system with lead service lines, and a
twenty percent replacement over three years for systems that
exceed the lead action level. Second, continue to reduce
exposure from lead in drinking water. To reduce lead exposure,
ASDWA recommends improved sampling, corrosion control
treatment, and water quality parameter monitoring to ensure
appropriate water quality is maintained, particularly when
water sourcement or treatment processes are changed.
ASDWA recommends sample site assessments proposed as ``find
and fix'' be included in the final rule to ensure there is
appropriate corrosion control throughout the distribution
system. In addition, ASDWA recommends systems have an ``upon
request'' rather than a mandatory lead testing program for
schools and child care facilities. Third, work to increase
transparency and clarify public notification.
Public access to lead service line inventories will
demonstrate transparency and is critical to helping utilities
be a trusted source of information. Tier 1 public notification
has historically applied to acute maximum contaminant level
violations where immediate action is necessary to protect
public health. The proposed change in the LCRR for action level
exceedance alters the logic for Tier 1 public notification for
acute MCL violations.
And fourth, additional funding for states, EPA, and water
utilities is essential. The significant increase in the
complexity of the proposed rule places additional burdens on
states. EPA proposed several new program requirements with
significant tracking, review, and approval components. Adding
to the burden, there is not a data system that exists at the
state or federal level that supports implementation of the
rule.
Without additional funding and a functioning data
management system, implementing the LCRR will be impossible for
most states. Increased funding for EPA and for states is vital
to support the implementation of the LCRR. Finally, funding is
needed to assist water systems with lead service line
replacements. State Revolving Fund programs provide loans, but
there are competing priorities for this subsidy including
emerging contaminants and aging infrastructure.
In conclusion, ASDWA thanks the subcommittee for holding
this hearing on these important topics and commends EPA for
moving forward with the LCRR. ASDWA looks forward to continuing
dialogue with Congress and our federal agency partners. I will
be happy to take questions at the appropriate time. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Tucker-Vogel follows:]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Ms. Tucker-Vogel.
Now we will move to Mr. Estes-Smargiassi for 5 minutes for
your opening statement, please.

STATEMENT OF STEVE ESTES-SMARGIASSI

Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. Chairman Tonko, Ranking Member
Shimkus, and members of the subcommittee, the American Water
Works Association appreciates the opportunity to offer our
thoughts on EPA's proposed revisions to the Lead and Copper
Rule. My name is Steve Estes-Smargiassi. I am director of
Planning and Sustainability for the Massachusetts Water
Resource Authority, the regional wholesale water and sewer
provider to three million people in 61 cities and towns in the
metro Boston region.
I have been involved in our region's collaborative efforts
on lead for over 25 years, serve on EPA's National Drinking
Water Advisory Council's workgroups on the Lead and Copper
Rule, and chair AWWA's Lead and Copper Technical Advisory
Workgroup. The AWWA strongly supports full removal of all lead
service lines. Indeed, our board of directors voted to endorse
the 2015 recommendations made by the National Drinking Water
Advisory Council, NDWAC. I will quote from them.
``AWWA supports the NDWAC recommendations to reduce lead in
drinking water through the complete removal of lead service
lines while ensuring optimum corrosion control measures.
Support of the NDWAC recommendations underscores the importance
of protecting the public from lead exposure through the
development of collaborative, community-based approaches to
remove all lead service lines in their entirety. Effective lead
service line replacement requires solutions that successfully
address the often-shared ownership of these lines, the
associated financial burden, and other barriers and risks.''
EPA's proposed revisions are an important step forward. We
have offered what we hope are constructive comments on the
ninety pages of the Federal Register Notice to make the rule
clear, implementable in the field, and enforceable. We believe
that the proposed rule requirements for immediate development
of inventories of all lead service lines, making those
inventories publicly available, immediate development of plans
for the full removal of all lead service lines, and no partial
lead service line replacements except under the narrowest of
circumstances, and provision of an annual notice to every home
with a lead service line will go a long way towards the future
where there aren't lead service lines connecting our water
mains to our customers' homes.
Regulatory mandates, though are only one part of solving
this problem. One obstacle to full lead service line
replacement is the cost, particularly the cost of the portion
on private property. My agency has tried to remove that
obstacle by creating a hundred-million-dollar fund for our
member communities, but the ability of lower-income families to
afford even a loan can be an issue. Congress has appointed 45
million dollars for assistance to low-income homeowners. We
hope that you will continue to direct substantial funds to this
critical need.
Another obstacle is creating and sustaining community
interest. We all know that a crisis creates short-term
momentum, but more effort is needed to keep going until that
last service line is removed. In one of our gateway cities,
Chelsea, we have been working with our local Clean Water Action
organizers to do door-to-door canvassing to encourage residents
to participate in that community's replacement efforts.
Neighbors speaking the same language become trusted sources of
information and assistants in navigating the program.
I mention this to stress that every program will be
different. A national lead service line removal program is
actually 50,000 local programs tailored to local circumstance.
Any regulatory approach needs to account for that. A
frustration that we all encounter in dealing with lead is the
siloing of programs. The Department of Housing and Urban
Development has programs to pay for lead paint removal. When
they are done, they call the home lead-free without checking
for or allowing for the removal of any lead service line. That
cries out for a legislative push towards integration of those
efforts.
Until recently, our state's lead poisoning prevention
program like most others, didn't test the water or check for
lead service lines. My agency is now providing training and lab
services to make that happen. Again, these types of structural
program problems could be solved nationally with coordinated
efforts by HUD, HHS, and Department of Education.
A final note on risk communication. Lead is a powerful
neurotoxin affecting children's development, and thus it is one
of the most sensitive and alarming of the topics that we talk
to our customers about. Where and when there is a risk, we need
to coordinate with trusted partners in the medical and public
health professions to clearly communicate that risk. Rushing
that task and failing to do it effectively fails our customers,
preventing those who need to take action from doing so and
unnecessarily alarming others.
I hope that AWWA's written comments and those of my
colleagues here on the panel have been helpful to the committee
and I welcome any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Estes-Smargiassi follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Estes-Smargiassi.
And we will now move to Commissioner Bobbitt, please, for 5
minutes with your opening statement, please.

STATEMENT OF CINDY BOBBITT

Ms. Bobbitt. Chairman Tonko, Ranking Member Shimkus, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify on this important issue. My name is
Cindy Bobbitt and I am a county commissioner from Grant County,
Oklahoma and honored to testify on behalf of the National
Association of Counties.
Today, I would like to offer the county perspective for
your consideration as you assess challenges and opportunities
around eliminating lead contamination in our drinking water.
First, while our responsibilities vary from state to state,
county governments serve as both regulators and regulated
entities when it comes to the Clean Water Act and work every
day to ensure the health and safety of our residents. We
operate jails, hospitals, 9-1-1 emergency systems, build roads
and bridges, and run elections.
But one of the most important things we do is maintain and
operate water systems to provide clean drinking water. We often
do this through partnerships, especially in rural communities
like mine. Grant County has a population of 4,500. We have
eleven water systems and we are responsible to ensure water
quality standards and meet the needs of all. This includes
protecting our water systems and water quality during disasters
and major flooding events when we have them. Counties across
the country share our federal partners' concerns and are
committed to do all we can to eliminate lead contamination in
all of America's drinking water.
Second, due to limited local resources and mounding
regulations, counties are challenged to make long-term budget
investments. Regardless of size, fiscal constraints are the
reality for most counties and we are mandated to provide a
growing number of services while operating under greater state
and federal restrictions on how we generate revenue. In fact,
45 states limit counties' ability to raise additional revenue.
According to the EPA, administering the proposed rule is
estimated to cost local water systems between 130 and 270
million dollars annually and up to eight billion dollars over
30 years. There are between six and ten million lead service
lines in our country and preliminary findings show that the
average cost to replace a single line is $4,700. Using these
figures, replacing all lead service lines would cost local
water systems between 26 and 47 billion dollars, creating an
enormous, unfunded mandate for local governments.
Counties support the goal of replacing all lead service
lines in the U.S., but it is important that our federal
partners recognize the growing number of federal and state
requirements on local governments and understand the full
picture of county public priorities. Communities like mine with
low-income populations are often more at risk of lead exposure
due to our older housing infrastructure. These counties are
really limited in raising additional revenues.
Raising taxes in my county and placing financial burdens on
our people who have a median income of $28,000 is not an answer
to pay for additional federal mandates, so counties are once
again faced with tough choices. Fund our schools, hospitals,
justice and emergency management systems, and pave our roads.
Which of these public services should we cut to provide this?
At the end of the day, it is not about replacing a red line or
a blue line. It is about replacing hazardous water lines
regardless of geographic location and social and economic
conditions.
Third, counties need early, consistent, and meaningful
engagement with our federal partners to help develop clear and
practical legislation and regulations that we can implement at
the local level. Water systems across the U.S. are rapidly
reaching the end of their life spans. It will cost up to a
trillion dollars by 2030 to upgrade the nation's drinking water
infrastructure. We encourage Congress and our federal agency
partners to continue meaningful consultation with states and
local governments on this rule to reduce the risk of unfunded
mandates to produce successful strategies for implementing
federal policies.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify and provide
the county's perspective on this proposed rule. We stand ready
to work with our federal partners to develop policies to ensure
every American has access to clean water. I will be happy to
answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bobbitt follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much, Commissioner.
And finally, Ms. Wu, you are recognized for 5 minutes,
please, with your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MAE WU

Ms. Wu. Thank you, Chairman Tonko.
Mr. Tonko. You are welcome.
Ms. Wu. Ranking Member Shimkus and members of the
subcommittee, my name is Mae Wu. I am the senior director of
Health and Food at the Natural Resources Defense Council. And
as you have heard there is no safe level of lead and, in fact,
over the past few years every state in the nation, with the
exception of Hawaii has had at least one water system that has
had levels in its water that has exceeded EPA's action level
and so millions of Americans have been threatened with elevated
levels of lead in their water.
About three years ago, while government officials were
refusing to ensure that Flint residents had access to reliable
sources of bottled water and properly installed filters,
Danielle found out that her young son Theo had levels of lead
in his blood that exceeded the CDC recommendations for children
under the age of six. She found out also she had no lead paint
in her home but she did have troubling levels of lead in her
water, so even though it was expensive for her family, they
switched to bottled water. So Theo has been diagnosed with
attention deficit disorder and other health problems and his
behavioral problems have caused him to be expelled from
preschool, so as you can imagine, it has been a life-altering
experience for this family.
And you might think that Theo is one of the young victims
of Flint, but in fact, all of this happened in Newark. And the
Flint babies who were raised on lead-contaminated drinking
water have now started reaching school age and the city has
found that the percentage of kids that have qualified for
special education has doubled in this time.
So the Lead and Copper Rule and its implementation are
broken. It has been broken for a long time, at least 20 years,
when Washington, DC started struggling with its own lead in the
drinking water crisis. And so, at this point, tweaks aren't
going to get it done. We need a major overhaul of the Lead and
Copper Rule. And so, NRDC will be submitting tomorrow detailed
comments about the revisions, but I wanted to just highlight a
few of the recommendations that we have today.
First, EPA should streamline this complicated and confusing
Lead and Copper Rule. They need to set an enforceable standard
for lead, like they do for most of the other drinking water
contaminants. It shouldn't be a treatment technology or
treatment technique that relies on corrosion control, but
really just a maximum contaminant level for lead.
Unfortunately, EPA has doubled down on this existing difficult-
to-implement, difficult-to-enforce nonhealth-based action level
and has further complicated matters with an unenforceable and
non-health based trigger level, so that needs to change.
Second, recently, actually, NRDC received an internal memo
from Region 5 of EPA that talked about a lot of the problems
with the Lead and Copper Rule. And one of the things it
mentions and a lot of the things that you have heard today is
that EPA's revisions have ignored the elephant in the room,
which is no matter how well corrosion control is run, unless
you remove all of the lead service lines, and that means
including the part that runs on private property, you are going
to continue to have exposure to lead.
And so, full lead service line replacements have to be
required and they have to happen within ten years. We just
can't wait any longer. And, unfortunately, under EPA's
revisions, it could take 33 years or more if a system has
triggered the requirement to even start replacing its lines.
The other thing they need to do is ban the partials. These are
partial replacements that are dangerous. They have actually
been shown to show higher levels of lead than just leaving an
undisturbed lead service line in place and they need to be
banned and prohibited.
And the reason why partial lead service lines happen is
oftentimes because the homeowners can't afford the thousands of
dollars up front and on short notice that would be required to
pay for those lead service line replacements or they are
renters and their landlords refuse to pay for it. And so, the
cost cannot be put on individual homeowners because, really,
what we are doing is exacerbating the already disparate burdens
that are put on moderate and low-income families. And it really
is worth the cost because for every dollar that is invested in
lead service line replacements you get ten dollars of benefits
back.
And, finally, the tap water samples that are used in the
Lead and Copper Rule have to reflect the highest levels of lead
that are in the water. Data have shown that when you look at a
series of sequential one-liter samples of water that actually
it is the later sample, so when you are looking at the fifth
liter or higher where you see the highest levels of lead.
And so, you can actually find that those liters will have
action level exceedances when that first liter didn't exceed
the action level, but EPA again relies on this less
contaminated first draw of water and it ends up underestimating
lead and showing maybe that things are fine when there actually
is a problem.
So, thank you for this opportunity and I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wu follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Ms. Wu. And thank you to the entire
panel for your opening statements and for your appearance here
today. We are going to move to member questions. Before we do,
we were asked to admit a news release from the Department of
EPA that would be included in the official record. We will
admit this press release to the record pursuant to the
gentleman's request.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Tonko. But I must point out inaccuracies in the
document. In the release, the EPA claims that my colleagues and
I deliberately chose to exclude them. That is simply not true.
We shall have--we would have welcomed EPA's testimony here
today. The release also suggests that other witnesses on the
panel, those appearing here today, must have received more
notice of the hearing date. That is also not true. No witnesses
received more notice than the EPA. We greatly appreciate the
efforts that our witnesses today have made to testify here and
we will again acknowledge working with the EPA on what is a
very serious issue.
So now to member questions and I will start by recognizing
myself for 5 minutes. The area of safe drinking water, which
obviously is a fundamental right and a fundamental duty of our
federal government, is our focus here today. The public and
many of my colleagues may look at the Safe Drinking Water Act
and assume that it ensures drinking water that is, indeed,
safe. This is a reasonable assumption but, unfortunately, one
that is not entirely accurate.
I am referring to the fact that drinking water standards
set under the Safe Drinking Water Act are not health-based
standards, but are actually based on cost. The recent proposed
revision to the Lead and Copper Rule is no exception. I would
like to read a short quote from the proposed Rule, and I quote,
``The EPA established the lead action level in 1991 based on
feasibility and not based on impact on public health. The
proposed trigger level was also not a health-based standard.''
So, Dr. Hanna-Attisha, do you think that we should have a
health-based standard for lead in drinking water?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Absolutely. That is an excellent
question. The EPA has actually set something called the
``maximum contaminant level goal'' for lead and water, which
recognizes that there is no safe level of lead and that is set
at zero parts per billion. The FDA, which regulates bottled
water, has a standard of lead in bottled water of five parts
per billion.
The American Academy of Pediatrics recognizes no safe level
of lead has recommended a maximum level of lead in schools and
child care facilities and that water at one part per billion.
We need to be moving towards a health-based standard that
recognizes the well-known and undisputed science that there is
no safe level of lead.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you so much, Doctor.
And, Ms. Gaddy, do you agree?
Ms. Gaddy. Yes, most definitely. It is crucially important
that this issue that a lot of our residents face in
environmental justice communities, it is a health injustice and
then there are cumulative impacts that we suffer from on a
daily basis. And just because of the ZIP code that we reside
in, there are other issues attached with water issues, so we
definitely need this to be a health-related concern with a
sense of urgency.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And to anyone on the panel, what
would a Lead and Copper Rule look like if it were based just on
health protection instead of cost? Anyone?
Ms. Wu, I think you wanted to respond.
Ms. Wu. Well, it would look like some of the things we have
outlined, which is it would take away all the lead service
lines that are the cause of the problem and it would ensure
that people's homes, that the water that is coming into their
homes is safe to drink.
Mr. Tonko. OK, anyone else? Doctor?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Sure, I would just reiterate that so in
lead, the public health and pediatric and the medical community
advocate something called ``primary prevention,'' which is in
public health means we are never supposed to expose a child to
lead, so it would be putting in place the recommendations that
eliminate that exposure. Eliminate lead from our service lines,
maximize corrosion control so that lead never gets into our
drinking water and then we never have to wait to find in our
children.
Mr. Tonko. Do any of our reps from water organizations want
to--yes, Ms. Licata?
Ms. Licata. Yes. I really believe that it would firmly look
at a more integrated approach. I think you have heard from the
testimony today that an interdisciplinary approach among
agencies as well the water providers is really necessary in
order to address this problem. One of the comments that was
made earlier is that the utility can't simply assume authority
based on the rule. There are prohibitions against our
addressing some of the private sectors, we can't force our way
into schools, so we would really have to look at this in a more
holistic manner and really integrate the approach.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Feasibility is an important consideration in adopting
regulations, of course, because a regulation that cannot be
implemented will not improve public health. But we have seen
across our environmental laws that protective regulations can
drive innovation, making better technologies feasible for lead
in drinking water. We have EPA saying that what is feasible in
2020 is no better than what was feasible in 1991.
Ms. Wu, do you agree with that or can we do better than 15
parts per billion?
Ms. Wu. Yes. I do think we can do a lot better, and I think
as you look at examples of the cities across the country who
are starting to do full lead service lines replacements at no
cost to the homeowners, it shows that it is feasible and it can
be done and it should be done.
Mr. Tonko. Do you know what some of the other countries
might do in regard to lead levels?
Ms. Wu. Other countries?
Mr. Tonko. Yeah.
Ms. Wu. I am not.
Mr. Tonko. OK.
Oh, Doctor?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. My understanding is that the World
Health Organization has an action level of ten parts per
billion.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Thank you very much.
I will now recognize Mr. Shimkus, subcommittee ranking
member, for 5 minutes to ask questions, please.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much. I am going to go by Dr.
Mona. And if the World Health Organization says ten parts per
billion, why not zero? Why aren't they saying zero if everyone
says there is no safe level?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. I completely agree. It should be zero.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. There must be a reason.
Let me, I wanted to start with, point out those two young
children back there in the second row. Can you introduce them,
because I think they are related to you.
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. I have my daughter Nina who is an eighth
grader in Michigan who is studying U.S. History, so we thought
we would get a hands-on lesson. And my nephew Zachary who lives
in northern Virginia and wanted to see his aunt testify.
Mr. Shimkus. Well, let's welcome them here.
[Applause.]
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. I am a former teacher, so this is like----
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. I also have a Flint kid with me,
Jasmine, over here, who works with us at Michigan State
University.
Mr. Shimkus. All right, Civics 101 right here.
Mr. Tonko. A Flint kid. That is OK.
Mr. Shimkus. So let me thank you for that.
Let me go to Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. I am a former Army
Infantry officer and we have the KIS theory, Keep It Simple.
This is very complex. Could you--you went over a lot of this
debate and can you kind of explain why it is a difficult
process, in Infantry language, and then maybe follow up with
the practicality of an MCL for lead?
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. So, let me sort of start off with
corrosion control and then talk about lead service lines. One
of the things we worry about in any change in regulation is
that any change in treatment, any change in source water,
anything we do in the water system, we have to evaluate all the
rest of the factors. In fact, a number of the situations where
we have seen elevated lead it wasn't because, in some cases, it
was, but in other cases, it was not because folks were
negligent about thinking about lead. It is that they were very
active about thinking about another contaminant, whether it be
disinfection byproducts or giardia, or cryptosporidium, and
those changes to fix one problem can cause another.
As much as we would like to think we fully understand
corrosion in water, EPA's experts and academic experts
frequently disagree with each other and frequently don't have a
practical answer for whether a tweak in one thing will cause a
deficit in something else and we worry about that.
Mr. Shimkus. And we have seen that too just on power
utilities where we try to get a cleaner burning to kill the
particulate matter but nitrous oxide goes up, so it is one
event affects another and that is why I appreciate that. That
is difficult.
So I was going to go back to Mr. Estes-Smargiassi, Ms.
Tucker-Vogel, and Ms. Licata. Some of my colleagues have
publicly dismissed this proposed rule. Given the challenges
from your perspective, do you see the administration's proposal
as generally addressing the right issues and, if not, at least
suggesting a serious and workable proposal?
Let's go to Ms. Licata first.
Ms. Licata. I think there are a lot to begin to work with
in this rule and we would really look forward to working with
the administration on it. Particularly, we like the part of the
no partial replacements unless you have a significant emergency
repair. We think that that makes great sense.
Mr. Shimkus. OK, let me go to Ms. Tucker-Vogel real quick;
same question. Anything good, you know, about the rule?
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. In the proposed rule?
Mr. Shimkus. Right.
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. Yes. I think requiring the lead service
line inventories is a good first step and I think, you know, it
is fundamental to the rest of the rule. If you don't know where
the lead is, you can't fix anything else.
Mr. Shimkus. OK, thank you. Let me go to Mr.----
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi?
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. Inventories, plans to remove them,
and letting every homeowner know that they have a lead service
line if they have one and encouraging them to replace it.
Information is power.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, time is short. So let me go--who has
submitted formal comments for the rule yet? Raise your hand if
you have submitted formal comments.
Is that a yeah? So you have not submitted them yet?
Tonight?
And you have, Ms. Gaddy? OK.
Ms.--so some of you here are testifying, haven't submitted
to the rule. NRDC is going to, I guess, so, and it is due, so
if you are going to do it, you better get it in.
Is a rule better than, a revised rule better than no rule?
In other words, you know when the last rule was written, or
promulgated, 1991. I was here during the Obama administration,
came in 2009, and left in 2017. Did they promulgate a new Lead
and Copper Rule? The answer is no; they did not. So cut the
administration a little slack for trying to do something versus
nothing. And I yield back my time.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Chairman Pallone for 5 minutes to ask questions,
please.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Many of you state in your testimony and I saw serious
concerns about EPA's long overdue proposal for the Lead and
Copper Rule, so I wanted to highlight a few of these concerns
that we can work with EPA to address them in the final rule.
And the first concern is that this proposal does not do enough
to prevent lead contamination, so let me try to run through
this quickly.
Dr. Hanna-Attisha, why is prevention so important when it
comes to lead exposure?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Sure. That is a great question and it is
really fundamental to why we are all here. Why is lead bad? It
is like we have mentioned, a potent, irreversible neurotoxin,
so what that means it attacks the developing brains of
children. It impacts cognition, lower IQ levels, it impacts
behavior, causes things like developmental delays, attention
problems, focusing problems, hearing loss, and growth problems;
it has been linked to impulsivity and criminality.
We also now know it has multigenerational impacts. There is
a recent book out on lead that called lead a multi-headed hydra
because wherever you turn, there is like a new research study
that says there is something bad, another bad thing.
Mr. Pallone. When you say ``multigenerational,'' you mean
it can hand it down from one parent to their children?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Absolutely. Research from Detroit shows
the epigenetic impact of lead. Grandmothers exposed to lead,
you can see those DNA changes----
Mr. Pallone. OK.
Dr. Hanna-Attisha [continue]. In their grandchildren. We
also know that children exposed to lead as adults can manifest
with high blood pressure, kidney disease, early dementia, gout,
and have other life-altering consequences.
Mr. Pallone. Sounds pretty bad. I mean, I obviously don't
think this proposal does enough to remove lead service lines.
What should we do to prevent exposure through drinking water?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. I think once again the many things we
have talked about, we should find where the lead is and we
should get it out. We should get rid of our lead in our service
lines. It is going to be very difficult to get rid of the lead
in our home fixtures and faucets, but we can minimize that risk
with better corrosion control treatment, with better public
education; people can use filters if they choose, if they are
concerned. Better testing, better transparency.
So like many of the things here, we need to--this rule
should be based on the concept of primary prevention, public
health, not on feasibility and what saves money.
Mr. Pallone. Now let me ask Ms. Gaddy. Do you think a
community can solve lead contamination without removing lead
service lines?
Ms. Gaddy. No. We must start first with removing all the
lead service lines and making sure that individuals are
informed that where they exist and then provide the necessary
finances for them to be removed.
Mr. Pallone. Now, of course, I am thinking of Newark and
our state which is undertaking this aggressive replacement of
all lead service lines, and I think we can see in coming years
that that decisive action would offer robust protection for
public health. Yet, this LCR proposal maintains a structure of
the old rule where action is only required after a problem is
found and I think we would have to do everything we can to
prevent lead contamination, not just remedy it.
So let me ask Ms. Wu. When should lead service lines be
replaced? Does it make sense to wait until monitoring shows
that there are leaching and, you know, do you think that EPA
should adopt a proactive lead service line replacement
requirement instead of this reactive approach?
Ms. Wu. Absolutely. I think we need to start pulling them
out of the ground now. And as we have seen the monitoring and
waiting for monitoring, as all the flaws in that mean that we
might think there is no problem because it is not showing up in
the liter that we are looking at, where actually you do have a
big problem. So this wait and see is the worst way to do it. We
have to be proactive about it.
Mr. Pallone. I am going to run out of time, but I want to
ask about this trigger level below the action level. The
proposal takes a small step by introducing a trigger level
below the action level, but it seems kind of confusing to me.
So let me go back to you, Ms. Wu. Do you think the EPA
should require corrective action for lead levels below 15 parts
per billion?
Ms. Wu. Yes. I mean, as we know----
Mr. Pallone. Basically, I am asking whether you think the
trigger level is enough or should the action level be lower?
Ms. Wu. No, it needs to be lower. It needs to go as low as
possible. Five would be way better. Zero would be great.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
Ms. Wu. But yes, it needs to be lower.
Mr. Pallone. Let me just ask in the 30 seconds, Dr. Hanna-
Attisha, do you agree with what she said and, Ms. Gaddy, do you
agree?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. Ms. Gaddy?
Ms. Gaddy. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. OK, so that is it. I mean, I think that we all
agree that EPA should lower the action level and require
proactive lead service line replacement. I don't think we can
undo the effects of lead exposure, so we have to do everything
we can to prevent it. And as costly as lead service line
replacements are, the alternative is far more costly for
impacted communities.
And I just want to thank you, you know, for your testimony.
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Representative McKinley for 5 minutes, please.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Several of you have come close but then you stopped. We
have been doing research to try to find out how many homes were
built that still exist since prior to 1986, because in 1986, we
had the ban on lead pipes and solder and the like, lead solder
in our homes. But I can't get a number of homes that are still
out there that where families are at risk, and so if you can
get that.
But, Ms. Wu, I thought you came close a little bit to it,
too. Do we have a number? What are the metrics on the
projection, because there would be tens of millions of homes?
If we have about a hundred million homes out there, I am going
to say maybe 40 or 50 of them; we could figure out that. That
is what I am trying to find out. How many homes out there have
exposure?
So what is the projection to remove the lead-based pipes,
fixtures, and solder in a residential home? Does any of you
have that number or is this just something we just whine about?
Ms. Wu. Well.
Mr. McKinley. I guess none of you--one of you just take a
shot at this.
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. Yes. The best estimate we had for
lead service lines is between six and ten million homes have
lead service lines. That number obviously could be improved if
we narrow up the range. In addition to that----
Mr. McKinley. You are saying service lines that are coming
into the house. I want to know how many are in the house that,
physically, homes built prior to 1986 would have. We would have
a lot of homes in there would not have copper necessarily in
it.
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. Many tens of millions.
Mr. McKinley. Yes, tens of millions.
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. Many tens of millions more.
Mr. McKinley. Tens of millions. So I am trying to find out
what is the projected cost? Is it five thousand dollars a
house, ten thousand dollars a house? I don't know what that--I
know what it would be for mine because I have had the estimate
on it.
But I would like to know for--so, here is what I am going
for. We give, and we have been talking about this for years. I
am an engineer, a licensed engineer, and we have been dealing
with this in homes and apartments all over in our project. Why
aren't we offering a tax credit? Why aren't we offering a tax
credit for people to be able to remove these, or grants?
Now one question came up, it was a question what are other
countries doing? I believe it is Ireland, is offering grants to
remove lead pipelines in homes, so in America, why aren't we
doing this? Look, we give tax credits for residential energy
tax credits that deals with high-efficiency boilers, furnaces,
and solar panels. We would have historic preservation tax
credits. We have tax credits for mortgages, state, and local
income taxes. We have tax credits for home office deductions.
But we don't offer one to remove lead-based pipe, which is far
more dangerous to people.
Now, Ms. Wu, you said it was a 10:1 ratio. Maybe it is. I
don't know what that is. That might be able to support, and
give us some strength if we were to go for that to be able to
promote something that it will pay for itself if we were to use
a tax credit.
So I want to also want to engage you, because I think if we
can get to that--and many of you referred to it as the elephant
in the room. To me, the elephant in the room is the homeowner
and his pipeline. You get him engaged, him or her, engaged in
this debate by cleaning theirs up and then saying, but it is
you, communities--I am sorry, Ms. Bobbitt-- the counties to do
it; I think we can get more pressure put on the counties and
everyone to do this.
But if we put pressure on the counties to do it, then it is
going to put pressure on, and they are going to resist it
because, for whatever reason, they can't afford to do it in
their homes. So I want to give them--if we offer all these tax
credits for everything else, why in God's name aren't we doing
the same thing for lead-based pipe in our homes, and we ought
to be able to do that. So, is there any thoughts on that?
Ms. Gaddy. Well, I just wanted to add, I know in the city
of Newark the average cost is $7,000 to replace a lead service
line. We have 18,000 lines that are being replaced that will
cost about $126 million.
Mr. McKinley. That is a service line. I am talking about
inside the house, which is going to be more expensive. You
might have to rip out some walls. You are going to have some
problems in there. So, some other comments?
Dr. Hanna?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. So, service lines were restricted in
1986. Most communities weren't actively putting them in, except
for Chicago, which mandated using lead service lines to deliver
drinking water. However, our home fixtures were allowed to have
lead in them until 2014. So lead was allowed in brass fixtures
until 2014. It is going to be very difficult to rip all of that
out and that is why in addition to lead service line
replacement, we need that optimal corrosion control and other
preventive measures.
Mr. McKinley. OK, my time has expired. But I didn't see any
of you saying I like the idea of tax credits. Sorry. I yield
back.
Mr. Tonko. Does anybody want to talk about that tax credit,
just say yes or no before we go to our next----
Ms. Bobbitt. I think a tax credit would be very good.
Mr. Tonko. OK, thank you.
There you go, so we got one.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you for your cooperation.
Mr. Tonko. So we have made Representative McKinley somewhat
happy, so OK. The Chair now recognizes the vice chair of the
full committee, Representative Yvette Clarke, for 5 minutes,
please.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I thank
our ranking member, Mr. Shimkus, for convening this timely
hearing on the EPA's recently proposed revisions to the Lead
and Copper Rule. Thank you as well to all of our witnesses for
being here today.
Brooklyn, New York, which is where I hail from, is very
fortunate to have some of the cleanest drinking water in the
nation, thanks in no small part to the work of our Department
of Environmental Protection and our upstate partners. But even
in Brooklyn, we are not exempt from this national crisis that
has called our drinking water system into question,
particularly in our public schools where drinking fountains
have had to have been shut off to prevent our children from
lead exposure. Much of our infrastructure is very old and many
of our buildings were constructed during the time period when
lead was used in service lines without even a second thought.
So I wanted to raise a couple of questions, but let me
start by letting the committee know that I received an internal
memo from my colleague, Congresswoman Diana DeGette, and it is
a 2017, EPA memorandum that discusses lessons learned in
implementing the Lead and Copper Rule in the older industrial
cities of the upper Midwest, lessons that I am afraid that have
gone unheeded by the EPA in drafting this new particular
proposal. Copies of this memo was provided to the Democratic
and Republican offices of this committee last night, and I ask
that the memo be entered into the record.
Mr. Tonko. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Clarke. According to the memo, sampling just the first
liter of water to come out of the tap rather than the fifth or
tenth liter, missed the peak lead values 100 percent of the
time. So, Ms. Wu, could you elaborate on this and tell us
whether this problem has been solved in this upcoming proposal?
Ms. Wu. Yeah, unfortunately, it hasn't been solved and EPA
continues to rely on the first liter. Whereas, you know, the
studies have shown that the water that comes out from, say, the
fifth liter and on is actually closer to the lead service line
and more reflective of what is happening in the lead service
lines.
Ms. Clarke. OK. The memo points out that neither the states
nor small or medium water systems have the expertise to
establish optimal water quality parameters that will ensure
lead levels are well controlled.
Ms. Wu, is this problem addressed in the EPA's proposal?
Ms. Wu. No. That is also not addressed.
Ms. Clarke. The memo points out that a lot of water systems
don't know where their lead service lines are and thus may be
missing high lead levels when they go out to sample.
Ms. Wu, is this problem addressed in the EPA's proposal?
Ms. Wu. It is not fully or well addressed in the revisions.
Ms. Clarke. So this memo ways even the best-centralized
treatment used by a public water system may not prevent the
release of lead particles, particles that can be up to 97
percent lead.
Ms. Wu, is this problem addressed in the EPA proposal?
Ms. Wu. No. That problem is not fixed in the proposal.
Ms. Clarke. The memo points out there may be elevated lead
levels in homes even if the overall system has not had an
action level exceedance. So, even though Chicago's water
overall is above the action level, there may be more than 4,000
homes drinking water containing 15 parts per billion of lead,
which is the action level, and one thousand homes drinking
water with more than 100 parts per billion of lead.
Ms. Wu, is this problem addressed in the EPA's proposal?
Ms. Wu. No. That problem has not been addressed.
Ms. Clarke. So this report came out in 2017. None of this
has been included in this upcoming proposal. These are things
we already know.
So, Mr. Chairman, we have had a tragic history in this
country with lead and drinking water. Unfortunately, it seems
as though the EPA does not seem to have learned from that
history. Mr. Chairman, I would like to again make sure that
this put into the record, and I would like to thank all of our
witnesses for being here and lending the expertise.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentle lady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Walden, for 5 minutes, please.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Tonko, I appreciate that.
And again, thanks to the panel.
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi, do the proposed revisions to the Lead
and Copper Rule create a more deliberative process regarding
corrosion control and system management that currently exists
under the Lead and Copper Rule?
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. The proposed rules add a fair amount
of additional detail on how systems ought to think about this.
They have focused on medium size and smaller systems rather
than just large systems, so there is additional focus on
corrosion control as one of the, if you will, the legs of the
stool that we need here along with lead service line
replacement and public education. It adds a lot of complexity
which does concern us, but I think the thrust of encouraging
corrosion control makes sense.
Mr. Walden. OK, let's see. Commissioner Bobbitt, according
to your testimony, it appears that counties have many
responsibilities and roles within your communities regarding
public health protections. I think we all know that. Would you
please explain what some of these are though?
Ms. Bobbitt. Yes. Thank you for that question. We are
responsible for about anything that touches our counties, our
people, so we take care of 9-1-1, roads and bridges; we run
elections, we do so many things and it is important. We are
also very smart and we work in partnership, and that is why it
is real important for us is to work in partnership with our
federal, state, and local governments, because as counties, we
all need to be at the table to figure out what we need to do
for our clean water.
Mr. Walden. Again, back to Mr. Estes-Smargiassi and Ms.
Tucker-Vogel. What are your views as to what will help
accelerate line replacement and will encourage replacements of
customer-owned lines? I talked about some of this in my opening
comments.
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. So one thing that will help
accelerate it is knowledge, so the requirements for inventory
and public education and notice to homeowners is going to make
it more likely that folks who have a lead service line are
encouraged to remove it. There has been a fair amount of
conversation here about funding. That is probably the big gap
in all of this. My numbers say if we are just thinking about
lead service lines, we are talking about 30 to 80 billion
dollars across the country.
Mr. Walden. Wow.
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. This proposal also adds in the
galvanized lead service lines preceded by lead gooseneck. In my
region, there is about twice as--that adds, doubles the number.
So if we look at it that way here, we might be talking about
something on the order of $160 billion to deal with this. The
places where we have had real success have been where there has
been external money applied.
Mr. Walden. Sure.
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. Flint did a great job.
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. With a lot of money from this
organization here.
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. If somebody gave us a couple hundred
million dollars, we would be able to move a lot faster in doing
ours.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Tonko has the checkbook. Ask him. He is
happy to do that, I am sure.
So you may have covered this. I was out of the room at the
other hearing. But what do you tell the average homeowner? What
is my responsibility as a homeowner? How do I know whether that
service line coming in or not is something I should replace? Is
it my responsibility? At what point do I start, when the water
gets to my house or there to the street? Who can take that on?
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. So, I think it varies from utility to
utility.
Mr. Walden. OK.
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. And also from state to state. But in
general terms, the responsibility for the service line from the
meter to the foundation of the house typically lies with the
homeowner.
Mr. Walden. Got it.
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. Now sometimes, the meter might be in the
house, so then there again, it is just whatever the policy of
the water utility might be at that point. But to go back to
your question of how do we communicate with and educate people
about what their materials are, the inventories are the first
and fundamental part of that both on the utility-owned side of
the meter and the privately-owned.
Mr. Walden. But how does a homeowner know? How do I know in
my home?
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. Well, it is going to take an educational
effort that has got to be part of the rule.
Mr. Walden. Is there a simple test? I mean if you are
painting there, you can scrape some of the paint and you can,
you know, do the lead test. I have done that. But you can't do
that----
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. Well, keep in mind the lines are buried.
Mr. Walden. Right. No, I know.
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. So sometimes, depending on how the lines
are connected to the meter, sometimes you can tell there at the
meter set and you can do a little scratch test and see whether
it is lead or not.
Mr. Walden. Oh, all right.
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. But there again, it is going to vary
depending upon how it is constructed.
Mr. Walden. And on copper lines, I know they used to use
lead solder, right? Is that an issue people should be worried
about as well?
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. It could be. There again it depends. They
don't use lead solder anymore.
Mr. Walden. Yes, good.
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. So as long their water is not really
corrosive it is probably OK.
Mr. Walden. That is the issue----
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. I have lead solder on my copper pipes in
my house, so it is, but, you know, they are old and my utility
uses corrosion control.
Mr. Walden. Got it. OK, thank you. Thank you all. And thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Mr. Tonko. You are welcome. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair now recognizes Representative Blunt Rochester for 5
minutes, please.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you, Ranking Member and to the panel. I am sorry I have been
running back and forth up and down the stairs. I am on at the
same time in another hearing.
So I would love to, I might have to submit some questions
for the record, but I want to first thank you and just express
that yesterday we know the President released his fiscal year
2021 budget. And a budget, it really a representation of your
values and your priorities.
The proposed budget would lead people to believe that we
don't value our environment as much as we do or our health, and
based on the last three years, this is not really a surprise.
The administration has rolled back or is in the process of
rolling back nearly 100 safeguards for our air, water, and
health. And for the 4th year in a row, the Trump administration
has proposed deep, draconian cuts to EPA's overall budget, this
year reducing it by nearly 27 percent.
Since EPA was created in 1970 under a Republican
administration, our health and our environment are not partisan
issues. It has made our air and our water cleaner, prevented
millions of asthma attacks and hospitalizations and avoided
hundreds of thousands of premature deaths. So when looking at
this Lead and Copper Rule proposal, it goes against the very
essence of what the EPA is supposed to do, protect our
environment and protect our health.
And, unfortunately, when the EPA fails to do its jobs,
those impacts fall disproportionately on the poor and
communities of color. What happened in Flint is, sadly, just
one example of what is happening all over this country,
including the state of Delaware. We know how horrible lead is
for our health, even at low-level exposures.
Children and pregnant women are especially vulnerable and
this new rule fails to protect the millions of Americans who
drink their water from systems with lead and copper pipes, and
that is unacceptable. It also fails to require adequate
procedures for notifying a community of a contamination which
is a fundamental right and especially important for
environmental justice communities.
Ms. Gaddy, in your testimony, you highlight that Newark,
New Jersey had difficulty communicating health risks and
technical information concerning lead levels to the public. We
hear a lot about the concern for creating a panic if in
revealing lead level exceedances too quickly. Do you think that
the people impacted by contamination in Newark should have been
notified sooner? And in your experience in Newark, does panic
arise from too much information or too little?
Ms. Gaddy. Yes. Well, thank you for that question. And I do
think that too many of our residents were not informed of the
situation early enough and then when information came out, it
was too much to comprehend at one time so then there was a
sense of panic. In order for individuals to fully engage and
understand what is happening and how serious this is to their
health, you had to first kind of explain what the problem was.
It was 15,000 service lines at first, it wasn't everybody in
the city.
So when you begin to say, well, only these groups of
individuals can receive a filter or are in jeopardy, their
health is jeopardized by a potential lead, so now the other
50,000 in that particular ward or 75 in another ward is like
why not me? And so then it created this whole confusion. But
there was a lack of transparency up front as well. I do believe
that there were missteps along the way. There was a lack of
communication between the administration and the health
department.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Right.
Ms. Gaddy. Because this was a health issue that should have
been addressed from the health department as well as with the
water department and because there were disconnects along the
way individuals didn't connect that this is something that is
poisoning my family.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you. Thank you.
And I am going to shift to Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Following
along those same lines, do you agree that it is important to
inform residents? And also, what is the difference that a
timely notice can make in exposure to lead to children and to
the harm that could be done?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Absolutely. We definitely need more
transparency, and more communication. After Flint happened, in
a bipartisan manner, Congress passed the EPA notification bill,
which says that if there is lead in the water, people should be
informed of it. It is kind of crazy that we needed a bill for
that to happen, but this is a step in the right direction.
People need to know if there is a concern so that they can take
the proper measures to protect themselves.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. And I am going to ask Dr. Wu, does
this proposal ensure that EPA will notify people impacted by
lead contamination as soon as possible?
Ms. Wu. No, it could do a lot more to make sure they get
notification in time.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. And in your testimony you highlight
that sampling requirements are weak and that repeated sampling
frequently identifies lead levels that were not identified in
previous sampling efforts. You propose that sampling should be
taken from every tap in schools and child care facilities twice
a year. What is your recommendation for frequency of sampling
done outside of schools and child care facilities?
Ms. Wu. Well, for the frequent--first and foremost, the
most important part is to take the samples that are from the
liter that shows what is happening in the thing, or in the lead
service line, right, and so that is most important. And then
the frequency of sampling is, you know, more frequent is always
going to be better.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you. My time has expired and I
yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlewoman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Representative Long,
for 5 minutes, please.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here on this important subject.
And, Ms. Tucker-Vogel, unfunded and underfunded mandates have
always been a concern for states and proposed revisions to the
Lead and Copper Rule offer no additional funding for states'
implementation of federal requirements. What impact would this
rule have on the state finances for drinking water programs and
enforcement?
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. Well, it will have a significant impact.
I think if you look at the full testimony that we submitted and
also our comments that as were submitted, with the Lead and
Copper Rule you will find that the increase is significant, and
without additional funding from EPA I am not sure how we will
be able to fully implement the rule. Also, replacement of the
lead service lines both on the public and private sides, there
will be additional funding required for that as well.
Mr. Long. Assuming that the public water system's
supervision grants are fully funded at $150 million per year,
would states be able to fully implement the proposed rule as
well as all of the other items that are required to do part of
their primary enforcement responsibilities?
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. So I would like to reiterate that states
will not be able to implement this rule at all if we don't have
a functioning data management system, which we currently do not
have either at the federal or state level. Our safe drinking
water information system, otherwise known as SDWIS, currently
does not have the capability for us to track all of the new
requirements that are in the proposed regulations. So that is a
significant issue for states.
Mr. Long. OK, thank you.
And, Commissioner Bobbitt, according to your testimony, it
appears that counties have many responsibilities and roles
within your communities regarding the public health
protections. And I know that Chairman Walden earlier, Ranking
Member Walden on this committee, I guess, but Ranking Member
Walden asked you a little bit about this. But with competing
demands, how do you prioritize all the services in your
community?
Ms. Bobbitt. Thank you for that question. That is a great
question because it is a very difficult task. But like
everybody else, we have to balance our budget the same as you
do in your home and at your budget and the same as a federal
government has to balance their budget and our state has to
balance their budget, so do counties, so we have to prioritize.
Obviously, we look at safety first and we are always very
proactive about looking at what is impacting our environment.
So we have to prioritize, but we do look at safety first.
Mr. Long. OK, thank you.
And, Ms. Tucker-Vogel and Ms. Licata, both of you raised
concerns about the proposed regulatory revisions regarding
making public water systems responsible for testing drinking
water at school and child care facilities, which we all want,
of course. Ms. Licata, what technical coordination and/or
funding challenges might this approach pose for water system
operators?
Ms. Licata. Yes, so we as a utility for New York City, are
greatly interested in supporting the schools and daycare
centers to the best of our abilities with testing and the
knowledge of what may exist within their facilities and where
they may have their lines. We think that there could be
additional funding for those types of facilities. We do know
that the Congress in 2016, through the WIIN Act created a grant
program. There is about $45 million that may have been provided
at this point, but we do need EPA to stand up a program that
could administer the funding. We have heard it is a drop in the
bucket, but the very next step is to stand up a program that
would allow for potentially grants to be administered.
Mr. Long. OK, thank you.
And, Ms. Tucker-Vogel, why should state education
departments and child care licensing agencies be responsible
for drinking water matters when they are in the schools?
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. So state education departments and
schools are responsible for the safety of the children that are
in their care, both in the schools and in child care
facilities. I think it is important to note that drinking water
operators at water utilities don't have the expertise that it
takes to look at premise plumbing. So once you start looking at
premise plumbing within large institutional buildings, it is a
very different expertise that is required than what is required
to operate a drinking water system. And I don't think our
operators at this point have that level of expertise to address
premise plumbing issues.
Mr. Long. OK. And with that I yield back 5 seconds. Thank
you all.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Soto, for 5
minutes, please.
Mr. Soto. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. You know,
getting lead out of our water is pretty fundamental. It has
been a challenge for thousands of years for humanity. I was
reading the other day that the fall of the Roman Empire was
even contributed in part because there was lead in their pipes
that drove people insane. And then we had lead in our piping
until the 1920s in a lot of cities, but until the 1980s--I
couldn't believe that. Until the 1980s and national plumbing
codes, there was lead.
We know this is a hard issue. We have had issues like
asbestos that we are working on and PFAS and even getting lead
out of gasoline in the '70s and '80s, but we can't avoid it
because it is hard. I worry about my own state, where 80
percent of the children with lead poisoning were not tested by
the local health departments, according to Pediatrics medical
journal. And then I just met with my Florida rural water folks
last week and they are volunteering to help out schools and
daycares because there is no state money to be able to test our
many of thousands of schools in Florida.
So, first, I wanted to ask for everybody's response. We saw
the President's budget this week, a 26 percent cut to EPA.
Those 50 programs that are targeted for cuts are radon, clean
water, and the lead program. So it would be great to hear what
that would mean to each of your communities if we had a 26
percent cut to the existing lead programs that we already are
funding in the 2020 budget.
And we will start from left to right with you, Ms. Hanna-
Attisha.
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. So the lead programs, the safety net
programs, all these programs that are critical for the health
and development of our children and of our families, they are
already underfunded. If you look at our lead program, the
Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program with the CDC, they
got some of their funding restored with some of the Flint
dollars that came in. But that is still not at what it needs to
be to properly identify the children that are exposed, but
really to focus our work on primary prevention not only getting
the lead out of our homes, but getting the lead out of our
plumbing.
We talk a lot about cost. The cost has come up many times
today and we are not talking about the cost of doing nothing.
We well know the cost of inaction. There have been studies from
the Pew and Robert Johnson Foundation and even studies in
Michigan that tell us the burden of not eliminating lead
exposure. It costs us about 80 billion dollars a year when we
look at decreased economic productivity, special education
costs, criminal justice costs, healthcare costs, and behavioral
healthcare costs. That is the cost of continuing to kick the
can and continuing not to eliminate these kinds of exposures.
Mr. Soto. Sure.
Ms. Gaddy, what would a 26 percent cut to the lead program
mean for places like Newark that you have been talking about
today?
Ms. Gaddy. Well, there would be a lot of services that
residents would not receive and again, I concur with Dr. Hanna
as well. Not only the lead in our drinking water, but lead
paint chips, dust, all of those things and those programs need
proper funding from EPA. It also means that individuals over
their lifetime, children will be exposed to more illnesses
based on the lack of safe and affordable drinking water, the
lack of individual air issues that is also associated with it.
I mean, one in four children in Newark have asthma. We have
cumulative impacts of just total, so many toxins, the air we
breathe, the water we drink, the food we eat, so a 26 percent
cut would hurt us tremendously in our community and the damages
will be irreversible. So children will have a lifelong of
health effects from an early age until they are adults.
Mr. Soto. Sure.
Ms. Licata, what would it mean for New York City to have
that kind of cut to the lead program?
Ms. Licata. We would be very concerned about deep cuts to
EPA, but I would, frankly, be most concerned about deep cuts to
the SRF programs for the states because my utility relies
greatly on that source of financing which really allows us to
access the markets at a very good rate. And, frankly, I think
with respect to budget cuts there, I think we are hearing today
that we do need some out-of-the-box opportunities to address
the costs associated with removing lead from homes, and I hope
that we can talk about that some more.
Mr. Soto. Sure.
Ms. Tucker-Vogel, what would it mean for Kansas if we had a
26 percent cut to the lead program for EPA?
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. So, well, first, I am here representing
ASDWA, but the lead program is not in the drinking water
program in the state of Kansas and I doubt that that is the
case in most of the state drinking water programs, that that
lead program located in another part of an agency.
So I would echo the concern though, about cuts to both the
public water supply supervision grant and the SRF programs
which do directly impact the state drinking water programs and
allow us to work towards reducing lead in drinking water.
Mr. Soto. Thanks. My time has expired.
Mr. Tonko. And perhaps the other witnesses can respond in
writing to answer, acknowledge Representative Soto's question,
which was very good. The gentleman yields back.
Next, the Chair will recognize the gentlewoman from
Michigan, Representative Dingell, for 5 minutes, please.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Chairman Tonko.
And I am sorry to all the panel. There are two hearings
that are equally important, especially for Michigan because it
is autonomous vehicles downstairs, but we have all been
bouncing up and down because we care deeply about both issues,
but I thank the chairman for holding this hearing.
And as you have heard all morning and as you know, this
really matters in Michigan. And I would reinforce again, it is
on each one of us here in Congress and the government to ensure
that no city in America ever experiences what Flint
experienced. Again, we have witnessed it. I have seen the
children. I am following the children.
It matters on the adults too, but as I talked about earlier
when I introduced Dr. Mona, I will never forget those kids when
I first--and the desperation of those parents. And it is really
clear that government at all levels failed the people of Flint.
Now we have a moral obligation to fix it, and I have felt that
from the very day that I first went to Flint and the ACLU,
before it ever became public, started talking to me about what
happened. And that is why a strong, proactive, and clear
federal Lead and Copper Rule is needed for the long term to
protect Americans all across the country.
I am going to address my first set of questions to Dr.
Mona. I call her Dr. Mona because the kids call her Dr. Mona,
and I should maybe be more respectful, but I trust kids more
than I trust adults some days. Sorry. But in your testimony,
you stated that EPA's proposed revisions to the Lead and Copper
Rule are minimalistic and insufficient, which I agree with.
Given your expertise and your experience in Michigan, I want to
direct a series of questions to you. First, can you describe
for the committee why there is no safe level of lead?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Yeah, we talked about that briefly
before. It is a neurotoxin. It impacts cognition and
development and behavior and has life-altering,
multigenerational, multisystem consequences. Very clear
science, which we have known for hundreds of years back when
the Romans used lead, now tells us there is no safe level.
Mrs. Dingell. So having said that and we have talked a
little about it and we keep dancing it, but we have got to stay
on it. What do we do to protect our most vulnerable, which is
our children and pregnant women?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Right.
Mrs. Dingell. What is the most direct thing we do?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. That is a great question and that is how
this rule really should be focused on and that should be that
focus on primary prevention, doing everything we can to not
expose children. Not only does it make health sense and
development sense, we also know it makes economic sense.
Mrs. Dingell. So what makes lead in drinking water
different than, say, lead from a lead pencil or from paint?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. That is a great question and that is
something that I had to learn as a pediatrician despite caring
for hundreds of children with lead poisoning both in Flint, and
in Detroit prior. Lead is different. Lead in water is different
than other traditional sources of lead. Lead paint and lead
dust, kids are highest risk of exposure to those household
sources when they are crawling and walking, usually when they
are toddlers. They walk around, they crawl, they find a paint
chip they put in their mouth and paint chips are actually sweet
and so they continue to eat them.
Lead in water impacts a different age groups. It impacts
the unborn, and has well-known maternal fetal impacts including
miscarriage, fetal death, prematurity, and small birth weight,
and it most impacts babies on formula. We have so many babies
in Flint who are formula-fed. We have low breastfeeding rates
and they were using this lead-tainted water to mix their
formula, which is a powder.
So the age group of exposure is different than the other
sources of lead, and also, unlike the other sources, lead in
water is in a vehicle meant for us to ingest. Like, we are not
meant to eat dust and paint, kids do it, but we are meant to
drink water. It is a medical and public health necessity for us
to consume water and when lead is in it, we can't see it, we
can't taste it, and we don't know it is in there.
Mrs. Dingell. So now let's take it to another step. So what
is the difference between lead exposure in schools and in
daycare versus exposure in homes, and what do we need to make
sure the kids are getting safe drinking water in schools?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Sure. That is a great question. So lead
in schools and child care facilities are a little bit different
than lead in homes. Usually, there is not lead service lines to
these bigger buildings, the lead is coming from fixtures and
faucets. Lead in schools usually is increased because there are
long periods of water non-use, for example, weekends,
overnight, and breaks, which concentrate the exposure of lead
so that first kid that comes in on a Monday morning and turns
on the drinking faucet, they are going to get a gush of lead in
their water. So that is what makes it a little different. And
we have poorly invested in the infrastructure of our schools,
and this is another reiteration reminder of why we need more
capital investment in our schools to get them caught up.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. I yield back, but I will have some
questions for the record, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to all of
you. Thank you.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlewoman yields back and the Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from California, Dr. Ruiz.
Representative Ruiz for 5 minutes, please.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this hearing on such an incredibly important topic. Thank you
all for being here and for your advocacies and your voice in
this public health dilemma. The health and safety of our
children is the most important aspect of keeping lead out of
drinking water, the health and safety of our children.
OK, the health and safety of our children should be our
objective, not some cost-benefit equation and feasibility and
for an agency. Lead is a potent toxin, a known threat to public
health with serious impacts on cognitive development in
children and there is a broad consensus that no level of lead
is safe. No level of lead is safe. As a parent of twin 4-year-
olds, would I consider a certain level safe for my children to
drink? Would I accept a certain amount of lead for my children
to drink if the medical community is saying no level of lead is
safe to drink? I would definitely not.
I am a physician, so I am going to ask Dr. Hanna-Attisha;
you are a pediatrician, correct? Can you tell us what health
impacts you found in your patients during the Flint lead
crisis? What led you to even test for this?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. That is a great question, and it is part
of the nuances of lead. So I shared kind of the consequences of
lead exposure, but those don't present right away. Kids don't
come into the clinic with those acute symptoms. I wish they
did. I wish a kid who was exposed to lead had like purple glow-
in-the-dark spots, but they don't, and in pediatrics, we call
it a silent pediatric epidemic. It is pernicious. It is
invisible.
We don't acutely see symptoms of exposure, which is why,
unfortunately, we are then left to screen children at the ages
of one and two because that is when they are most at risk for
household lead exposure for lead in their blood, but when we do
that it is too late. And when we do that, we are literally
using our children as detectors of environmental contamination.
We should be screening the water and their environment.
Mr. Ruiz. Is that a mandatory screening or is that your
practice or is that a state mandate?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. It is different in every state, but it
is a Medicaid mandate that if a child is on Medicaid, they have
to be screened at the ages of one and two. Some states still do
universal screening, but it is based on risk.
Mr. Ruiz. OK, and so how do these patients on lead present?
What are the symptoms of lead, acute lead toxicity?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. So acute lead toxicity, which we rarely
see anymore, this was something that was much more common when
we had lead in gasoline and a lot of lead in our paint, are
symptoms of seizures and tremors and acute neurological
symptoms and often death. But now what we see is what we don't
see. It is this kind of silent, invisible consequences and they
present later on in life with problems focusing, problems
paying attention, problems in school, learning disabilities,
growth issues, and hearing issues, so these are the
consequences of exposure. And when we do diagnose them it is
often years after the exposure and which makes it then very
difficult to do anything about it, but also very difficult to
prove causation.
Mr. Ruiz. Are those reversible?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. They are not.
Mr. Ruiz. OK. So they are permanent?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Yes. Lead is a permanent, irreversible
neurotoxin, which is why we are never supposed to expose
children to it. Not all children who are exposed will have
consequences and it depends on a lot of other risk factors,
including nutrition.
Mr. Ruiz. And so that is why prevention is so important--
--
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Yes, prevention.
Mr. Ruiz [continue]. When it comes to lead and not
reactionary policies of once you see there is a lot of lead
then we are going to act, after a child consumes the amount of
lead for a certain period of time.
In my district, the Coachella Valley Water District does
not have any lead service lines, and even so they work with
schools and daycare facilities to proactively test for lead in
their water pipes and drinking fountains to ensure the safety
of children. I want to talk about the cumulative impacts. So as
a pediatrician, can you tell us what happens to a child who is
exposed to lead both through contaminated drinking water and
through paint in their home?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Yeah. That is a great question. The
burden of lead exposure does not fall equally on our nation's
children as we have heard. It is a form of environmental
injustice or environmental racism. Predominantly poor and
minority children are exposed to lead just like many other
contaminants, and it is not just lead in their water. It is
also lead in their deteriorating homes. It is lead in the soil
because of industrial legacy uses of lead. So there are
cumulative exposures that are all synergistic and additive and
that impact the child. This is one.
Mr. Ruiz. Synergistic and additive. Do you think it is
important the EPA considers these cumulative impacts when
setting action levels and requirements for lead in drinking
water?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Absolutely. And I think the EPA should
also take the opportunity to lower the standards for all
sources of lead exposure, not just water.
Mr. Ruiz. OK. So I think it is clear that a drinking water
standard that fails to protect low-income children or children
of color is not good enough.
Ms. Gaddy, do you agree?
Ms. Gaddy. Yes, I agree. And cumulative impacts are
something that most individuals who live in certain ZIP codes
suffer from that environmental degradation on a daily basis and
it needs to be addressed.
Mr. Ruiz. So today is the anniversary on the executive
order on environmental justice, and the steps laid out in that
executive order are as important as ever and the example of
lead exposure shows why. I have legislation that I have
introduced to codify the executive order and I appreciate that
the chairman of this committee and this subcommittee included
many of these provisions in the Clean Future Act and also, it
also looks at cumulative impacts.
So, Ms. Gaddy, do you support codifying the requirements of
the environmental justice executive order?
Ms. Gaddy. Yes. And I am going to be at that hearing. It
started at 12:30 today. I am late, but I definitely support it.
Mr. Ruiz. Excellent. So I thank the witnesses for traveling
to be here today and I thank the chairman for calling this
important hearing and I look forward to working with all of you
to move important environmental justice legislation forward.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back and the Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from South Carolina, Representative
Duncan, for 5 minutes, please.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield as much time
to the gentleman from Illinois as he needs.
Mr. Shimkus. I thank my colleague.
A couple of points that we need in clarification. My
colleagues from Delaware and Florida mentioned the importance
of a budget and that it does set priorities and you all
answered appropriately. More money is better; less money is
not. But it is instructive that as of yesterday, my Democratic
colleagues have said on the House that they are not going to
submit a budget. So that would be pretty disappointing too,
don't you think, if there is not even a budget submitted by the
legislative branch of the House?
I am not going to draw you into the politics of this, but
you can see how that is, if you are going to throw a punch, you
have got to be willing to take a punch and it is not--budgets
are important. They are not going to submit one, so it is
difficult for me to accept the premise of attacking an
executive budget that at least has presented one.
Dr. Mona, appreciated the comments last time. You mentioned
the unborn child. They are exponentially challenged by lead,
would you say?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And you would claim them to be a vulnerable
population in themselves?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And should they be protected?
Dr. Hanna-Attisha. They should be protected with strong
lead in water regulations.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much and I appreciate that. It
just--I am glad my colleague, Cathy McMorris Rodgers, is here
because she offered a motion to recommit on the floor a couple
of weeks ago. We were debating another exciting issue, which
was PFAS, and she wanted to enact into the law a protection for
the unborn children under the PFAS standard. It was rejected on
the floor, but it is important. I appreciate that testimony.
Who of you here have people in your government entity that
does not have water connected to any system?
Oh, Ms. Bobbitt, OK. So what do they do for water?
Ms. Bobbitt. They have water wells, and private water wells
at their homes.
Mr. Shimkus. Private water, and are they tested?
Ms. Bobbitt. We work in partnership with the Oklahoma Water
Resources Board and our health department and they are
available to be tested----
Mr. Shimkus. Available, but they don't have to be tested.
Ms. Bobbitt. No, they are not mandated.
Mr. Shimkus. That is correct. So, but of course all the
people in your district are rich, right? We wouldn't classify
them as low income.
Ms. Bobbitt. Right, we have a median of $28,000. I don't
know that----
Mr. Shimkus. I would say you have a lot of low-income
people.
Ms. Bobbitt. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. So not all low-income people live in
metropolitan areas, do they?
Ms. Bobbitt. No.
Mr. Shimkus. So if you have to make a decision, and I do
this all the time. I have a rural area, 33 counties. Driving
north to south would probably take you six hours, a lot of
parts of rural America. If you have to make these tough
decisions, as you highlighted earlier, right, you have got to
make decisions of hospitals, EMT, all this other stuff. Is it
more important for you to try to connect people on safe
drinking water or rip out service lines that aren't above the
lead limits?
What would be--if you are going to make a decision as to
what you need to do to service your constituents and you had to
prioritize, is it better to rip out these lines that aren't
higher in lead or is it better to connect to these people who
don't have safe drinking water?
Ms. Bobbitt. We would work in partnership. So, obviously,
we are not going to go in there and mandate any lines be ripped
out. We are going to work in partnership. We need to come to
the table together to figure out what works best to serve
everybody.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Here is my--let me rephrase this question.
You are given a limited pot of money and the government says,
OK, this money is to rip out lines, service lines to homes that
are maybe still even under ten parts per billion, or you could
connect with the same money people who don't have connection in
rural America. What do you think you would do?
Ms. Bobbitt. We would connect.
Mr. Shimkus. Absolutely. And we do have programs that help
do that. Rural development, I work with them closely. And for
you city dwellers, we have communities that aren't connected to
water. And so when we address this issue of more money to do,
and we want to get it safe but we want to make sure that we can
still connect everybody so that then you have at least a
baseline.
And that is what the rural people are going to be concerned
about is that we are going to put in more rules, more
regulations and they are not going to be able to fulfill the
promise of safe drinking water to all Americans. My time has
expired and I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. And the gentleman from South Carolina yields
back. The Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from California,
Representative Barragan, for 5 minutes, please.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you. I want to thank the Chair for
holding this critically important hearing on the EPA Lead and
Copper Rule proposal, which I believe falls short, very short
of protecting public health from lead poisoning. And I want to
thank the panelists for being here, all of you who have been
working on this issue.
I don't quite understand why we debate the health and
safety of our children and whether it reaches a certain level
and it is bad enough now, we can do something about it, when we
know the medical community is saying that lead, any amount of
lead, is bad for their development and bad for their health.
The fight for clean and affordable water is personal.
I happen to represent a district in south Los Angeles where
there are only four districts poorer than mine. A couple of
years ago, we had brown water coming out of the faucets in
Compton. And I remember somebody saying, ``Well, it is only
impacting 500 people. Why do you care about this,
Congresswoman?'' I said one person who gets brown water is too
many and we shouldn't be putting these value sets on people and
based on where they live and how many people it impacts.
Everybody deserves clean water. Now, fortunately, the water did
not test positive for lead, it was other issues that we had.
And it just reminds me of sometimes the attitude when we should
be saying that we are not going to put up with unhealthy or
unsafe water for our kids and our vulnerable populations.
I remember being at an event about a year ago, maybe less
than that and had a teacher come up to me and she was with a
group of students, and said, ``The lead in our school is
testing just a tick under where action is required and we are
worried about this.'' And it was pretty high and it felt so
helpless to not be able to say anything on what could be done.
But it is unacceptable and we are failing and need to do
something about it, and so for communities of color and low-
income communities, they are certainly bearing the brunt of
this.
Ms. Gaddy, I want to start with you on the EPA's rule
required, rather, the EPA's required environmental justice
analysis of its Lead and Copper Rule finds that household-level
service line replacements that depends on their ability to pay
will leave low-income households with disproportionately higher
health risks. Given that I represent a poor district, this is
of my concern. There is also the issue of small water systems
that can't afford service line replacement which was the case
in my district with my water issue. It had to be taken over by
the county. It was the first time that was ever done in the
history of the state.
Can you please talk about this disparity and how Congress
can work with water systems to ensure that small water systems
and low-income households get the same full-service line
replacements as wealthier households?
Ms. Gaddy. Yes. I mean just for example, in Newark,
originally the residents were supposed to pay a thousand
dollars towards the replacement of the lead service line and
that was a huge burden, so a lot of individuals was opting out
of the program because now that is taking money away that they
need to provide for their family. And then fortunately enough,
our mayor and the city council was able to secure the proper
funding.
We all agree, especially in EJ communities that water is a
human right and that everyone deserves a right to safe,
affordable, quality drinking water and EPA should be doing more
to ensure that quality drinking water is afforded to everyone
throughout this country. And for those individuals who have the
smaller systems, it is not an either/or. If you don't have
money, you shouldn't have to buy bottled water which we know is
not regulated, right, and/or protected, and you shouldn't have
to pay for a lead service line.
What you want is to be able to turn on the tap water and
receive quality, safe drinking water that will help your family
and that is not happening in EJ communities and communities of
low-income people. So it is definitely something that is
causing a disparity and it is a health injustice that we have
to correct. And so, the money needs to be found today, and
action needs to be taken today to ensure that all these
individuals are protected and that that burden is not unfairly
put on individuals who don't have the financial means to
support the right to quality, safe drinking water.
Ms. Barragan. Great.
Ms. Wu, I want to--the NRDC's threat on taps report in 2017
talked about the enforcement and the challenges around
enforcement. Can you speak to the enforcement challenges with
the rule including from how environmental justice perspective
and how we can do better?
Ms. Wu. Yes, so we found that for the most part, there is a
very low, low percentage of formal enforcements that are
happening with drinking water violations in general. And we
also did a report called ``Watered Down Justice'' that showed
that there were violations happen more in minority communities
and low-income communities. So the disproportionate burden is
shown by the amount of violations and how long the violations
stay in violation. So enforcement is a huge part of it and it
is not happening in the communities that need it the most and
so it is an important part of making sure that the Lead and
Copper Rule, whatever it looks like, is actually properly
implemented and enforced.
Ms. Barragan. Great. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlewoman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlewoman from the state of Washington,
Representative Rodgers, for 5 minutes, please.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am here
to yield to the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus.
Mr. Shimkus. I thank my colleague for showing up and
helping.
So let me go with this, Ms. Gaddy. I appreciate your
statement. And you mentioned, I think, and you did it just
recently too, about service lines being replaced under the
state of New Jersey has got a plan to do that, correct? And you
mentioned at no cost. I wanted to just flesh out, there is
really no free lunch. You would agree with that, right? Someone
is paying for this.
Ms. Gaddy. Right.
Mr. Shimkus. So in New Jersey, who would be paying for the
replacement of these lines in this grant program you are
referring to?
Ms. Gaddy. Well, the bill, the individuals, the homeowners
and those who--yes.
Mr. Shimkus. But it is a grant program, so the state of New
Jersey, if I am right, would offer money to the homeowner for
the service line.
Ms. Gaddy. Correct.
Mr. Shimkus. Because I don't know. I am just asking. I
don't know the answer.
Ms. Gaddy. Well, it is a variation.
Mr. Shimkus. OK.
Ms. Gaddy. There are programs that the State came in----
Mr. Shimkus. So if the State is doing it, they are getting
their money how? How would the State----
Ms. Gaddy. Through taxes.
Mr. Shimkus. OK, thank you. So let me go to the, you know,
Ms. Tucker-Vogel, Mr. Estes-Smargiassi, and let's talk about
the payer in these issues, right? Who is paying for water? How
is it paid for?
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. So the----
Mr. Shimkus. If you don't want to answer, I will just go to
the next one. So I don't have much time, you have to answer
quickly.
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. So the ratepayers.
Mr. Shimkus. The ratepayers pay.
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. So who are the ratepayers?
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. So the water system customers, the
utility customers.
Mr. Shimkus. So we are either going to have the taxpayers
pay and the ratepayers pay. Someone is going to pay to do this.
Ms. Tucker-Vogel. Correct, and then the case of revolving
loan funds, you know, the State provides those loans. But there
again, they have to be paid back. They are not grants. And so,
it is the ratepayers that are paying back those loans as well.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Let me go to--I want to ask Ms. Licata a
question. You mentioned earlier, way long ago, about service
lines going into schools and that you could not force the
schools to--can you talk about that real quick?
Ms. Licata. Yeah. The EPA, neither the EPA or the DEP have
the authority to force the schools to do the testing, right, so
we would need Congress to grant EPA authority----
Mr. Shimkus. What about, do you have the force to be able
to replace the school----
Ms. Licata. No, we do not.
Mr. Shimkus. Do you have the force to be able to force a
private homeowner to do this?
Ms. Licata. No, we do not.
Mr. Shimkus. Do you have the force to able to force an
apartment complex to replace all their lead lines in an
apartment complex?
Ms. Licata. No, we don't.
Mr. Shimkus. That is good. Thank you. And I want to finish
with this. A lot of this revolves--and thank you again, Dr.
Mona. I am going to use that too, because you helped identify
this problem in Flint from day one, so you get all the credit
for raising this issue to our attention. Ms. Dingell was right.
It was a failure at all levels. I think the people evaluated
this.
I just want to put this on the record so that we kind of
know what really happened. And I have been on the chairman, or
ranking member for nine years. My understanding of Flint is
that there were horrible decisions and actions made by federal,
state, and local officials. Flint happened because of money and
politics. Flint wanted off Detroit water because they felt
gouged on rates. The city council set an artificial political
deadline that didn't meet engineering needs for water
chemistry.
The State cut the city slack; because they were in
receivership, they didn't go after enforcement and then tried
to minimize it. EPA was aware of the high-level readings, but
minimized their impact to avoid causing a panic. EPA also slow-
walked a legal reading of the responses. That took several
months. And the biggest problem was no one told the public and
that is what you lived through this experience. So we have
local, state, and EPA all failed the residents of Flint.
So I would--part of what you all do if you are a
nongovernment organization, a public interest group, or you are
a utility or with an association, we all have got to stand up
to protect the residents of our communities and we can't let
another level of government entity gets in the way of
protecting our constituents and our consumers. So I applaud you
for being here and with that I will yield back to the gentle
lady from Washington State.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlewoman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Representative Flores, for
5 minutes, please.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield my time to Mr.
Shimkus.
Mr. Shimkus. All right. I am almost done.
So let me go back to Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. Under the
proposed rule, public water systems would need to access funds
quickly to cover the costs of replacing its portion of a lead
service line replacement with the 45-day schedule. Estimates of
lead service lines vary, ranging from 2,500 to 5,500 per line,
with some industries estimate at $8,700 per line. What
budgeting and financing challenges would public water systems
operators face to replace lead service lines within 45 days?
And this is really part of that intro to the last set of
questions.
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. So the proposed rule suggests that if
a homeowner replaces their portion of the line that the water
system needs to replace their portion within 45 days.
Certainly, financing for some utilities that where this might
be an unexpected expense could be an issue. More importantly,
the timing itself could be an issue. For those of us who live
in the North, we don't typically open up the streets anywhere
between early in November and March because the folks who plow
aren't really enthused about big potholes from patches in the
street.
So need to have sort of--one of the things we ask for as I
think about rules is practicality. We need to have rules that
work, they work under all circumstances, and where the
enforcement makes sense. I wouldn't want a water system to be
in violation of the rule because they couldn't do something
practical even though that was their intent. We would want to
see coordination between the homeowner and the city.
Mr. Shimkus. So we are debating a proposed rule that has
been proposed by the administration in October of last year and
the deadline is tomorrow, don't forget. And it is better to be
debating a proposed rule versus not talking about any rule that
hasn't come down the pike in 20 years. So let me follow up with
you, same panelist. Do you anticipate that the 45-day
requirement would lead to a change in the frequency or types of
customer requests for lead service line replacement?
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. What I think we are seeing from the
rule will be that with inventories and letters that more people
will be interested in this and there will be a demand in some
cases for the homeowner to replace their piece of the line when
the city is not currently ready. It is not necessarily
efficient. Systems will need to figure out how to make this
work if that is the rule because we want to satisfy our
customers' demands.
If a customer wants to remove a lead service line, we are
going to have to figure out how to manage that. But we would
like to be able to create a system where if we are doing lead
service lines in a neighborhood, we get all of them done and we
do it efficiently and with the least disruption to the streets
and so on.
Mr. Shimkus. If the homeowner ultimately fails to replace
their portion as intended, what might be the consequences for
the homeowner and/or the public water operator?
Mr. Estes-Smargiassi. So this has been the crux of the
issue around lead service line replacement. Even if, and in
fact, I can offer concrete examples. Even where a water system
is prepared to pay for a hundred percent of the lead service
line replacement all the way from the main to the person's
home, we don't get a hundred percent participation. We have
homeowners who aren't interested in having the city come and
dig up their front yard or go down in their basement for
whatever reason and pull that lead service line out.
So we are seeing, even in communities in my area where our
funding enables the communities to put together a program that
covers the whole cost that they are getting around 90 percent.
They are not getting that last ten percent. Some homeowners
just aren't interested. And we don't have the authority to be
able to make them remove that last piece of pipe.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, and let me ask with this. And I only have
a minute left. So no one here at the panel is proposing forcing
government trench-diggers to pull out lead pipes on private
property, are they? Does anyone say we want to authorize the
Federal Government to protect the individual who lives in this
home that we are going to mobilize an eminent domain personal
property to remove their lead pipe? Is anyone proposing that?
Ms. Wu?
No, thank you very much and I yield back my time.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back. Several documents
have been requested to be entered into the record of this
proceeding. Let me just list what we have that has been
approved. A letter from the United States Conference of Mayors
and the National League of Cities; a letter from National Rural
Water Association; a letter from American Public Water Works
Association to EPA; a letter from American Public Water Works
Association to the Energy and Commerce Committee; a press
release issued earlier today by EPA with acknowledgment of some
inaccuracies.
And, finally, I would like to thank all of our witnesses
for providing not only tremendous information, but I think
establishing for us priorities. You know, that is what budgets
are; they are priorities. We can either do a relief for those
most wealthy and bloat our deficit or we can prioritize our
children and their health.
I remind Members that pursuant to committee rules, they
have ten business days to submit additional questions for the
record to be answered by our witnesses. I would ask that each
witness respond promptly to any such questions that you may
receive. I believe a few of you didn't get to respond to
Representative Soto, so if you could do that also. And at this
time, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:51:10 p.m., the subcommittee was
adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
