- DATA CENTERS AND THE CLOUD: IS THE GOVERNMENT OPTIMIZING NEW INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES OPPORTUNITIES TO SAVE TAXPAYERS MONEY?

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DATA CENTERS AND THE CLOUD: IS THE GOVERNMENT OPTIMIZING NEW
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES OPPORTUNITIES TO SAVE TAXPAYERS MONEY?

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEETH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 14, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-26

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
81-280                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, JR., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         JACKIE SPEIER, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          MATTHEW A. CARTWRIGHT,
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina               Pennsylvania
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MARK POCAN, Wisconsin
DOC HASTINGS, Washington             TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                TONY CARDENAS, California
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         STEVEN A. HORSFORD, Nevada
KERRY L. BENTIVOLIO, Michigan        MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
RON DeSANTIS, Florida

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Stephen Castor, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Government Operations

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              MARK POCAN, Wisconsin
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on MAY 14, 2013.....................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. David A. Powner, Director, Information Technology Management
Issues, U.S. Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................     7
Written Statement............................................     9
Mr. Bernard Mazer, Chief Information Officer, U.S. Department of
the Interior
Oral Statement...............................................    33
Written Statement............................................    35
Mr. Steve O' Keefe, Founder, Meritalk
Oral Statement...............................................    49
Written Statement............................................    52
Ms. Teresa Carlson, Vice President, World Wide Public Sector,
Amazon Web Services
Oral Statement...............................................    56
Written Statement............................................    58
Mr. Kenyon Wells, Vice President of U.S. Federal, CGI Federal
Oral Statement...............................................    63
Written Statement............................................    65

APPENDIX

Statement for the Record Submitted by Facebook, Inc..........    82
The Government IT Network, The FDCCI Big Squeeze.............    86
Data Center ``Statistics''...................................    90
Statement for the Record of Thomas A. Schatz.................    91

DATA CENTERS AND THE CLOUD: IS THE GOVERNMENT OPTIMIZING NEW
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES OPPORTUNITIES TO SAVE TAXPAYERS MONEY?

----------

Tuesday, May 14, 2013

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Government Operations,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:49 p.m., in
the Meese Conference Room in Mason Hall at George Mason
University, 4379 Mason Pond Drive, Fairfax, Virginia, Hon. John
Mica [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Mica and Connolly.
Staff Present: Alexia Ardolina, Assistant Clerk; Richard A.
Beutel, Senior Counsel; and Mark D. Marin, Director of
Oversight.
Mr. Mica. Well, good afternoon. I am Congressman John Mica.
I am pleased to chair one of the Oversight and Reform
subcommittees, which is Government Operations, and have the
opportunity to be here today.
The Democrat leader of the subcommittee is the
distinguished gentleman and Congressman from this district--I
believe we are in his district----
Mr. Connolly. Yes.
Mr. Mica. --Mr. Connolly. So, with that partnership, we
have the responsibility to conduct various oversight hearings
and look at government operations.
But today I call and convene the subcommittee hearing to
order in this district. And the title of today's hearing is
``Data Centers and the Cloud: Is the Government Optimizing New
Information Technology Opportunities to Save Taxpayer
Dollars?'' And that is the subject.
And we are here, actually, at the request of the ranking
member, Mr. Connolly. What we try to do is operate the panel in
a bipartisan manner, and areas of interest or particular
expertise, we like to highlight the priorities of Members. And
Mr. Connolly has been very active and a leader in trying to
consolidate some of the duplicative and costly data centers in
the Federal Government. He has been on this issue before I got
the opportunity to chair this subcommittee, so he has a long
history. And it was one of his priority requests that we
conduct the hearing. And, jointly, we decided that this would
be a great place, Fairfax County, George Mason University, to
have a field hearing here.
I apologize for the delay. My plane was on time, but, as I
told Mr. Connolly, the traffic in northern Virginia is
horrendous. In spite of my efforts to help with the rail
connection to Dulles and all, we still have a ways to go. But
we are delighted to be here.
The order of business--I will step out of order for just a
second because we are here at a very distinguished university.
If I could, maybe I could ask the ranking member to introduce
the president of this university, and we could inject a few
comments before we get to the business of the subcommittee.
Again, we are delighted to be here. I think it is great to
come to a university setting. I don't know if we have students,
professors, or others here, but it's an awesome opportunity. I
see some of us may, in fact, be recorded. And, again, it is an
actual hearing of Congress and part of our realtime work. So we
are pleased to be here.
Would you do us the honors, Mr. Connolly?
Mr. Connolly. I would. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you so much for being here. And we all apologize for our
traffic, but when you were both the ranking member and the
chairman of the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee,
you were very sympathetic and supportive of our efforts to
extend rail to Dulles Airport. And we want to thank you for
your support, because you did get it, about how serious the
congestion is here.
It is my privilege to introduce the president of George
Mason University, Angel Cabrera. We just actually celebrated
the installation ceremony for our new president. He comes to us
after many years of serving in the southwest part of the United
States in other academic endeavors, and we are delighted to
have him here.
George Mason University is about a little over 40 years old
now and in that 40-year time period has grown to become the
largest single university in the Commonwealth of Virginia,
which always surprises people at UVA, Mr. Jefferson's
university, which is over 200 years old, and Virginia Tech,
also a very large campus. So it just tells you a lot about what
is going on in terms of academic programs here in northern
Virginia. And it is a center of excellence, especially for the
technology community, but for so many other things as well.
So welcome, President Cabrera.
Mr. Cabrera. Well, thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. You might come over. I don't know, are these live
right here?
Mr. Cabrera. Yes. Thank you so much, Chairman Mica and
Congressman Connolly, for moving the business of Congress
across the river. And I hope the air of Fairfax will make the
meeting very, very productive.
I want to point out that even though we have a problem with
physical transportation of vehicles, the transportation of bits
through the Internet couldn't be any faster than it is in
northern Virginia, which I think is one of the reasons why this
is a perfect location to have this discussion.
I would also point out that we are, of course, in one of
the most educated and one of the wealthiest counties in
America. Those two things go hand-in-hand. And one of the
reasons why this area has become probably the world's hotbed
for the Internet and for cloud computing and other information
technologies is precisely because we have universities like
George Mason that right now ranks in the top 200 of research
universities in the world.
So it is a privilege to have you here. I wish you a very
productive meeting. And thank you so much for having chosen
George Mason University to conduct your business. Thank you.
Mr. Mica. Well, thank you. And, again, we are pleased to be
here.
And we will proceed. We are a little bit late in beginning
the proceedings, but the order of business will be as follows:
I will start with an opening statement. I will yield to Mr.
Connolly. Then we have two panels of witnesses. I will
introduce the two panels. One is primarily government; the
second looks like primarily private sector. We will proceed
with questions after we have heard from the witnesses, the
first two on the first panel and then the second panel.
So, with that, we will go ahead and proceed, and I will
recognize myself to sort of set the stage and talk about the
topic.
Today's hearing, actually, again, is the result of some of
the work of the Democrat leader of the committee. Some several
years ago, the GAO began some work and looked at some of the
data center consolidations. In fact, today, coinciding with
this hearing, there is the release of this report, ``Data
Center Consolidation: Strengthened Oversight Needed to Achieve
Cost-Savings Goals.'' And the subject matter contained in this
report will be discussed by the GAO representative.
But some of the background here is that GAO reports, in
fact, that in fiscal year 2011 the government funded 622
separate human resources systems, costing $2.4 billion; some
580 financial management systems, costing some $2.7 billion;
777 supply chain management systems, costing some $3.3 billion;
and so the list continues. Most of these systems perform,
unbelievably, the same function.
To address some of this wasteful duplication, and with much
fanfare, the OMB, the Office of Management and Budget, rolled
out a program in 2010 entitled the Federal Data Center
Consolidation Initiative. Sometimes you will hear me refer to
it as the FDCCI. But they trumpeted the fact that they thought
that they could close 40 percent of the data centers by 2015
and save taxpayers a welcome $3 billion. That would have meant
that, in closing 1,253 of the 3,133 total Federal database
centers, we could save that much money.
To accomplish this savings, 24 of the CFO Act agencies were
tasked by the OMB to do several things: first of all, to
conduct an initial inventory of data center assets by April
30th of 2010; and then, secondly, to develop a plan by June
30th, 2010; and report quarterly on their closures and savings
via an online portal called data.gov.
Today, GAO has released the latest of its three reports,
the one I referred to. In that report, we will find that the
GAO uncovered the fact that the program was not being
effectively implemented, unfortunately, and, also
unfortunately, that taxpayers are not going to recognize or
realize the projected savings that were anticipated.
Specifically, OMB and the agencies, some of the findings--
again, not mine, but theirs--were that the agencies were
delinquent on finalizing their data consolidation, their
migration plans. And, also, we have, I think, a chart up here
that shows the cells in orange, and we see missing data in
these cells, lots of question marks.
So we also found in that report that we lacked a basic
system to track cost savings so that progress toward that $300
billion cost-savings goal could be measured. GAO states, and
let me quote them, ``As of November 2012, the total savings to
date had not been tracked but were believed to be,
unfortunately, minimal.'' Again, their commentary.
OMB recently announced its plan to roll up the FDCCI into
its broader--a new process called PortfolioStat, potentially
losing focus and motivation to carry out this much-behind
consolidation of the original intended government data centers,
again, consolidation.
At a time of fiscal austerity and tight budgets, it has
never been more important for the Federal Government to drive
efficiencies and cost savings through effective management of
its information technology systems. It is absolutely essential
that IT assets should be optimized to maximize the return on
investments, reduce operational risk, and provide responsive
services to its citizens.
We must, I believe, accelerate data center optimization by
urging agencies to complete meaningful transition and
consolidation plans for their data centers and, also,
accurately track these savings.
And another thing that we are going to have to do is
support broader transition to the cloud solutions for Federal
IT resources and hopefully drive broader efficiencies in the
use and deployment of IT data centers. We are going to hear
from some of the private sector in here a little bit about how
we might achieve some of that in our second panel.
So, with that sort of setting the stage for where we are in
this hearing and, again, the review of what is taking place
with this consolidation effort, let me now yield to the
gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you for your gracious willingness to have this field hearing
here in the 11th District of Virginia at George Mason
University. I have very much appreciated the spirit in which
you and I have been able to work, beginning this year when this
subcommittee was first formed. And my hat is off to you in
terms of bipartisan cooperation and comity, and I thank you.
We have something like 3,100 data centers in the Federal
Government, and that is an astounding number. It is a stovepipe
kind of operation, and it is expensive and inefficient.
And what we are trying to do here is identify ways to
optimize, you know, the purpose here, through private-sector
cloud computing, through some remaining Federal data centers
that may make sense, but to try to achieve efficiencies,
especially right now when we are in budget contraction.
It is imperative for agencies to be able to expand their
scope and to be able to try to replace through better
deployment of technology lost dollars in their bottom line in
terms of the budget. If we don't do that, if we are not, you
know, seized with a sense of urgency about that mission, then,
you know, Federal agencies are going to have to do less with
less. And that will not serve the American people very well.
And so this, while for some a dry topic, is really at the
cutting edge of, can we organize ourselves in the Federal
Government to replicate what the private sector has done in
terms of the utilization of technology, better investments in
technology, smarter investments in technology?
We have had hearings, as the chairman knows, on the
Oversight and Government Reform Committee where it is estimated
that, of the $81-billion-a-year Federal information technology
budget, perhaps as much as $20 billion of it is spent in less-
than-optimum ways, some of it maintaining very old legacy
systems.
Now, the good news about that, as was pointed out in one of
our hearings, was that the Chinese don't know how to hack into
those legacy systems. So maybe that's an upside. But in terms
of efficiency for the future and making sure that we're ready
to go for the future, I'm not sure it's the kind of investment
we want to be maintaining forever.
And so data center consolidation is one piece of a larger
piece of Federal IT policy. And as the chairman indicated, I
requested the GAO report--and we are going to hear about it
today in testimony from Mr. Powner--on how are we doing. And
you can see from this chart, as the chairman just pointed out,
well, I wouldn't give us an A in terms of compliance with
trying to consolidate and eliminate duplicative data centers.
For some agencies, it may just be that it is not a
priority. For others, maybe they don't share the goal. But we
have got to reach the OMB goal of 40 percent reduction, or
consolidation, and we want to actually go way beyond that,
because that still leaves us with 1,100 or 1,200 data centers,
and it's not at all clear that we need all of them.
And so this is an important part of a larger picture. This
bill that I introduced on data center consolidation is an
entire title of what is known as the FITARA bill that Chairman
Issa, Chairman Mica, myself, and Ranking Member Elijah Cummings
have introduced in this Congress that would be the most
comprehensive rewrite of Federal IT acquisition policy since--
well, in 20 years. And so this is a vital piece of it, and
that's what we're doing here today, to try to really focus on
how can we do better at the Federal level. We need to do
better.
So thank you all for being here.
And, again, Mr. Mica, thank you so much for having this
hearing.
Mr. Mica. Again, pleased to be here.
And what we will do is, we have additional statements that
Members may like to submit. And, also, if the public or anyone
else is interested in submitting, it has to be done through a
Member, so in this case it would be Mr. Connolly or another
member of our subcommittee panel. But, without objection, the
record will be left open for 7 days, with Mr. Connolly's
concurrence.
Mr. Mica. And I also see that Facebook has a written
statement that they would like to be entered into the record.
Mr. Connolly asked that that be permitted.
Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Mica. Now we will turn to our first panel of witnesses.
And we have two distinguished panelists: Mr. David A. Powner,
and he is the director of information technology management
issues with the U.S. Government Accountability Office. We refer
to it commonly as GAO. Then we have Mr. Bernard Mazer, and he
is the Chief Information Officer of the Department of the
Interior.
Now, I think we've got two more witness little plaques out
there. And I'm not a happy camper, Mr. Connolly, that OMB and
GSA have chosen not to provide us a witness this morning. And
they are not going to squirm out of appearing before the panel,
so we will schedule another hearing. It may not be here, but it
will be in Washington. And we will call them in either
voluntarily or however we have to do it, because we do--this is
about saving taxpayers significant sums of money and achieving
something that they set out to do. So we need answers, and we
want it straight from those individuals involved.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Mica. Yes, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. I concur in your sense of disappointment with
OMB. I conveyed my disappointment to folks at the White House
directly and to OMB directly for their nonparticipation today.
None of that should, of course, detract from the fact that
we are delighted to have the witnesses we do have.
Mr. Mica. Yes, and we'll start it, and we'll start it here
in Fairfax at George Mason, and we'll get to the bottom of it.
Sometimes it takes more time.
I understand last night, apparently in response to this
hearing--and these hearings do actually make things happen,
believe it or not--GSA, which is a no-show, updated their data
posting from zero to 74 planned data centers closings on
data.gov. So we sometimes can get some things moving along. And
that's part of this process, is the constant oversight that
we're responsible for in this important committee and
subcommittee.
So those are the two witnesses we have from GAO and the
Department of the Interior.
This is an investigative panel, and it is part of the
procedures of the panel to swear in our witnesses. So I would
ask you to stand, if you can, Mr. Powner and Mr. Mazer. Raise
your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give and provide this subcommittee of Congress is the
whole truth and nothing but the truth?
Mr. Mazer. Yes, I do.
Mr. Powner. Yes, I do so solemnly swear.
Mr. Mica. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
answered and responded in the affirmative.
So, with that, the way we proceed, for everyone's
information, is first I will call on GAO's representative, Mr.
Powner, and then Mr. Mazer, in that order.
And we have a little bit of extra time. We try to hold it
to 5 minutes. If you have prepared information or background
data that you would like submitted to the record, just request
it to the chair, and that will be accomplished.
So, with that, we welcome you.
And, Mr. Powner, first, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF DAVID A. POWNER

Mr. Powner. Chairman Mica, Ranking Member Connolly, we
appreciate the opportunity to testify on the Federal
Government's efforts to consolidate its data centers and to
save taxpayers billions of dollars.
In a time when we hear too often about fraud, waste, and
duplicative Federal programs, the Data Center Consolidation
Initiative is an effort that is good government. Its goals are
to reduce costs, increase current low-server utilization rates,
and shift to more efficient computer platforms and
technologies. The specific goals are very clear and aggressive:
close 40 percent of the government's over 3,000 data centers
and save the taxpayers $3 billion.
This afternoon, we are releasing our third report on this
initiative. The first two highlighted holes in agencies'
inventories and plans and made recommendations to ensure that
inventories were complete and that agency plans clearly had
comprehensive schedules to close centers and associated cost
savings.
For example, last summer, we reported that only three
agencies had complete inventories: SSA, HUD, and the National
Science Foundation. And only one agency had a completed plan,
that being the Department of Commerce.
While incomplete, these plans still showed great
opportunities for cost savings. For example, DOD claimed that
it could save $2.2 billion. In its recent budget submission,
DOD plans to save $575 million in fiscal year 2014 alone. And I
think that is represented on your chart up there, fiscal year
2014.
This afternoon, I will provide a progress report on closure
and cost-saving goals and recommendations to ensure progress
continues. My comments will also address the importance of
FITARA in this area.
Data center closures to date and those planned are
promising. Four hundred centers were closed by the end of
December, and another 400 are planned to be closed by September
of this year, as your chart shows up there. And the plan is to
close well over 1,000 centers by December 2015.
Despite impressive progress and visibility into the closure
situation, this is not the case regarding progress and
transparency toward the cost-savings goal of $3 billion. In
fact, OMB is not tracking cost savings. This lack of such data
raises questions about the government's ability to meet its
overall goal.
But let's be very clear on the cost savings issue: Closing
over 800 centers should yield significant cost savings. The
Department of Agriculture recently reported to the
Appropriations Committee that it saved nearly $50 million in
fiscal year 2013. DHS is reporting $20 million of savings in
fiscal year 2013. And we've already discussed DODs plans to
save $575 million in fiscal year 2014.
Now is not the time to take our foot off the accelerator
regarding associated cost savings, and FITARA would be
extremely helpful since it requires the tracking and reporting
of cost savings.
OMB has recently integrated the data center effort with the
broader PortfolioStat initiative and is in the process of
revamping metrics in this area. OMB stated that its new goal is
to close 40 percent of the non-core data centers and that
additional metrics in areas like energy consumption are to be
developed by the data center task force.
Folding the data center effort under this initiative is
fine as long as the right metrics are in place, including cost
savings, and that it provides the appropriate level of
transparency. Mr. Chairman, having the right metrics and
transparency moving forward is currently a big question mark.
Our recommendations are to track and annually report on key
data center metrics, including cost savings to date, extend the
time frame for achieving cost savings beyond the current 2015
horizon because significant savings will occur beyond that
date, given where agencies are at today.
Regarding governance, we need better leadership out of OMB
and the GSA program office if we expect the data center
initiative to be successful. With OMB, this leadership starts
with the Federal CIO. In addition, each CIO needs this to be
one of their top priorities and at any point in time should be
able to report on closures and cost savings to date and those
planned for the next fiscal year. If these simple questions
cannot be answered, we do not have adequate governance at the
agency level.
And, finally, codifying the data center optimization
consolidation effort the way FITARA does will ensure cost
savings are tracked and reported and that this initiative will
span multiple administrations.
I would also like to mention, Mr. Chairman, your comment
about GSA's data changing, that really shows the importance of
this committee's oversight. Your staff made a couple of key
questions to GSA, and clearly we went from zero reported
centers to 74 in a couple days. And having that reported is
very important so that we can perform the appropriate oversight
so, in fact, those 74 data centers do get closed, with their
associated cost savings, and then we can think about optimizing
the centers that remain open.
So this concludes my statement, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Connolly. Thank you for your leadership on this topic,
and I look forward to answering your questions.
Mr. Mica. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Powner follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.024

Mr. Mica. And we will hold the questions until we have
heard from Mr. Mazer. And he is the Chief Information Officer
at the Department of the Interior.
Welcome, sir, and you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF BERNARD MAZER

Mr. Mazer. Good afternoon, Chairman Mica and Ranking
Minority Member Connolly. I would like to summarize my
testimony and submit the full testimony for the record.
Mr. Mica. Without objection, we'll submit the additional
data.
Mr. Mazer. My name is Bernard Mazer. I currently serve as
the Chief Information Officer for the Department of the
Interior. As a representative of the Federal CIO Council, I
also serve as an executive sponsor of the Federal Data Center
Consolidation Task Force.
Thank you for providing the opportunity to testify
regarding cloud computing and optimization of data centers
across the Federal Government.
The Federal Government information technology
infrastructure is a massive collection of networks. In the span
of 11 years, from 1998 to 2009, the number of Federal data
centers drastically increased from 432 to more than 1,100. The
result was an inefficient Federal data center population with
unnecessary operations and maintenance costs.
To reverse this trend, OMB in February of 2010 launched the
Federal Data Center Consolidation Initiative, referred to as
FDCCI. A year later, in February 2011, the Federal Data Center
Consolidation Task Force was chartered. The task force is
comprised of agency representatives who are working together to
share progress toward individual agency goals and the overall
Federal goal of optimization and consolidation.
Today, the task force has contributed to the FDCCI by
advising on policy and implementation; sharing information,
best practices, and lessons learned; and by working with
agencies to assess the benefits and challenges of cloud
computing.
One of the critical roles of the task force has been to
share best practices. For example, the Department of the
Interior has launched an IT transformation initiative to
consolidate IT infrastructure operations at the department
level, including data center operations, in order to eliminate
redundancy and speed the adoption of new technologies, such as
the migration to cloud computing.
Information provided by the task force has helped evolve
the FDCCI. Under the March 13th OMB memorandum on
PortfolioStat, the FDCCI was formally integrated into
PortfolioStat and shifted the FDCCI focus from consolidation to
both optimizing core data centers and consolidating non-core
data centers. Through PortfolioStat, agencies have already
realized $300 million in savings, some of which is attributed
to data center consolidation.
The expected benefits of moving to the cloud can be great
and are driving the transition from existing hosting
environments that focus on managing servers to modern cloud-
based environments. These benefits include improving service
delivery to customers, modernizing computing capabilities,
enhancing collaboration, and replacing legacy information
technology infrastructure. Moreover, as agencies refine their
business processes during cloud migration, they can also
realize significant cost savings.
The deployment of cloud tech computing also presents
challenges, including culture and change management, data
interoperability and portability, and the lack of expertise or
experience in implementation of migrating to cloud-computing
technologies.
Another challenge agencies have experienced is calculating
cost savings related to optimization and consolidation. This
requires calculation of a total cost of ownership which is much
more comprehensive than just equipment or energy cost. That is
why the task force, working with participating agencies and GSA
and OMB, are developing a total-cost-of-ownership model. This
model is now being used as a planning tool as agencies optimize
and consolidate their data centers.
Agencies are at different stages of moving IT applications
to the cloud and, in doing so, can leverage offerings from the
Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program, known as
FedRAMP, that provide a standardized approach to security for
cloud products and services.
In conclusion, Federal agencies are continuing to make
progress toward optimizing and consolidating data centers.
Since launching the FDCCI, agencies have closed 484 data
centers as of last week, with plans to close 855 by the end of
the fiscal year 2013. The progress is being publicly tracked
through data.gov.
FDCCIs integration into PortfolioStat is expected to
strengthen the focus on tracking cost savings, increase the
number of tracked metrics, facilitate collaboration across
agencies, expedite implementation of best practices, and should
result in a consistent method for tracking costs. All of this
is expected to result in a more accurate assessment of the
benefits of this initiative.
I am confident that cloud computing and data center
consolidation has the potential to provide modernized IT at a
significant cost savings. It is our job as chief information
officers to provide the evidence of these benefits to the
American people.
Chairman Mica, Ranking Member Connolly, this concludes my
prepared statement, and I would be happy to answer any
questions that you may have at this time.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Mazer follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.029

Mr. Mica. Well, we'll go ahead with some questions.
And let me first ask our GAO representative, while one of
the basic questions is that this whole project was projected to
save $3 billion, and I think that was by 2015, I think I quoted
the report as saying that the savings to date had not been
tracked but were believed to be minimal.
It seems pretty apparent now we're getting some data in as
a result of this hearing. But do you think they're going to be
able to approach the goal and meet the goal? Or what is your
prediction now looking at----
Mr. Powner. So a couple comments here.
If you look at the projected cost savings--at one time we
had plans that were being updated; now those plans are off the
table since this is being merged under PortfolioStat. But at
one time we had about $2.4 billion in very preliminary plans.
Inventories weren't complete yet. $2.2 billion of that came
from DOD.
Now, there were some things where upfront costs needed to
be considered. But if you look at this chart up here, the Ag
and the DHS numbers, that comes from a report that goes to the
appropriation committees. Those agencies are reporting already
in fiscal year 2013 a savings.
And if you just project--I mean, 800 closures in DOD alone,
$575 million in fiscal year 2014 alone. Our thought is this: If
you extend it beyond 2015 out to--and it's great to have these
stretched goals near term, but I think $3 billion is very
realistic. And when this initiative was started, there was a
goal of $3 billion. At one time, OMB was talking about a $5
billion cost savings, and they went back to $3 billion.
So it's somewhere--who knows, really, where it is? But I
think that's why you need good hard numbers on these closures.
And if we have over 1,000 centers that we are closing, there
has to be significant associated cost savings.
Mr. Mica. Uh-huh. Well, what's interesting, now entering on
the scene we have this PortfolioStat. I'm wondering if the
consolidation efforts were to merge with this new thing, is
this all going by the wayside? Or do you see them as
compatible?
Mr. Powner. They're clearly compatible. So if you look at
the PortfolioStat initiative--and that's something we looked at
very closely for the Congress--PortfolioStat----
Mr. Mica. Tell me how that's going to work, how you see it
working.
Mr. Powner. Yeah, so what PortfolioStat is, that takes
commodity IT, so you can think of it more as administrative
systems, and it puts them in groupings, so HR systems,
financial management systems, email systems?
And OMB has an initiative, which we highly commend their
efforts on that, where they went to each of the agencies, and
they identified about 100 opportunities at 24 major departments
and agencies to save $2.5 billion. Okay? And that was the first
cut in PortfolioStat.
Now, clearly, when you start looking at consolidating
commodity IT and moving to the cloud, there is a lot of overlap
with data center consolidation. So movement to the cloud-based
center consolidation, PortfolioStat, their shared service
approaches--all these different terms that they have. But the
bottom line on all of this, Mr. Chairman, is you have
significant effort, PortfolioStat and $2.5 billion in savings;
data center consolidation, $3 billion in savings.
They did some TechStat reviews looking at troubled
projects. The committees looked at that. Chairman and Ranking
Member Connolly, I know you've looked at a lot of the troubled
projects. But there were $3 billion in savings.
All of a sudden, you do the math real quickly, and there is
$7 billion or $8 billion in savings that we could spend more
appropriately on modernizing government IT operations and
furthering our mission. So that's why these savings are very
significant. If we do things much more efficiently and save a
significant amount of money, it will be in the ballpark of, you
know, $7 billion to $8 billion, $9 billion.
Mr. Mica. Okay.
Now, there are three components to making this
consolidation effort work, as I understand. One is supposed to
be OMB and sort of its oversight; GSA, and they have a program
management office involved; and then we have the task force.
Now, you said we need better leadership with sort of a
general statement with the CIOs, but somehow some thing is
lacking here. We don't even have OMB willing to come in today
and testify.
I mean, please be frank with us. Has OMB dropped part of
the ball, an important part of the ball, that is making this
not work?
Mr. Powner. So our report is fairly balanced here, Mr.
Chairman----
Mr. Mica. No, no, just be honest. You don't have to be
balanced.
Mr. Powner. --OMB, GSA, and the task force, and they have
done some things well.
OMB has actually set the goals well. And we've got the ball
rolling on----
Mr. Mica. But they're not----
Mr. Powner. --they're not driving it to closure.
GSA, they have a program office responsible for plans and
inventories. Our work over there shows the plans and the
inventories have not been complete. Okay? We've got agencies
like DOT where FAA wasn't reporting their air traffic control
facilities.
And then when you look at what Mr. Mazer is doing, I think
he's done a great job with the task force and the like, but we
pointed out the peer-review process was not where it needed to
be.
So all three organizations we felt needed to do more from a
leadership perspective.
Mr. Mica. Okay. And since we've got Mazer here, we'll pick
on him a little. How can their effort be improved? And do you
cite that here in the report?
Mr. Powner. Yeah, we did cite that.
That was a time--so the task force was put in place to
perform peer reviews of the various agencies. And we clearly
made a very clear point that we thought there could be more
peer review going across the agencies to help each other out.
And I commend Mr. Mazer for his efforts to date and for him
being here and what he's done to date, but I also think that
that task force can do better, similar to GSA and OMB.
Mr. Mica. Well, with that being said, Mr. Mazer, and as
chair of the task force, where do you see, again, us going from
here in your particular role? You're an important part of the
equation.
Mr. Mazer. Chairman, where I see the role of the task force
is--we appreciated GAO's examination of the overall FDCCI
activities. In previous years, they were looking at the paucity
of information populating what constitutes a data center.
We are going to take into earnest the incorporation of the
peer-to-peer reviews. We had those in the past. It will keep
agencies on course in terms of their schedules and in terms
filling out their inventory.
The Federal Data Center Consolidation Initiative task
force, as it's being integrated into PortfolioStat, it's really
linked to the shared services activities that we're engaged
upon, about looking at these duplicative business systems like
HR and financial management systems. It's related to the
TechStat activities that we're looking at.
What the Federal Data Center Consolidation Initiative is
going to do is identify criteria for examining what will become
core data centers and what will become non-core data centers.
Non-core data centers, we're going to encourage those data
centers either to move to the core data center or to move out
into the cloud.
But we're following the approach of optimizing the
portfolio, which includes applications----
Mr. Mica. Can you define a little bit better the core and
the non-core, just for the record?
Mr. Mazer. Chairman Mica, core data centers are those that
are capable of delivering enterprise or private-sector-like
class services. They're reliable, they're secure, they're
following green IT, and they have the capability to deliver a
variety of services across an agency or across agencies.
Non-core data centers are activities that might be specific
to a location or they might be supporting a particular
scientific or monitoring-type of system. Many of the non-core
data centers are, in effect, really small data centers. You
could sometimes characterize them as closets, so they're 500
square feet or less, with a lot of cost inefficiencies about
maintaining those.
So we're going to encourage those to move to the core. Or
if they have applications, then we're going to look at the
promise of moving those out into the cloud.
Mr. Mica. Okay.
Well, finally--and I want to give Mr. Connolly plenty of
time--is there--now, we are considering, again, some update in
legislation and are working together on that. Have you looked
at that? Is there anything that we are missing that would give
us the tools to move forward, from what you have seen, either
on an agency basis, on the whole consolidation?
Maybe you've reviewed some of what we have proposed, but--
and we want to pursue giving all the tools necessary to
expedite this. And sometimes, you know, you have to have
language that actually mandates certain actions because the
agencies are so inclined to stay static and not take
initiatives.
But maybe you could both quickly comment on, or briefly
comment on anything you see.
Mr. Powner. Yeah, so on FITARA and the data center
optimization section, a couple key things that we're very
supportive of the bill is in the area of tracking and reporting
key metrics.
Not only do you want to track and report closures and cost
savings--and that is very clear, because there are cost savings
that need to be had--but you also have aspects of that bill
that talk about optimization metrics, where you look at energy
usage and those types of things, higher server utilization
rates and that type of thing. So, obviously, you want both. You
want the right metrics on closures and cost savings, but you
want also the right metrics on optimizing what remains. And,
clearly, I think that's something that the task force is
charged to do going forward as part of the PortfolioStat.
So I see your bill being very consistent with the direction
that the administration is going. What it does is it mandates,
codifies it in law, and it will ensure that it will span
multiple administrations. Because, regardless of whether you
want to look at this in 2015 or not, this is a long-term
initiative that will go beyond 2015.
Mr. Mica. Right.
Mr. Mazer. Chairman Mica, the administration I don't
believe has a position yet on the bill, but I have examined the
bill from a data center perspective, metrics perspective. A lot
of those cost-tracking metrics are what the Federal Data Center
Consolidation Initiative is looking at.
There are some things that we're looking at, about power
usage effectiveness; we're looking at cost per operating system
virtualization; we're looking at ratios of employees to the
amount of servers; and we're also looking at facility and
storage utilization.
One of the activities that I feel good about the Federal
Data Center Consolidation Initiative is, as we're looking at
metrics, or we're attempting to look at metrics and all that
that have meaning and salience and trying to comport ourselves
into the 21st-century information technology.
Mr. Mica. Great.
I am a little bit more frosted as we go on and not seeing
the two other witnesses. We'll have to definitely reschedule
that, and we may have to have at least one of the witnesses
back.
Let me yield now to Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I think the answer I just heard to your question of,
did we get it right on the FITARA bill we introduced, I thought
I heard both Mr. Powner and Mr. Mazer say we got it absolutely
right and don't change a word, it's perfect.
I want to thank our panel for being here.
Mr. Powner, you've had a chance to look at the legislation,
which stands for Federal Information Technology Acquisition
Reform Act, which I referred to in my opening statement. And I
heard your answers to the chairman's question, that it does
encapsulate some of the reforms we're trying to make, including
what the task force is doing, and going even back to the 25-
point plan that Vivek Kundra put out when he was CTO.
Can you elaborate just a little bit about what it might
achieve and how, if that legislation could perhaps help us with
better compliance and better metrics and data center
consolidation?
Mr. Powner. Well, I clearly think from a metrics point of
view it will help significantly, because it makes it very clear
that cost savings are significant and that has to be reported
and tracked.
The other part of the bill that I think will help is CIO
authority. This is a CIO issue in every department and agency.
And, clearly, you know, it varies in terms of the progress and
the reported cost savings that CIOs are currently making. You
know, we're all trying to get to a position where IT is more
effectively managed at $80 billion, and we know that's
understated based on some of the prior hearings that you've
held. So I think in addition to the data center section, the
CIO authority section also could play a significant role in
moving the ball forward in this area.
Mr. Connolly. At the moment, are you satisfied that OMB has
consistent methods of evaluation to capture cost and cost
savings with respect to data centers?
Mr. Powner. No, I'm not--we're not. In fact, what OMB told
us is that they were not tracking cost savings and that the
savings were minimal. So if you're going to establish a goal of
closures and cost savings, we need to then track that and
ensure that we actually drive it to closure.
We have a lot of good plans in D.C. at times in the IT
area; what we don't do is implement them completely. And, also,
folks aren't held accountable to implement them completely.
This is a prime example.
Mr. Connolly. Well, if they're not tracking cost savings,
what do they think the consolidation effort is for?
Mr. Powner. That's a very good question, Mr. Chairman.
So we did not agree; that's why we made the recommendation
in our report that cost savings needs to be front and center in
terms of metrics. And we can talk about optimization goals and
all this other stuff, but we're optimizing the stuff that
remains. Okay?
All those closures, and even if those are all small wiring
closets, 800 of them, there's a lot of money to be had with
those. And if we get to a point where we have 1,100 or 1,200
centers, which would get to the 40 percent----
Mr. Connolly. Can you refresh our memory, Mr. Powner, on
how much these data centers expend, what it costs the taxpayers
every year just on energy consumption?
Mr. Powner. I don't have good numbers on that.
Mr. Connolly. Would about $450 million roughly sound right
to you?
Mr. Powner. I would have to get back to you on that, but
likely even higher, though, if you start adding all the
departments and agencies. You look at DOD alone and you look at
their centers----
Mr. Connolly. Yeah.
Mr. Powner. And, frankly, they're reporting some numbers
there that they probably would have missed. They don't have a
complete inventory yet.
Mr. Connolly. It underscores your frustration, Mr.
Chairman, which I share. We've got to have some consistent
measurement by OMB. And, for goodness' sake, obviously cost
savings are part of the goal here, not the only goal, but a
pretty important part of the goal.
And if they're not consistently measuring that or even
seeing it as a significant factor in making the decision about
to stay open, to close, to consolidate, then they're not with
the program. And, certainly, they're not consistent with the
legislation we've introduced.
Would that be a fair statement, Mr. Powner?
Mr. Powner. Yeah, so if you look at the IT budget--we spend
$80 billion on IT in the Federal Government, and 70 percent of
that is operations and maintenance, which includes data
centers. And the challenge going forward is to take some of
that O&M spend and move it into systems development and
acquisition so we modernize the government and further the
mission. But we spend a lot of money keeping the lights on, and
if we can do it more efficiently in this example, or movement
to the cloud, we need to do more of that.
Mr. Connolly. Yeah. Absolutely.
Mr. Mazer, you are a constituent. I cannot imagine a better
spokesperson for this whole subject than yourself, hailing, as
you do, from Annandale.
But just a couple of questions. You chair the task force.
What is the mandate of the task force?
Mr. Mazer. The mandate of the task force, it was initially
chartered to provide information sharing, examining best
practices, to examine activities like power usage
effectiveness, and to follow and optimize--or to follow working
with the agencies on the schedules and all that for closure on
activity.
Mr. Connolly. Okay, but there is a goal, an end goal, which
is to promote this consolidation.
Mr. Mazer. It's to promote the consolidation. And it's also
to promote--this task force, we had a year gap of the peer
review. But when the peer reviews that we had going forth on
all that was having one agency encouraging another agency to
either follow the intention of the schedule or to follow
intention with the scope or to look at the missing inventory
elements that are a part of what a data center consists of.
Mr. Connolly. What are some of--could you enumerate for us
a little bit the process and the criteria used in the process
for determining, or for helping to determine in that task force
process, ``You know, that sounds like an inefficiency. Ought to
close, ought to consolidate, or go entirely to the private
sector?'' What are the criteria whereby you look at something
going, ``That's great, don't change a thing,'' versus, ``That's
not so great, and maybe it ought to be closed?''
Mr. Mazer. Well, what we're looking at is, in terms of
the--you know, initially the task force was chartered to
reflect on best practices, and a reflection of noticing that we
are having a problem coming to grips with what we have in our
inventory. We started working on a series of metrics and all of
that, in terms of criteria.
So some of the metrics that we're looking at are how much
virtualizing we've done of the boxes. And we're establishing a
standard for the U.S. Government. We're looking at metrics in
terms of how much floor space that we're using. We're looking
at metrics in terms of the energy costs that we are looking at
and establishing a baseline there for those activities. We also
are looking at metrics in terms of what's the ratio of things
that are out in the cloud as opposed to things that are
actually to be put on premises.
And right now the task force is engaged in establishing
these metrics as a baseline which will serve as the basis for
when the PortfolioStat sessions start in the summer so that
agencies will have a good apples-to-apples comparison of what
costs are and what we should strive to.
Mr. Connolly. I assume utilization is one of the criteria?
Mr. Mazer. Yes, sir. Utilization is a heavy criteria--one
of the criteria. We've got about nine criteria. I'd be happy to
submit for you a----
Mr. Connolly. That would be very helpful, I think, to all
of us here. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. Yeah, because I would think, in some ways,
utilization alone could be a qualifier or disqualifier. I mean,
if you find something grossly underutilized, it's a strong
candidate for consolidation or elimination.
Mr. Mazer. Yes. Many of our servers are at 5 percent or 10
percent----
Mr. Connolly. Yeah.
Mr. Mazer. --utilization, which does fit the----
Mr. Connolly. I think that--could you repeat that? Because
I'm not sure that's fully appreciated. When we're looking at
data consolidation, it isn't because we're obsessed with
smaller numbers. It is because we're looking at how efficient
it is.
Mr. Mazer. Right. When the teams have gone out and done
either using automated tools or on-site examination of the
capacity of servers, many of them are woefully underutilized.
There's more efficiency by putting multiple operating systems
or applications on one particular server, particularly given
the state of technology that it is today.
Mr. Connolly. Right. Thank you.
And a final question for now. You mentioned FedRAMP. Could
you just remind us all what FedRAMP is and give us a status as
to where it is?
Mr. Mazer. The status I will defer to my colleagues from
GSA, but I will tell you----
Mr. Connolly. Yeah, but they're not here, Mr. Mazer.
Mr. Mazer. FedRAMP--well, what FedRAMP is looking at is,
you know, the security is a very important issue concerning the
U.S. Government and how do we protect our data and our content.
And what we have done over the past 10 years, with the advent
of the FISMA laws and all that, is really establish a set of
controls. And if agencies can subscribe to those particular
controls, whether it's, like, access, availability, those types
of activities, then they're saying, okay, they're reasonably
protected given the categorization of that security.
FedRAMP is a model where, if anyone can subscribe to these
set of controls, then they can be delivering that particular
service. So FedRAMP is a model that, let's say if a private-
sector company says, ``I'd be able to do something for you, the
U.S. Government,'' they will follow the standards as
promulgated by FedRAMP, and you'll have an independent auditor
or a validator come in and say, ``Yes, they're matching these
controls.''
And it actually establishes a common baseline, so rather
than every agency doing its own set of, ``I think the security
should be this,'' or, ``I think the security should be that,''
it subscribes to a standard baseline by which all private-
sector companies should subscribe to.
Mr. Connolly. So another way of putting it would be, Mr.
Mazer, that what FedRAMP is designed to do is to set some
common standards that people, other agencies buy in to. And
that helps us in terms of the acquisition process because the
private sector now doesn't have to deal with 100 variations.
Mr. Mazer. Right. The private sector doesn't have to divine
the intentions of each individual agency.
Mr. Connolly. And are we expected to finalize that process
soon?
Mr. Mazer. The FedRAMP process is ongoing. There are a
couple of, they call them--there's an acronym; forgive me if I
can't break it out--3PAOs, that they are that qualified to look
at a private-sector company as they are offering cloud services
to the U.S. Government.
Mr. Connolly. So can we expect something soon?
Mr. Mazer. There are three--as services, as agencies are
migrating to the cloud, they will avail themselves of the
FedRAMP. The private-sector companies will avail themselves of
the FedRAMP.
Mr. Connolly. But you are anticipating we will proceed with
FedRAMP as planned?
Mr. Mazer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. Just a final question, a follow-up question. In
your review, who is getting it right? Examples to look toward?
Mr. Powner. Agencies that are getting it right?
Mr. Mica. Yeah.
Mr. Powner. We can look at some of those agencies. You
know, typically, DOD is the agency that we point a lot of flaws
out when it comes to the IT management recently with the IT
Dashboard. Obviously, there's a lot of opportunity there for
them to get it right.
I turn to Mr. Mazer's organization, Interior; they're at
the top of the list. You know, GSA was a latecomer up there, as
we mentioned. But you have a number--DHS is also a leader. I
mean, they were planning on going from 43 to 2 at one time, and
now their numbers are a little bit different. But DOD, DHS, and
Interior are clearly leaders up there.
Mr. Mica. Okay.
Did you have anything else, Mr. Connolly?
Mr. Connolly. Not at this time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. Well, what we're going to have to do is thank you
for being with us. We'll probably submit some additional
questions to you from the committee. I didn't get to all that I
wanted answered.
Mr. Mica. And this is kind of a meat-and-potato hearing, as
you fellow geeks would love this one, but----
Mr. Connolly. All the acronyms.
Mr. Mica. Yes, exactly. Well, I have to sort through them.
I kept going back to make certain I knew what they were talking
about. And you've been doing this, focusing on this a lot more
than I. But very important. I mean, we're talking saving
billions and actually much more efficiently operating.
Sometimes when I go back after we have done our hearings
together, Gerry, we see the debt we're in and the situation
we're in financially. If we could just start implementing these
things on a fast track, we could----
Mr. Connolly. Yeah.
Mr. Mica. --take that column of losses and get us into a
much better fiscal condition.
Now, again, I thank you for coming.
I want to--particularly, we're going to ask Mr. Powner to
probably come back when we have the other two witnesses, and
maybe again you, too, Mr. Mazer. You could see how we have to
have some other answers from OMB and GSA, who are not with us
today.
So, at this time, again, I thank you. We'll excuse you, and
I'll call up our second panel.
Our second panel of witnesses I will introduce as they're
taking their seats.
We have Mr. Steve O'Keeffe, and he is the founder of
MeriTalk. We have Ms. Teresa H. Carlson. She is the vice
president, worldwide public sector, of Amazon Web Services. We
have Mr. Kenyon Wells, vice president of U.S. Federal, CGI
Federal.
Those are our three industry panel witnesses. I think this
will be an interesting panel. I always think it's great to hear
from the government witnesses, and we had two key witnesses
here today who provided us with their perspective. But I think
those from the outside that are involved in IT and also data
center consolidation that they undertake for the private sector
and the public sector, to get their on-the-ground, firsthand
evaluation and provide that to our subcommittee today.
So, with that, I welcome again Mr. O'Keeffe, Ms. Carlson,
and Mr. Wells.
As I indicated before, this is an investigative panel of
Congress, so if you haven't done so, we're going to do it now.
We're going to ask you to stand and be sworn in.
Do you swear that the testimony you are about to give
before this subcommittee of Congress is the whole truth and
nothing but the truth?
Mr. O'Keeffe. Yes.
Ms. Carlson. I do.
Mr. Wells. Yes.
RPTS MCCONNELL
DCMN CRYSTAL
Mr. Mica. The witnesses have all answered in the
affirmative. Let the record reflect that.
And again, welcome you. We are fairly informal today, but
we're trying to make certain that--I read, pre-read some of
your testimony. Some of it's pretty long, but if you can
consolidate your points, and if you have additional
information, certainly your whole testimony will be included in
the record. And then we'll go through all three of you, and
then we'll do the questions rather than after each witness
testifies. So I'm looking forward to all three of your
testimonies. I have read a little bit of Mr. O'Keeffe's, and
welcome him at this time, and recognize him. And thank you
again for participating.

STATEMENT OF STEVE O'KEEFFE

Mr. O'Keeffe. Thank you. Chairman Mica, Ranking Member
Connolly, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak to you today. My name is Steve O'Keeffe
and I am not the voice for the GEICO gecko, as has been asked
before. I'm, in fact, the founder of MeriTalk, the Data Center
and Cloud Computing Exchanges. These are public-private
partnerships focused on delivering tangible increases in
efficiency in government IT. I have spent more than 20 years
listening to Federal IT leaders talk about their challenges,
their opportunities, and their frustrations. You have already
heard a lot of numbers here today, but I'd like to cut to
what's really important: tangible savings. I'm afraid the
Federal IT reform is like a bad reality TV show. There is no
budget. The actors are powerless. The end is predictable. But
somehow we still keep watching. We need to change the script.
As you've noted, it is sad that OMB and GSA are not here.
So when Vivek Kundra announced FDCCI in February of 2010, we
talked about this, OMB said that taxpayers would save between
$3 billion and $5 billion by 2015. That's a lot of hamburgers.
And so as we set tangible goals we need to report against those
goals, and I think that's what this is all about.
Cloud, too, was billed as an IT budget crusher. Today we
are 18 months from the FDCCI savings deadline, and we have no
idea how much money we have saved the taxpayer, which is not
right. I would argue we don't need to keep counting data
centers. We need to understand how much we've saved, which
agencies are doing it right, and what we need to do to
accelerate savings. Let's get straight about this.
To help surface some answers MeriTalk recently released a
new study, and I'm Ross Perot-style going to use some charts to
illustrate.
Mr. O'Keeffe. The study is called ``FDCCI: The Big
Squeeze,'' and it is based on a survey of the operators in the
agencies. What we want to do is learn from people on the
frontlines what's going on. So a couple of statistics.
Fifty-six percent of data center leads give their agencies
a C grade or below on FDCCI. I think earlier Congressman
Connolly asked if we were getting an A. It seems we're getting
a C or below. I wouldn't be very excited if my children brought
that grade home.
Only half of Feds believe their agency is on target to meet
the FDCCI number of closures. Ironically in this case, one of
the questions you asked earlier about electricity savings, Feds
believe that power is a significant area where we're going to
save a lot of money. But based on our meetings with Federal
data center leads, we found that 1 in 20 data center executives
have an understanding of what they pay for electricity. So
that's a significant blind spot.
What about top obstacles? What we see is the Fed site,
budget constraints, mission-owner objections, and the inability
to consolidate applications as the biggest obstacles to
progress, which gives me the impression that the model for the
data center leads should really be that beatings will continue
until morale improves. They have no ability, they're not
empowered to change the equation.
So it's great to point out what the challenges are, but
let's go on the positive side and look at what we should do in
order to remedy the situation. We call this our five-point
plan.
And the points are, number one, don't hide. Our concern is
that by merging FDCCI with PortfolioStat we are going to be
gerrymandering the metrics. And so we are concerned about that.
We need to set realistic goals in the open and publish real
status on success and failures. And yes, failures if that's
what transpired. OMB has a total cost of ownership model. I
think Mr. Mazer referenced it. In this era of open government,
why does OMB insist on keeping this a secret? Why not publish
the TCO model so we can find out where the money is?
Number two, there is no money. Recognize that there is no
new money to fund data center optimization. And so with that,
we need to empower the CIOs to rationalize applications and
maybe trust new approaches because we know the old ones have
failed.
Number three, application rationalization. If you do not
cut the number of applications, you will not cut the number of
data centers. The Army is running over 100 operating systems
because it has so many legacy platforms. I think GAO flagged
this. Uncle Sam does not need 622 HR systems. I think we can
all agree on that.
Four, marry IT and facilities. Wouldn't it seem logical
that the data center lead should understand and own the budget
for the total data center environment? GSA owns most of the
facilities and pays the electricity bills. Why not publish the
energy bills for each data center so we'd have a better sense
for how to proceed? There are a series of new energy contracts
out there, the energy savings performance contracts, and we'd
like to see those moving forward more aggressively.
Five, public-private partnership, please. Why don't we
recognize that government is not the only organization that
operates data centers? We can learn a huge amount from
industry. Organizations like NASDAQ have put forth data center
consolidation optimization initiatives. Let's look at some of
those metrics.
Now to cloud. The onramp to Federal cloud, FedRAMP, is
horribly congested. We talked about problems with traffic
earlier. In fact, you can hear the honking on the digital
highway right now as software companies line up trying to get
through cloud certification.
After almost a year in operation, GSA's FedRAMP team has
only certified two cloud service providers. How are agencies
supposed to move to cloud when there are only two applications?
It's just not feasible. If the cost of FedRAMP certification
and the delays outweigh the volume of business that solution
providers receive from agencies, that industry will take
another road. That said, cloud acquisition vehicles are sorely
needed.
In closing, it's time to get real about Federal IT
modernization. Are the agency CIOs really in charge, and
therefore accountable for results? This question has very real
implications for FITARA. Richard Spires' recent experience at
Department of Homeland Security makes all CIOs question whether
they have authority or not.
We are ready and willing to discuss our initiatives and
recommendations. We look forward to working with you to deliver
improved efficiency in Federal IT, and welcome any of your
questions. Thank you for the opportunity to talk today.
Mr. Mica. Well, thank you. Thank you for your testimony and
your candor.
[Prepared statement of Mr. O'Keeffe follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.033

Mr. Mica. Let's turn next to Teresa Carlson, vice president
for Amazon Web Services.
Welcome, and you're recognized.

STATEMENT OF TERESA CARLSON

Ms. Carlson. Good afternoon, Chairman Mica and Ranking
Member Connolly.
Mr. Mica. She is not coming in very loud.
Ms. Carlson. Good afternoon, Chairman Mica and Ranking
Member Connolly. My name is Teresa Carlson, and I'm the vice
president, Amazon Web Services World Wide. Thank you very much
for inviting me to testify today on the Federal data center
optimization and transition to cloud computing, and to discuss
how the U.S. Federal agencies can do more with less and to save
taxpayer dollars. I'd like to submit my written testimony for
the record.
Mr. Mica. Without objection, your entire statement will be
part of the record.
Ms. Carlson. Also, I wanted to thank the university for
having us here today. I spent many, many Saturdays and Sundays
here at swim meets with my sons, and it is in beautiful Fairfax
County, and it is a beautiful day. So I really appreciate them
having us here as well.
Companies that leverage Amazon Web Services in the
commercial sector range from large enterprises, such as
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Shell, NASDAQ, to innovative startups
like Pinterest and Dropbox. Throughout the U.S. Federal
Government, agencies and departments are adopting AWS for a
wide range of technology infrastructure services and
applications, to include groups like the U.S. National
Institutes of Health, NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and the
U.S. Department of the Navy, Navy, and the U.S. Securities &
Exchange Commission.
AWS is passionately committed to sharing the benefits we
can achieve as a cloud provider to Federal Government agencies,
and our economies of scale have resulted in the rapid
innovation of public cloud services and lowering the price for
our customers. Specifically, we have lowered our cloud
computing prices 31 times since 2006. Let me repeat, 31 times
with no one pressuring us to lower those prices. We lowered
those prices based on our savings and providing them back to
the customer.
Given the proven secure and game-changing efficiencies of
cloud computing, we believe that the FDCCI should be directly
linked to the Office of Management and Budget's ``Cloud First''
policy in order to be truly successful in the data optimization
model. While there is no doubt that since Federal Government
workloads can continue to operate in government-owned data
centers, there are a very large number of workloads that should
be more suitable and efficiently managed in large-scale
commercial cloud platforms. Therefore, the adoption of cloud
computing services should be a central part of the Federal
strategy.
One way to think about cloud computing is that instead of
buying and owning and maintaining their own data centers or
servers, Federal agencies can acquire technology resources and
compute power and storage on an as-needed basis and dispose of
it when it's no longer needed. In fact, we have something
called a Trusted Advisor service where we actively work with
our customers to turn off servers when they're not being
utilized, and they actually don't even have to worry about what
their electric bill is because that's part of the service we
provide and it's part of the pricing model, so they'll know
that in real time. And users only pay for what they use by the
compute hours, or storage-gigabyte, and they are not locked,
they are not locked to any long-term contracts. They can choose
long-term contracts, but they are not locked into anything like
that.
There's many, many examples of Federal agencies that have
begun to embrace the cloud. A couple I'd like to highlight for
you today is NASA's Jet Propulsion Lab. When the Mars Space
Lab, also known as the Curiosity, successfully landed last
year, public cloud computing infrastructure from AWS was
utilized in support of various aspects of the mission,
including the public outreach around the landing itself, so
that everyone in the United States and the world could enjoy
that landing, as well as the data and image pipeline--the
pipeline management dealing with all the new data streaming
that was actually coming down from Mars. Tom Soderstrom, the
CTO of NASA JPL, described it this way: JPL has leveraged cloud
services to dramatically reduce IT costs, and in the process
increasing their agility and decreased the time to science
while enabling JPL to have complete flexibility when using
those computing resources. In fact, we worked with them in a
very short period of time to get that set that up. It did not
take much for them to procure and set that up.
The U.S. Department of the Navy CIOs office recently
initiated a pilot project to move unclassified data to the
commercial cloud environment. The Secretary of the Navy's
public-facing information portal is now on AWS, and they also
have an initiative to work on a strategy to migrate all public-
facing sites. And he's already said that--CIO Terry Halvorsen
stated that the Department has achieved a 50 percent reduction
in cost to operate this portal.
Let's imagine for a moment, if that level of cost savings
could be applied to all Federal IT spending, how much money
could that actually be? And I believe it' a lot more than those
$3 billion that were initially brought up.
The reality is that cost savings is only part of the
picture and that what we think is a fundamental and clearly a
need to transition to cloud computing and this will be a big
part of the optimization for the data center consolidation.
There are many companies out there that have already taken full
advantage of that in a commercial site like Netflix to move
their entire infrastructure to the cloud.
We think there is exciting opportunities out there to
actually do a lot more with cloud services. We support what
you've done already in both FITARA and FDCCI, and we appreciate
having the opportunity today to speak to you and are prepared
to answer any questions. Thank you again.
Mr. Mica. Well, thank you also.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Carlson follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.038

Mr. Mica. And we'll turn now to our final witness on this
panel, Mr. Kenyon Wells, vice president of U.S. Federal, CGI
Federal.
Welcome, and you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF KENYON WELLS

Mr. Wells. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Mica,
Congressman Connolly. Thank you very much for the opportunity
to appear before you today. My name is Kenyon Wells, and I'm
vice president at CGI Federal Incorporated, a global
information technology and business process services firm. I'm
honored to provide some thoughts today about ongoing efforts
for Federal agencies to optimize their use of their data
centers and move to greater use of cloud computing technology.
CGI applauds the subcommittee not only for its continued
efforts to eliminate wasteful IT spending, but also for its
recognition that continued investments in IT will save money,
improve efficiency, and provide better services to U.S.
citizens and businesses. In particular, CGI thanks the
leadership of this subcommittee, as well as Chairman Issa,
Ranking Member Cummings, and the full Oversight and Government
Reform Committee for bringing many important issues to light
with the introduction of H.R. 1232, the Federal Information
Technology Acquisition Reform Act, and for the open and
transparent manner in which that legislation was drafted.
In February of this year, CGI became just the second
company to be granted a FedRAMP cloud security provisional
authority to operate. CGI is now delivering more than $100
million in secure cloud solutions to dozens of Federal
programs, in addition to many other cloud implementations for
State government and commercial clients. Based on these
projects and discussions with other Federal agencies, CGI
offers the following observations.
First, there is significant progress, but more can be done.
There are two major drivers that lead to immediate cost savings
for agencies in adopting cloud computing. One of these is the
speed with which new systems can transition to go live in the
cloud. For example, CGI worked with GSA to bring 30 systems
live in less than 90 days. As a result, that agency program
reduced their overall server footprint by 50 to 70 percent.
The other immediate cost-savings driver is that agencies
only pay for the capacity they need. So instead of running data
centers that continuously provide peak capacity that is always
underutilized, CGI's cloud clients have significantly lowered
day-to-day costs and pay only for added capacity when it's
needed. These immediate savings are a great achievement, but
longer term the consolidation of data centers and migration to
the cloud are but a step in the journey towards Federal IT
modernization and consolidation. These more holistic efforts
will eventually deliver savings that dwarf the numbers we are
talking about for FDCCI today.
Second observation. Cost savings are often difficult to
quantify. A lot of what we are talking about here today, we
have seen some of the reality as to why agencies struggle with
it. And as the GAO report indicates, many agencies do struggle
to determine just how much they save under consolidation
initiatives. The challenges here are exacerbated by the lack of
baseline IT costs on an agency-by-agency basis. Additionally,
there are some initial costs associated with moving the cloud
computing or closing down data centers which can delay the
initial cost savings even though an agency will save
significantly in the long run.
Third, significant acquisition challenges exist. In
discussions with numerous agencies on this topic, CGI has seen
many that have struggled to modify their procurement methods
when purchasing cloud services. Cloud computing not only
represents a fundamental change in how IT services are
delivered, but also how they are procured. A focus on using
readily available contract vehicles could significantly
accelerate cloud migration. Additionally, Congress and the
administration could provide agencies with more freedom to
enter into innovative agreements with industry to allow
government to significantly reduce its upfront costs on the
public-private partnership we're talking about.
Many of CGI's commercial and State government clients have
entered into an agreement where CGI assumes the initial
transition costs so those clients can start saving on day one.
If the Federal Government wants to do more with less, then it
should embrace new methods of contracting that shift that risk
and upfront costs to industry partners.
Finally, strong leadership and interdepartmental
cooperation increase the results from cloud. CGI commends DOD,
DHS, and GSA for their collaboration as members of the Joint
Authorization Board overseeing the FedRAMP program, which
represents a significant and necessary step forward as the
Federal Government looks to implement the cloud. FedRAMP's
common-risk framework for all agencies is a critical piece of
the puzzle that eliminates the needs for highly customized
solutions that often hold no real extra benefit and severely
increase cost.
Moving forward, FedRAMP's continuing monitoring process is
more frequent and more detailed than those already in place at
most Federal agencies, which will create more confidence in
security around commercial providers who receive their P-ATO.
This will be followed on by the new DHS-led efforts around
continuous monitoring which will only help push this effort
forward so that agencies and Congress know both what IT assets
an agency has and how they're secured.
Thank you once again for the opportunity to participate in
this important hearing. Since I'm a few seconds under, I'll add
two additional things. One, thank you very much for holding
this hearing here in my alma mater, though this campus looks
very different than when I was here a couple of decades ago.
And finally, since it is a few days from Mother's Day, I want
to thank my mother and brother who surprised me by attending
today, and thank her for making me come to this school and
therefore be here. So I would look forward to any questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Wells follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.044

Mr. Mica. Well, we have a lot of mothers to be thankful
for. But it's nice to have some of your family with you, and a
successful alumni return and be a witness today.
Interesting perspective from the private sector. Mr.
O'Keeffe, your first--or your five-point recommendation seemed
to differ a little bit from what I got out of Mr. Powner. I
asked about the compatibility of what was going on with
PortfolioStat, and it was interesting. I guess under
PortfolioStat agencies are no longer required to submit the
previously required consolidation plan and the memorandum does
not identify a cost-savings goal. And you, of course, in your
first recommendation said that's not the way to go. So I guess
you differ a little bit with the testimony we had from GAO.
Mr. O'Keeffe. I think it's very important to be consistent.
If we said we were going to save--if we said we were going to
save $3 billion, or $5 billion, or however many billion dollars
it is----
Mr. Mica. Don't try to count.
Mr. O'Keeffe. --don't keep changing the rules. So I think
we just need to be consistent in terms of what we're doing. And
I'm, again, also very interested to see this TCO model which
Mr. Mazer talked about.
Mr. Mica. The secret TCO model.
Mr. O'Keeffe. Right. I don't see why that wouldn't--this is
an era of open government. Why can't we see the way the
agencies are measuring or OMB is measuring efficiency?
Mr. Mica. We would have liked to ask that question to OMB
today, but we will ask it at a future hearing.
Mr. Connolly. In the spirit of open government they're not
here.
Mr. Mica. Oh, and I have to--first of all, I have to
compliment this panel, Mr. Connolly. My experience has been
that it's been like pulling teeth to get anybody from the
private sector to come before any of our investigative or
oversight hearings. I mean, they run like scalded dogs from us
because they're so afraid of the agencies coming down on them
for some reason or participating with us. So I thank you. I
think you are providing a very valuable public service and
insight, and I think it's important that we hear from people
who are dealing with government on a day-to-day basis, see how
things work and don't work, and then make recommendations to
us. Again, I thought, Mr. O'Keeffe, excellent points here.
Now, the other problem we have is, I think you highlighted
in one of your recommendations--and GSA owns most of the
facilities. I guess they pay the power bills and things like
that. So there is not the accountability. There is no
incentive. How do you change that now? And then we have pending
legislation. I asked the question of the other panelists, do we
need to do more to beef up the pending legislation?
So first I will ask that, then I have another question.
Have you read any of the proposed legislation? I think some of
you actually participated. It's a fairly open process. Will it
resolve some of these issues? I don't think it's going to
resolve that one.
Mr. O'Keeffe. If I might, I mean, I think that the language
of FITARA was great. But the message in terms of empowering the
CIO, which is critical in terms of the success of the program,
runs contrary to what we have seen from an experience
standpoint. I mentioned the experience with Richard Spires who
recently was put on leave at Department of Homeland Security,
and then resigned, very recently, and it just doesn't seem as
though that there is real support for the CIOs to stand up
against the components and the mission owners. And if that's
the case, then, you know, given the experience with Richard
Spires, I'm not sure other Federal CIOs are going to rush to
stand up, because the support hasn't been there. So the
language, I think, of FITARA is good, but I think we have to
show that support.
Mr. Mica. Should we beef up the language and empower the
CIO more or----
Mr. O'Keeffe. I think we absolutely should empower the CIO
more. But again, language is one thing, you know, it's actions
which are going to be more important.
Mr. Mica. It's interesting, because actually some of my
first work many years ago was looking at government
organizations and restructuring governments, primarily local
governments, and after some years of doing that, you know, we
could write the best charter of government and guidelines and
everything, and then you get lousy people, they couldn't
implement. And sometimes you would have lacking legislative
authority, or a charter, and you get people who are creative
and innovative, and they could succeed.
So sometimes it's hard to craft that. But we want to make
certain that we give them the tools to be able to do the job.
So there is a disconnect between the facilities, the energy,
things of that sort, so maybe there could be some change there.
That's a tougher one, Mr. Connolly. I kind of think of things
again that would empower a CIO to move forward.
The thing that drives you nuts with government, you've seen
it, is people are making a decision, or then the lack with this
FedRAMP and the certification of--well, for cloud
participation. We are up to two, you say?
Ms. Carlson. Yes, two.
Mr. Mica. And how long has that taken?
Mr. O'Keeffe. Almost a year.
Mr. Mica. A year.
Ms. Carlson. We've been going through the FedRAMP process.
We are very close, but it's a very long process, and I do
really appreciate what, you know, the FedRAMP office is doing,
because security is obviously very important.
The one thing is, once it's there, they need to be able to
utilize it, because as you begin to set more and more controls,
every agency can stack and put more controls on top of the
FedRAMP process, and you really don't have a FedRAMP process.
You just have a FedRAMP process plus, plus, plus.
Mr. Mica. And it goes on and on.
Ms. Carlson. And it goes on and on, and it never, you know,
comes to fruition. And then I think the second thing is the
``Cloud First'' policy. In order for this to really make sense,
I do think they need measurements, respect to what Steve was
saying, they need measurements in there to say, here is the
real process we've made toward ``Cloud First,'' you know,
around the application, consolidation effort as well, because
you're only going to truly get there when you begin to take a
look at what are those applications that you've done? How are
you looking at the total picture as actually the consolidation
effort?
Mr. Mica. Does anybody know how many cloud certification
requests are pending?
Mr. Wells. There are over 80.
Mr. Mica. Over 80?
Mr. Wells. Yes, and many of those were just in the last
couple of months.
Mr. Mica. Okay.
Mr. Wells. There were about 40 the beginning of December.
Mr. Mica. Okay, so a huge number. So we need to get, first
of all, some stability in the certification process, and people
certified, then some motivation, and some empowerment of those
charged with this responsibility to move forward, and again,
some accountability in the system.
Mr. Wells. Yes.
Mr. Mica. I'm going down O'Keeffe's recommendations here. I
thought it was a good summarization of some of the things that
we needed. But do you not need 600 HR systems? That got me,
because we started looking at Office of Personnel Management,
and I think they have blown either a third of a billion or a
half a billion dollars. And finally I was told--were any of you
involved in that? No? Then they finally settled on a smaller
contract after blowing lots of money and attempts, smaller
contract, and then they discarded that.
Now I understand they are going back to almost hand
processing. That's the Office of Personnel Management for the
Federal Government. And then we've 600 HR systems on top of
that. So I can't even begin to imagine how much we spend in
sort of a mundane process, not that there aren't variations for
background checks and all kinds of information to be combined.
The other thing is on retirement systems. That whole area,
again, is just unbelievable money that's been spent, and I
guess my comments were actually the hand processing for
retirees is what they have gone back to, very costly. They just
hired more and more personnel and abandoned IT as a solution.
Is that----
Ms. Carlson. The opportunity there, especially with cloud
computing, is the ability to not have to spend millions of
dollars to test out systems. So with the cloud computing model
you can set up and design something in a very small way without
spending a lot of money. And the minute that works you move it
into the test adaptive environment, and then right from there
you can move it into production and then scale it. So you don't
have to build a system for complete scale and then try to
deploy it.
So again, that's another opportunity because your cost, if
you fail, you can fail fast, use those failures as
understandings, and then recover, and you don't even have to
throw away all that code. It actually can be utilized for the
success that you need.
Mr. Wells. And then taking that one step further, that
makes sense, complete sense for custom application. But getting
back to the retirement systems and the HR systems and all the
other common systems that every agency has to use, moving
toward software as a service, where you actually have a handful
of applications that have been precertified and FedRAMP
certified, that then agencies don't have to start from scratch,
they don't have to reinvent the wheel. They'll have a handful
of those, so hopefully more than that, enough to make it a
competitive market space, but something they know works so that
at least we can streamline it.
Mr. Mica. A final question, and actually motivated by Ms.
Carlson, is she had cited those that she felt were getting it
right, and she talked about Jet Propulsion Lab, NASA, Navy. Are
there good examples? I think it's always good to see who is
doing things well and what steps they've taken, how they got to
that success and--go ahead.
Mr. Wells. I can add an additional one: Department of
Homeland Security.
Mr. Mica. Which is stunning to me, because I think it's one
of the loose cannons of Federal Government, but that's another
matter.
Mr. Wells. As was discussed earlier, has certain
challenges, both based on the size and the politics involved,
but there is some very good work being done there. And a couple
of years ago they purposely went down their own data center
consolidation into two large DC1, DC2 data centers, and more
recently when they decided to embrace cloud, they decided to go
two different routes. One, build a private cloud on site in
government infrastructure, since so much of their stuff is so
sensitive; and second, to conduct a procurement to select a
government community cloud, an external provider who has all
the appropriate certifications. We were lucky enough to win
that contract.
Mr. Mica. Well, I'll have to go back and look at that,
because I think almost all of our terrorist incidents, even the
Boston, we still can't connect the dots. Maybe Homeland is
doing a good job, but they haven't connected to State, and--I
mean, other agencies. And it's very sensitive information. I
don't know, but you're just talking about the practical
implementation standpoint.
Mr. Wells. Right. So, for example, they started with a
couple of very small Web sites. They got comfortable with it,
started adding more. Now all of DHS' public sector----
Mr. Mica. And it is a newer agency, so...
Mr. Wells. Correct.
Mr. Mica. Mr. O'Keeffe, any----
Mr. O'Keeffe. NOAA has also done a very good job, the
weather guys.
Mr. Mica. NOAA.
Mr. O'Keeffe. Have put forth, you know, excellent progress
in terms of modernization
Mr. Mica. Just their IT. We still have a lot of people.
Mr. O'Keeffe. They've consolidated a lot of their data
centers. They've built a $2.4 billion data center out in
Martinsburg, West Virginia, and they are operating at
tremendous levels in terms of energy efficiency and such.
Mr. Mica. Well, I could go on. I have a whole bunch of
questions I would like to get. Let me let Mr. Connolly have a
shot here. I went well over my time.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It was actually a
very interesting line of questioning.
Ms. Carlson, in your prepared testimony, I would like to
cite something you said, because, Mr. Chairman, I think it sort
of encapsulates the whole challenge of cloud for the Federal
Government. And you say, ``One way to think about cloud
computing is that instead of buying, owning, and maintaining
their own data centers and servers, Federal agencies can
acquire technology resources such as computing power and
storage on an as-needed basis and dispose of it when it no
longer is needed. Many industry experts refer to this as a
utility model of obtaining and using IT capability analogous to
how the government obtains access to water, gas or electrical
power. Users to only pay for what they use.''
That's a pretty commonsense model. What's your
understanding of how the government looks at that? And, for
example, the task force, to the extent you're aware of their
process, are they also looking at junk the whole thing and go
private sector using this model?
Ms. Carlson. I think it's a very good question. I think
some are really evaluating that, as they begin to look at this
different heavy lifting that they're trying to do when they can
have what I call more mission for the money. You know, why not
utilize your dollars for the true mission and not worry about
building out infrastructure and these tools? And it's a very
common model that you use now, and, you know, hundreds of
thousands of customers and 190 countries, that for government,
it is still an ``ah ha'' moment when we actually show them that
they can provision virtual machines like that on a portal. They
just can't believe it.
And as Mr. Wells was saying, when that's configured in
FedRAMP all they have to do is go provision it. They don't have
to wait 6 months for the supply chain management. It's there
and available. And it's very, I mean from a mission
perspective, it's really a game changer for the U.S. Federal
Government.
Mr. Connolly. And I want to acknowledge that it may not
always be appropriate, but it is an option that needs to be on
the table.
Ms. Carlson. That's correct. And we don't suggest that they
just jump in. We suggest they take the opportunity to learn,
because it is a big culture shift and we understand that. And
the agencies that are getting there, it has taken them a little
bit of time, but they're gradually moving more and more, and
their really smart architects and engineers and research
scientists now, are really--they enjoy the fact that they have
capacity on demand as they need it and then they can shut it
down. And they can see how much it costs. They can look at a
portal and know immediately how much they're spending and the
servers that aren't being utilized, and they can be turned off.
And we help them with that. And that's really the key. We want
them to be able to reduce costs so they can do more and to have
all of the other components around security.
Mr. Connolly. And I'm going to come back to that. Mr.
Wells, you look like you wanted to talk to that point as well.
Mr. Wells. We're in absolute agreement with this. And if
you think about the overall Federal portfolio, what could go to
the cloud, what can't, you know, under FISMA they have to
categorize all of their applications low, moderate, or high.
Low basically is, obviously, a system that, you know, doesn't
have quite the same level of barriers as the others. FISMA
moderate means normally there is Privacy Act data in it. PII,
the kind of stuff we're worried about for identity theft, HIPAA
data, confidential but unclassified, confidential business
information, regulatory data, stuff that you really don't want
to get out. And there are a number of controls put in place,
defined by NIST, to do that. Low and moderate together is 88
percent of the entire Federal portfolio; 12 percent is
classified FISMA high. That 12 percent is normally national
security or critical infrastructure protection, the stuff
that----
Mr. Connolly. I want to make sure we all understand what
you just said. So what you're saying is that in data
evaluation, 88 percent of the Federal market, in this market,
would lend itself to private sector cloud computing.
Mr. Wells. Correct. And that's for FISMA moderate. A
FedRAMP FISMA moderate is a higher bar than a normal FISMA
moderate. A normal FISMA moderate certification, as defined by
NIST, has 252 controls. When the FedRAMP program sat down with
all the different agencies to try to come up with what they
would all accept, they ended up with 298 controls. And so it's
a much higher bar, and they tried to get every agency to say,
all right, what's the unique thing that you absolutely have to
have. Fine, we'll incorporate that under the standard. But
still many of those agencies will take that FedRAMP-certified
infrastructure, or application, and they'll still want to do
their own security checks on it again. That, I think, will be
unnecessary as we go forward. Now, the FedRAMP process is still
in the early stages.
Mr. Connolly. Excuse me, but if they want to do that, for
example, your services allow for that.
Mr. Wells. Oh, absolutely, absolutely. That's a
requirement.
Ms. Carlson. In fact, we create a package and we make it
very easy. And we sit down and they go through each and every
control. And I actually might say that there's a lot of
commercial companies that work and utilize that FISMA and
FedRAMP process. We have many that say they go through the
controls of the commercial company, because they think it is a
Good Housekeeping seal of approval for security.
Mr. Wells. It is the one area that I can say the Federal
Government is probably ahead of the commercial sector from IT,
and if the controls are followed and applied, it may not always
be done in the most efficient method possible, but it is much
more secure.
Mr. Connolly. You mentioned, Ms. Carlson, JPL, and you said
they achieved significant savings, dramatically saved IT costs,
I think were your actual words.
Ms. Carlson. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Could you just elaborate a little bit on
that, because I think that's one of the things we're looking
for--and I'm going to go back to Mr. O'Keeffe, if I may, Mr.
Chairman--to talk about cost savings. But we need models.
Ms. Carlson. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Where you can look at the reluctant players
and say, don't be so afraid. It works. And you will be the
better off for it. Tell us a little bit about JPL, your
experience with JPL.
Ms. Carlson. Yes. So one quick thing about JPL is they were
seeing a trend where their engineers and researchers were
trying to build their own OSs, their own operating systems, and
it was highly inefficient. They were concerned about security.
They knew that they were trying--they needed capacity when they
needed it. So they started looking toward a cloud computing
model to fulfill that. And then as a result, they gained a lot
of knowledge over the last few years. But this one particular
program that I talked about, and they can tell you the exact
dollars better, but they said they paid 10 percent of the
original cost by using a cloud computing model.
They also have talked about another major Mars program that
they ran. The program manager told me, if it hadn't been for
the utilization of cloud computing, they would have had to shut
the program down, because the original Mars Curiosity kept
going, but they didn't think that the little buggy would go
very long, like 2 months, and it was still running around
taking pictures after 6 months, 7 months. And all of that
amazing data being streamed from Mars, they wanted the ability
to take advantage of that for educators, researchers, but they
couldn't store it, they couldn't manage it, it was very costly.
So as a result, that was another reason they looked to cloud.
And I wanted to point out where we've seen the real push in
cloud in the Federal Government is more on the program side,
because the programs begin to say, I don't have enough money,
like, I don't have enough money. So they look for options to
keep their programs going, and then they begin to find that
there are new realities out there of how they could deliver IT
and really transform it. They think NASA JPL is a great
example.
And another one is Health and Human Services that's doing
across the board, and many of their agencies are utilizing
cloud now, especially for open and transparent programs like
the 1000 Genomes, the oxygen database, BioSense. They're
starting to look for ways that they can provide citizen
services that are effective, that again reduce cost, and be
able to scale when they need to scale things.
Mr. Connolly. And, Mr. Wells, you actually have, you are
one of the two companies certified so far for----
Mr. Wells. Correct.
Mr. Connolly. --this activity. Presumably in your
experience with Federal clients, you have also been able to
identify significant cost savings for the client.
Mr. Wells. Correct, and I think a lot of it comes back to
what Teresa was just describing as far as the elasticity and
that sort of thing. For example, I was mentioning the DHS Web
sites earlier. One of those is FEMA.gov, and Ready.gov, which
is their disaster preparedness site. And moving that into the
cloud, out of one of their data centers, used to be that they
had to build the infrastructure in their data center to the
peak capacity they would ever think they would need. But when
it's not hurricane season or when there is not a major
disaster, they need less than a tenth of the power for those
Web sites that they do need when there is a disaster.
So when Superstorm Sandy was coming ashore, the President
held a press conference, and he said, go to Ready.gov, there is
disaster preparedness information there, take a look at that.
And that was up and running in our cloud and we instantly saw a
huge spike, nearly a hundredfold increase in the amount of
activity on that. And the elasticity of the cloud allowed us to
spin up those services and spin them back down a few days later
when they weren't necessary.
Mr. Connolly. That's a great example. I would think
particularly applicable to you, Mr. Mica, coming from Florida,
in terms of the spiking in hurricane season and then coming
down.
Mr. Wells. And one other cautionary aspect of that tale
which I will throw out there is that at the same time we saw
all of this incredible spike and people flooding to the site,
the spike in the number of attacks on those sites--denial of
services attacks, attempts at hacking, et cetera--spiked as
well. And the people in our security operation centers were
watching it and were having to do some things to make sure that
there was no interruption in service. But coming back to even a
public-facing Web site that most of the year may not seem so
critical, for a brief period is absolutely mission critical.
And it's a sad testament, but it's the world we live in, that
as soon as people started paying attention to it, people
started attacking it, but that is the case.
Mr. Connolly. Sure. Yeah. Well, that's another hearing for
us, cybersecurity, because it's an incredible problem.
Mr. O'Keeffe, I was really struck by your presentation,
thank you. And I thought the point you made with Chairman Mica
was an excellent one. It isn't, while hopefully we do have it
right, I mean, the idea that we have 250-plus CIOs in 26
agencies tells you what you need to know in terms of
accountability.
Mr. O'Keeffe. Right.
Mr. Connolly. And decision making. We have to change that.
But that alone, and maybe hopefully legislatively we've got
that right. Enumerating the authorities of powers of that
designated CIO, even that doesn't necessarily solve the
problem, because what you're getting at is a culture, and
changing a culture is always difficult. What are the
attributes, if we were to have a successful cultural change, in
the CIO you would look for, given private sector experience in
the Federal Government.
Mr. O'Keeffe. Well, I think metrics are very, very
important. The CIO is not an IT person. They are not putting
together wires. They are not provisioning systems. This is a
business professional. And so what we need to do is establish
some real metrics.
I think that everybody is afraid of accountability, and so
what we see is that people run away from coming up with any
metrics at all. No metrics at all is better than any kind of
metrics whatsoever because you are going to be held accountable
for them. So I think we have to--let's look at the private
sector. When we look at data center consolidation, whether it's
NASDAQ, or Dow or whoever it may be, private sector
organizations, they've done data center consolidations. And,
you know, it's not a one-time operation. It's an ongoing
operation. How long does it take to consolidate data centers or
optimize data centers? How much does it cost? How much money do
we have to put into the process in order to get something out
of the process? Looking at things like PUE, it's another
acronym, but it's a metric which shows the power efficiency of
data centers.
I think what we need to have is a practical framework in
order to move the ball forward. And we need to make sure that
when we commitments that we measure ourselves against those
commitments. And sometimes we're going to fail, but let's be
open about what's actually transpiring. So I think, you know,
as far as the CIO role across agencies go, they need to have
authority, and with authority, was it Spiderman said, with
great power comes great responsibility.
Mr. Connolly. Well, and one of the things I have heard from
Mr. Spires and others who were CIOs, or are CIOs, from the
private sector in the Federal Government, we need more
flexibility and authority to award contracts, to make decisions
about this system, not that system, close that, open that, you
know, not dictatorial powers, but everything by committee means
the path of least resistance, the least risky, but also the
lowest payoff kind of outcome. And again, briefly, you might
want to comment on that as well, in terms of the powers that we
want to infuse CIOs with.
Mr. O'Keeffe. I think you're exactly right. You know, a
camel is a horse built by committee. And so in many
circumstances what we see is a lot of different camels running
around the Beltway. And so we need to be prepared to take, you
know, to take some chances on new approaches, whether that's,
you know, cloud computing or what you will. I think that the
cholesterol that we see in programs like FedRAMP, the cure can
be worse than the disease. So if we don't simplify what's going
on, then we're never going to see any real progress.
Mr. Connolly. And that's my final question, actually, about
FedRAMP. By the way, I would say to you, Mr. Mica, that
sometimes we're the problem. I mean, if you want to understand
why we have a risk-averse culture in the Federal Government,
Congress has to bear some responsibility here. The minute
somebody makes a mistake, if somebody thinks there's political
advantage in exploiting that mistake, we have a hearing and we
haul you before Congress and we threaten you with subpoenas.
Well, who the hell wants to take a risk and face all of that?
And we know in the private sector, I spent 20 years in the IT
world of the private sector, some things work and some things
don't. And a lot of what is considered highly successful today
started out failing. And it took a lot of, you know--and if
private sector entities had not--if they had the tolerance for
failure we've in the Federal Government, a lot of this would
not have happened, I submit.
But final question. FedRAMP. The idea that there are 80
pending applications--and my guess is, by the way, there could
have been more, people got discouraged.
Mr. O'Keeffe. That's right.
Mr. Connolly. Who wants to wait that long? And only two
have been approved? What's your sense of the problem? What's
the nature of the problem and what should we do to try to
accelerate the certification process?
Mr. O'Keeffe. I think perfection is the enemy of the good,
and so we're trying to solve for every scenario, and that's
just not practical. So we need to simplify the process. That's
really it.
Ms. Carlson. Yeah, I agree. I agree with that. I think it
can evolve. I don't think it has to be perfect out of the gate.
But I believe it's already, by the way, a very, very solid
process. And they need to be confident in what they've
developed already and get it out there and try it. It doesn't
mean that you can't come back around and hold the companies
accountable once they've gotten the FedRAMP. They need to be
able, which we do, we have to show that we're patching and
doing everything appropriately.
But I believe they need to be confident in what they
develop, and also the agencies probably need to get more
involved because the FedRAMP office themselves is not going to
be able to do everything, so the agencies are going to have to
work with the FedRAMP office and the vendor to certify in an
appropriate way, along with the three PAOs.
Mr. Wells. I think the process is slowly getting better,
just to say something positive out there. But it is important
to remember that the FedRAMP requirement was in the end the
result of something of a political process, again. The JAB
wanted to make sure that this standard would be acceptable to
all of the various agencies out there, so whenever someone
would throw in a new barrier, they would add it to the list. So
the bar is high. And the bar should be high. But if they had a
little bit more authority, or there was agreement on, you know,
amongst all the agencies that let's bring this down a couple of
notches, it would streamline the process a great deal. But
let's also recognize this is a brand new process with a brand
new program that is, you know, trying to do something really
groundbreaking across the entire Federal market space. So while
I'd love for it to go better, I do want to give them some
recognition that they're trying something very ambitious.
Mr. Connolly. Very helpful. I want to join the chairman in
thanking our panel. I think it's very thoughtful, very
insightful.
I will add, though, and I know Mr. Mica shares this, there
is no way Congress is going to continue to allow this process
to go forward without cost saving being a major criterion. The
idea that it's sort of incidental to the process and sometimes
not even impacted at all is a stunning thing to learn in the
current environment, and by the way, takes an efficiency off
the table.
You know, you cited in your testimony, Ms. Carlson, that in
some cases there could be 50 percent effectuated savings. Well,
you know, in an $80 billion IT budget, let's just project and
extrapolate that out: 50 percent saving across the board means
we've taken $80 billion, not changed the appropriation one bit,
but it's worth $120 billion, I mean, in terms of its buying
power and so forth.
But we're actually shrinking budgets, and so we've got to
look for efficiencies, and I think the private sector is going
to help us figure that out, because I don't know that left to
our own devices we're going to do it.
Mr. O'Keeffe. Just one point. As far as appropriations go,
one of the challenges is exactly on the Hill, inasmuch as if
you look to close data centers and they're closed in specific
people's districts, that's not real popular. So that's, you
know, that's definitely a factor in this equation, right? If
you try to close--you know, the whole point in closing data
centers is you have to shut them. And if that data center is in
a specific district, that can be a problem, so it can be
somewhat of a circular discussion.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, I thank you so much for your
indulgence, and thank you so much for holding this hearing.
Mr. Mica. Well, it is interesting, very educational for me.
A couple of final points. I can't remember, I read several of
these reports in some other background information, I guess one
of the problems that was identified someplace, and maybe it
was--I thought it was in GSA, they said that the quality of the
people who are involved in evaluating some of these systems in
all is not the level that they need, because some of these
people, you know, they're buying paper clips and office
supplies and stuff. And I know this is kind of touchy. Isn't
GSA the one that's doing the certification, or responsible for
it? Have you seen some of that or is that--anybody want to
comment on it?
Ms. Carlson. I mean, the individuals we have worked with, I
don't agree with that. I think the individuals we've been
working with in the FedRAMP process----
Mr. Mica. They get it?
Ms. Carlson. Yeah, they are very good. And they have the
three PAOs and they have been--I mean, they have been very
professional. And like Mr. Wells says, this is a really
important process, and they haven't put anyone in there that I
don't feel has been competent.
Mr. Mica. The other thing too, Gerry, is we are asking
people to dismantle sort of the standard operating safe
procedure, buy a couple more hard drives, hire a few more
people, as opposed to dismantling a lot of what they've got.
And then of course Mr. O'Keeffe just said the politics of--I've
tried FAA, I've tried some of the consolidation of the centers,
like one in Florida, is like the, you know, every card in the
world is pulled out to keep some things that are unnecessary in
today's IT world, and computer and technology world. But it's
very tough, so we end up being the problem.
Well, again, I think we've gotten some good testimony. Just
fascinated hearing--I guess if Amazon could get a little bit
more experience under their belt, maybe they could get
certified. For a mom-and-pops startup, I understand the
difficulty you're incurring. But we should look a little bit
more at that if we could get--yeah, and if 88 percent, you
know, we could probably take it down a few more notches. We're
not risking the national treasury or secrets. We could have a
little bit more efficiency in this process.
Well, again, I think it's most informative. I'm still
disappointed we didn't have a couple of the key players here.
We will convene another hearing, and we will talk to our
leaders. If we have to bring them here voluntarily, we will; if
we have to bring them involuntarily, we will. But we will have
a follow-up hearing. I think it's very important.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, I also want to thank your
staff. They have been very, very helpful and cooperative. We
really appreciate it.
Mr. Mica. The beatings will not continue?
Mr. Connolly. No more beatings.
Mr. Mica. The sequestration will be eliminated.
So think you so much for joining us today and providing us
with your testimony. Mr. Connolly, no further business? No
further business before the Subcommittee on Government
Operations. This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:46 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1280.062


