- HHS' OWN SECURITY CONCERNS ABOUT HEALTHCARE.GOV

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HHS' OWN SECURITY CONCERNS ABOUT HEALTHCARE.GOV

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 16, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-94

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

87-352 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, JR., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         JACKIE SPEIER, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          MATTHEW A. CARTWRIGHT,
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina               Pennsylvania
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
DOC HASTINGS, Washington             ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 PETER WELCH, Vermont
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              TONY CARDENAS, California
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                STEVEN A. HORSFORD, Nevada
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
KERRY L. BENTIVOLIO, Michigan        Vacancy
RON DeSANTIS, Florida

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Stephen Castor, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on January 16, 2014.................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Kevin Charest, Ph.D., Chief Information Security Officer,
Department of Health and Human Services
Oral Statement...............................................     7
Written Statement............................................    10
Ms. Teresa Fryer, Chief Information Security Officer
Oral Statement...............................................    17
Mr. Frank Baitman, Chief Information Officer, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services
Oral Statement...............................................    18

APPENDIX

Letters dated Dec. 15, 2013 from the White House, and Dec. 17
from this committee, an email exchange on Jan. 15, and a Jan.
15th letter to Sec. Sebelius...................................    54

HHS' OWN SECURITY CONCERNS ABOUT HEALTHCARE.GOV

----------

Thursday, January 16, 2014,

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:36 a.m., in Room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Darrell E. Issa
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Issa, Mica, Turner, Duncan,
Jordan, Chaffetz, Walberg, Lankford, Amash, Gosar, Meehan,
DesJarlais, Gowdy, Farenthold, Woodall, Massie, Meadows,
Bentivolio, DeSantis, Cummings, Maloney, Tierney, Lynch,
Connolly, Speier, Cartwright, Duckworth, Horsford, Lujan
Grisham, and Kelly.
Staff Present: Ali Ahmad, Majority Senior Communications
Advisor; Richard A. Beutel, Majority Senior Counsel; Brian
Blase, Majority Professional Staff Member; Will L. Boyington,
Majority Press Assistant; Joseph A. Brazauskas, Majority
Counsel; Caitlin Carroll, Majority Deputy Press Secretary;
Sharon Casey, Majority Senior Assistant Clerk; John Cuaderes,
Majority Deputy Staff Director; Adam P. Fromm, Majority
Director of Member Services and Committee Operations; Linda
Good, Majority Chief Clerk; Meinan Goto, Majority Professional
Staff Member; Ryan M. Hambleton, Majority Professional Staff
Member; Frederick Hill, Majority Deputy Staff Director for
Communications and Strategy; Michael R. Kiko, Majority
Legislative Assistant; Matthew Tallmer, Majority Investigator;
Sharon Vance, Majority Assistant Clerk; Rebecca Watkins,
Majority Director of Communications; Tamara Alexander, Minority
Counsel; Aryele Bradford, Minority Press Secretary; Susanne
Sachsman Grooms, Minority Deputy Staff Director/Chief Counsel;
Jennifer Hoffman, Minority Communications Director; Chris
Knauer, Minority Senior Investigator; Elisa LaNier, Minority
Director of Operations; Una Lee, Minority Counsel; Juan
McCullum, Minority Clerk; Dave Rapallo, Minority Staff
Director; Valerie Shen, Minority Counsel; Mark Stephenson,
Minority Director of Legislation; and Cecelia Thomas, Minority
Counsel.
Chairman Issa. The committee will come to order.
The Oversight Committee exists to secure two fundamental:
first, Americans have the right to know that the money
Washington takes from them is well spent and, second, Americans
deserve an efficient, effective Government that works for them.
Our duty on the Government Reform Committee is to protect these
rights. Our solemn responsibility is to hold Government
accountable to taxpayers, because taxpayers have a right to
know what they get from their Government. We must work
tirelessly in partnership with citizen watchdogs to provide the
American people the facts and bring genuine reform to the
Federal bureaucracy.
We are here today to ask and examine fundamental questions
about the security of Healthcare.gov. We recognize best
practices were not followed. Was securing testing completed
before the launch to the satisfaction of the experts will be
asked. What did top information security officials at the
Center for Medicare Services and the Department of Health and
Human Services recommend? Were the people who knew about the
technology empowered? Were the decision-makers people who knew
about the technology? Did leadership at CMS and HHS follow
these recommendations? If there was disagreement between people
below the top, were these questions and concerns properly
delivered to higher-ups prior to the launch of the site?
By now the American people are well aware that there were
functional problems in the Healthcare.gov website at launch.
Many may know that other websites costing a fraction as much,
but doing the same thing, worked better. For example, Kentucky
and Hawaii launched sites that cost the Federal taxpayer about
one-third as much and seemed to work better.
Those questions and others need to be asked, but today our
real question is why does the Administration steadfastly deny
the existence of security problems and shortcomings and lack of
security testing, while in fact the experts, Federal employees,
we hear from today will testify that there were known
shortcomings and, in fact, unanswered questions at the time of
the launch.
For many Americans, myself included, it seems to defy
common sense that a website plagued with functional problems
was in fact perfectly secure by design. Additionally, when an
individual finds himself, while on one website, getting
information delivered to him by mail acknowledging another
individual from another State, we certainly know that there
must be some cross-connect within the system that occurred, and
that in fact was reported in the days shortly after the launch.
This and other areas do concern this committee.
But most important, because we are the Oversight Committee
for Federal contracting and Federal employees, our
investigation has been active and attempted to get directly to
the contractors, such as MITRE, who did an evaluation, that has
been thwarted by the Administration, who warned and tried to
interfere with this committee by asking vendors not to deliver
us information. But through subpoena we have learned that in
fact there were flaws that were reported. It is now undeniable
that MITRE and other companies did their job sufficient for
people to know an alarm was being sounded in the days before
the launch.
We have acted to protect the information we received from
those entities. Notwithstanding that, we have had repeated
interference and claims that in fact we are the ones that are
going to disclose a roadmap to hackers. What is so amazing is,
in fact, the Administration would like you to believe that,
first, there were no problems; second, any problems that there
were, even though there were no problems, have been mitigated
or, as I would quote or paraphrase the Administration, plans to
mitigate are in place.
I have been in business a long time before I came to
Congress. A plan to mitigate means you have not mitigated.
Therefore, we will assume that any and all information given to
us about known security risks at the time or prior to the time
of the launch are still there.
Our witnesses today, for the most part, cannot refute that,
because what we discover is they have not been personally
assured, item by item, of the actual mitigation of those
shortcomings. As I talk in circles to a certain extent, I do so
because we continue to hear from the Administration there were
no problems, the problems have been mitigated, and, oh, by the
way, if you put out information about the problems others say
exist, you are creating a roadmap to hackers.
I don't think anyone can square that; not my ranking
member, not our witnesses. For that reason, again, this
committee will continue to look at all reports of alleged
security shortcomings or unknown areas, as in fact very, very
important to keep private; and we will do so because we must
assume that the website is still vulnerable, that the American
people may, as we speak, be having their personal identifiable
information hacked and taken, that in fact we cannot consider
the website secure. If anyone would like to say the website is
secure today, then I ask would you allow the former flaws to be
put out there; and the answer, of course, will be no.
In Washington, people like to talk out of both sides of
their mouth; they like to say there never was a problem, the
problem there never was has been fixed, and, in fact, you may
not put out records of the problems that never were because, in
fact, they are known vulnerabilities. That is what we are
facing today as we go into this.
It would be comical if it wasn't in fact all of your IRS
records, links to Health and Human Services, of course, but
links to the Department of Homeland Security and others. This
website has tentacles into some of the most personal
information, and in the future even more. More importantly,
States have links into this same database; and, in fact, one of
the things we know, which will not be the prime subject today,
is that the States, for the most part, were not end-to-end
tested, the States were not held to a standard of best
practices. My only hope is that, as we look to the billions of
dollars provided in Federal taxpayer money to the States, that
in fact consistently they did a better job in both operational
readiness and security. But that is but a hope. Today's hearing
will be about the failures or at least the failures to use best
practices that went into the launch of this site.
Lastly, in a few minutes I will be putting into the record
a series of exchanges that went on between the White House and
the Speaker, between the Secretary of Health and Human Services
through her surrogates and the chairman; and I will do so
because I think it is important to understand this is a
serious, serious hearing. It is one in which the White House
went to the Speaker of the House warning about the release of
information and asking that information not be seen, not be
heard, and not be delivered to this committee. It is one in
which the secretary said she wanted to meet, again, to me. I
flew back and she refused to meet with me, even though she was
in town.
I am deeply disappointed that we are here today still
dealing with the inability to deal with what happened prior to
October 1st, what has happened since October 1st, and I think
most importantly a committee that on a bipartisan basis
supports real reforms, real reforms that in many cases would
have mitigated or eliminated some of the mistake made and would
have allowed the President's signature legislation to not be
marred by a website that failed to perform at its launch and is
still questionable in its security.
Lastly, I certainly want to make sure that we all
understand the American people know that companies have been
hacked, that credit card information has been taken. It has
been widely publicized. The difference between Target and other
companies who dealt with hackers is we don't have to put our
credit card into that machine at Target, we don't have to
deliver that information; we have the choice of paying cash, we
have the choice of not registering. We do not, no one on this
dais has the ability to say I won't go into Obamacare; it is
mandated by a law that I did not vote for, that the American
people did not agree with, but went forward anyway on a purely
partisan basis.
Mr. Lynch. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Issa. So, therefore, I want to make it very clear
we take serious that the standard for security on the
Government side must be higher, and today's witnesses will help
us begin the process of understanding how it could be higher.
I now recognize Mr. Cummings for his opening statement.
He is not recognized. The gentleman from Maryland is
recognized.
Mr. Lynch. Mr. Chairman, I just want to raise a point of
order.
Chairman Issa. The gentleman----
Mr. Lynch. Are we going to balance out the time?
Chairman Issa. The gentleman is not recognized. The
gentleman is not in order.
Mr. Lynch. I don't care to be recognized at all.
Chairman Issa. The gentleman is not recognized.
Mr. Lynch. You have gone on for 15 minutes. I am just
asking for a point of order.
Chairman Issa. The gentleman is not in order. Mr. Cummings
is recognized.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
You are absolutely right, this is a very, very serious
hearing. But I think we need to be very careful and be reminded
that we have 110 million Americans, our constituents. You say
they could use cash at Target. A lot of them don't have cash
because they don't have jobs. Give me a break.
It is good to be here this morning. Today is the twenty-
second hearing our committee has held on the Affordable Care
Act. Twenty-two. We have spent more time on this one issue over
the past three years than any other topic.
Mr. Chairman, I agree, we want to get this right. This is
so very, very important. The consequences of what we do affect
all of our constituents, and there are people watching us right
now who are suffering from dreadful diseases who are praying
and hoping that we get it right. And I am determined to work
hard with you to make sure that happens. But I am concerned
about them, but I am also concerned about this 110 million of
our constituents who have been placed in a vulnerable position
with regard to their Target credit cards; and I am going to go
further on that a little bit later.
So where are we today? The law that went into full effect,
hello, full effect, on January 1st and now millions of people
are getting health insurance they did not have before. They are
receiving critical medical care; they have the security of
knowing they will not be bankrupt if they get into an accident
or get sick. But there is something more important or just as
important as all of that: even under those circumstances, they
are allowed to live in dignity. Dignity. That is what our
Nation is all about, lifting up each other so that we all live
in dignity. So this is a phenomenal accomplishment.
The law also put into place key protections for consumers,
and I am so glad it did. I am so glad. Insurance companies are
now prohibited from discriminating against people with cancer,
our constituents, diabetes and other preexisting conditions,
our constituents, both Republican and Democrat, both rural and
urban. Insurance companies may not charge higher prices for
women, and millions of people are now receiving free
preventative care. That is so important. It is cheaper to keep
somebody well than to treat them after they are sick. There are
also huge financial benefits.
Health insurance companies are now sending rebate checks to
millions of people. Since the law was passed, we have seen the
lowest growth in healthcare costs in 50 years. If we repeal the
law today, it would increase our deficit by more than $1.5
trillion.
Despite all of these positive results, Republicans are
still obsessed with killing this law. After more than 40 votes
in the House, they shut down the Government in an unsuccessful
attempt to de-fund the law. Now they have shifted to a new
tactic. This is brand new, hot off the press: scaring people
away from the Healthcare.gov website.
Everyone agrees that initially the website's performance
was seriously flawed. Our committee has a legitimate interest
in investigating contractor performance and agency oversight,
and we have held multiple hearings on this topic already.
But let me pause here for a moment. I am just reminded of
what Emerson said, a favorite quote of Mandela. He said do not,
do not be in fear and fail to act because of your fears and
your problems, but be led by your hopes and your dreams. And
this is about the hopes and the dreams of Americans to stay
well, to make sure that their children are well, to make sure
that if they get sick they don't have to go into bankruptcy.
That is what this is all about.
And that is why you are right, Mr. Chairman, this hearing
is serious, because it has consequences. In terms of security
of the website, however, it is important to highlight all of
the facts, instead of cherry-picking, I said it, cherry-picking
partial information to promote a political narrative that is
inaccurate. Based on the documents we have reviewed, and when I
say we, I mean Republicans and Democrats, and the interviews we
have conducted, I believe we can establish several key facts.
Number one, although some employees expressed concerns with
security testing before this website was launched, the agency
addressed these risks by implementing a strong mitigation plan
as part of the Authority to Operate memo that was issued on
September 27th.
Second, since that time the agency has complied
successfully with the mitigation plan. The agency has now
compelled full end-to-end security testing of the system and it
addressed specific issues that arose in a timely manner.
Third, witnesses interviewed by the committee have praised
the current level of security testing. They have described
multiple layers of ongoing robust protections that meet, and in
some cases exceed, Federal standards. As Ms. Fryer put it
during her interview, the agency is using--and these are your
words, Ms. Fryer; correct me if I am wrong--Ms. Fryer said, she
is one of our witnesses, she said that the agency is using
``best practices,'' Mr. Chairman, ``above and beyond that which
is usually recommended.'' So, Ms. Fryer, I hope you clear that
up. Make it clear to us where you stand.
Finally, most importantly, to date there have been no
successful attacks on Healthcare.gov by domestic hackers,
foreign entities, or others who seek to harm our national
security. Nobody's personal information has been maliciously
hacked.
Now, we need to be careful. Obviously, this could change,
given the increasing frequency and sophistication of attacks
against all Federal IT systems. But the evidence obtained by
our committee, and when I say our committee I mean Republicans
and Democrats, indicates that the security of Healthcare.gov is
strong and it keeps getting stronger.
In very sharp contrast, up to 110 million Americans were
subjected to one of the most massive information technology
breaches in history when their credit, debit, and other
personal information was compromised at Target stores and
online in November and December.
Mr. Chairman, I sent you a letter on Tuesday requesting a
hearing on the Target breach, and I understand you have agreed
to have our staffs meet on this issue next week, and I thank
you for that. If our committee can hold dozens of hearings on
the Affordable Care Act and on Healthcare.gov, which has not
been successfully attacked to date, surely we can hold at least
one hearing at the earliest possible date on the massive Target
breach that affected more than 100 million of our constituents.
As I close, I want to close by thanking Dr. Charest. You
have been pulling double duty, providing multiple classified
briefings to Congress in addition to your day job. We thank
you.
Ms. Fryer, your name has been thrown around on the House
floor, when I am sure you have heard about it, but you have
your opportunity today to clarify whatever it is you have to
say.
And, Mr. Baitman, after finishing a day-long interview less
than 36 hours ago, you were handed a letter inviting you to
testify here today, and we thank you.
I want you all to know that we appreciate everything you
and your staffs are doing to remain vigilant and constantly
monitor the security of the website. Millions of American
families thank you for helping them.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you and I yield back.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
I now ask unanimous consent that letters dated December
15th, 2013, from the White House; December 17th from this
committee; an email exchange January 15th; and a letter to
Secretary Sebelius on January 15th be placed in the record and
copies be made and distributed. Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman Issa. All members may have seven days in which to
submit their opening statements and other information.
We now welcome our panel of witnesses.
Mr. Kevin Charest, Ph.D., is the Chief Information Security
Officer at the Department of Health and Human Services; Ms.
Teresa Fryer is the Chief Information Security Officer at the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, which will
undoubtedly be called CMS throughout the hearing; and Mr. Frank
Baitman is the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Information
Technology and Chief Information Officer at the Department of
Health and Human Services, and, again, I thank you for back-to-
back appearances.
Pursuant to the committee rules, would you please rise,
raise your right hand to take the oath?
Do you solemnly swear or affirm the testimony you are about
to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth?
[Witnesses respond in the affirmative.]
Chairman Issa. Please be seated.
Let the record reflect that all witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
In order to deal with a fairly short period of time--one of
our witnesses has a hard stop at 12, which we are going to very
much try to respect, and we are likely to have a vote more or
less at that time--I want to announce that I will ask you to
stay within that five minute opening statement, and I will be
very strict on the gavel today, which is not the history of
this committee.
So we want everyone to ask their question and complete
their questions well prior to five minutes. I won't cut off a
witness answering a question, but I will cut off exactly at
five minutes a question that is droning on, and I will curtail
the answer of questions if, in fact, it is unable to be
answered within a short period of time. And I say this because
I want to get through all the people on the dais and allow our
witnesses to leave timely.
Additionally, if witnesses need to excuse themselves for a
short period of time, please just go ahead, signal to the
clerk, do it, and use the facilities back here.
Other than that, Mr. Charest, you are recognized.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF KEVIN CHAREST, PH.D.

Mr. Charest. Good morning, Chairman Issa, Ranking Member
Cummings, and members of this committee. My name is Kevin
Charest and I am the Chief Information Security Officer for the
United States Department of Health and Human Services.
The Department of Health and Human Services is the United
States Government's principal agency for protecting the health
of all Americans, providing essential human services,
especially for those who are least able to help themselves. The
HHS Office of the Secretary and the Department's 11 operating
divisions administer more than 300 programs, covering a wide
spectrum of activities.
The Office of the Chief Information Officer, in which I
serve, is a part of OS. Our responsibility as one of the staff
divisions of OS is to manage programs within OS and support the
11 operating divisions in carrying out their various and
diverse missions. It is important to point out, however, that
we manage the Department's information technology portfolio
through a federated governance structure. The vast majority of
the Department's IT resources are tied directly to the
appropriations and statutory authorities Congress provides
directly to our programs and operating divisions. Our
governance authorities at the OS level reflect that federated
structure. Thus, many of HHS's operating divisions have their
own chief information officer, chief information security
officer, and IT management structure. The exception of this
rule is in OS, where the Department's CIO and CISO perform
those responsibilities.
HHS's enterprise-wide information security and privacy
program was launched in fiscal year 2003 to help protect HHS,
including its operating divisions, against potential
information technology threats and vulnerabilities. The program
ensures compliance with Federal mandates and legislation,
including the Federal Information Security Management Act.
Under my leadership, I have established a framework for
operating divisions to regularly report incidents involving IT
security to my office. Operating divisions routinely report
potential information security incidents to the HHS Computer
Security Incident Response Center, which I oversee.
In addition to our internal investigation of all IT
security incidents, we report all such incidents to the
Department of Homeland Security's Computer Emergency Readiness
Team at DHS's National Cybersecurity and Communications
Integration Center. Through US-CERT's operations center, US-
CERT accepts, triages, and collaboratively responds to
incidents; provides technical assistance to information system
operators; and disseminates timely notifications regarding
current and potential security threats and vulnerabilities. For
reference, in fiscal year 2013, US-CERT processed approximately
228,700 cyber incidents, an average of more than 620 per day,
including Federal agencies, critical infrastructure, and
industry partners.
It is important to note that HHS operates a defense-in-
depth strategy for protecting its assets in accordance with
guidance issued by the Office of Management and Budget and the
National institute of Standards and Technology, which has been
reflected in HHS's information security policy. This strategy
includes the use of a risk-based approach to authorizing
systems to operate, a robust set of technologies for continuous
monitoring of systems, standards and minimum requirements for
systems, as well as the appropriate business processes and
controls to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of all HHS IT assets.
Consistent with these policies, CMS reports actual or
suspected computer-security incidents in connection with
Healthcare.gov to the CSIRC. The reports are based on the
operational security protections CMS has in place to deter and
prevent unauthorized access, and weekly penetration testing and
security scans of the system. CMS's chief information security
officer and its information system security officer are
responsible for designing and maintaining a security program to
mitigate any risks identified in accordance with FISMA.
Additionally, building on Federal guidelines and
regulations, and in conformance with industry standards, HHS
has dedicated teams of career experts, including officials from
the Office of the Chief Information Officer, the Office of
Inspector General, Office of Civil Rights' Privacy Office, the
CSIRC and key operating divisions who work around the clock to
identify, manage, and mitigate suspected or potential breaches
of PII.
In carrying out their work, those teams abide by HHS's PII
Breach Response Team Policy, published in 2008, and HHS's
Privacy Incident Response Team Charter, published in 2011. HHS
security and privacy experts work with appropriate Federal
Government and industry professionals to do the following:
validate risk and review and approve response plans; review and
approve communications or notice to affected individuals
perform analysis on data in order to recommend strategies to
effectively refine and improve the Department's response to the
potential loss of PII; implement privacy and security solutions
that can reduce the potential loss of PII; and, finally,
monitor the privacy and security environment to raise awareness
of threats to PII within the Department.
If the team determines that notification of a breach is
warranted, the operating division coordinates through the PIRT
to send letters to the affected consumers or businesses,
informing them of the breach.
I appreciate the opportunity to meet with you today and
discuss your interest in the Federal Government's IT security
practices.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Charest follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Ms. Fryer?

STATEMENT OF TERESA FRYER

Ms. Fryer. Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Cummings, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
speak about my role in protecting the security of the
Federally-Facilitated Marketplace, also known as FFM. As a
career civil servant, I have decades of experience in
information security not only at CMS, but also at NASA, the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Office of Personnel Management,
and 20 years at security positions in the Navy. In my current
role as Chief Information Security Office for CMS, my
responsibilities include issuing CMS information security
policy; ensuring the CMS systems comply with applicable laws
and regulations; and providing oversight to maintain the
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of all CMS
information and information systems.
CMS has a long track record of successfully securing and
protecting almost 200 complex IT systems related not only to
FFM, but also to Medicare, Medicaid, and the Children's Health
Insurance Program. In my role as CISO at CMS, I lead the team
that is responsible for overseeing the independent security
control assessments of CMS systems, including the FFM. These
are conducted to assess the effectiveness of the security
controls that CMS has implemented in the agency's information
systems.
Independent security contractors completed a security
control assessment of the FFM on December 18th, with no open
high findings. This security control assessment met all
industry standards, was an end-to-end test, and was conducted
in a stable environment and allowed for testing to be completed
in the allotted time. Given the positive results of the recent
security controls assessment, the ability to complete
comprehensive security testing and a mitigation plan in place,
I would recommend the FFM to be given a new Authority to
Operate when the current authority expires in March.
The FFM authorization to operate that is currently in place
has s a number of strategies to ensure the FFM is protected
against attacks and mitigates risk, including regular testing
that exceeds best practices and a requirement to perform a full
security controls assessment within 90 days of a launch. The
risk mitigation strategies and compensating controls that were
prescribed are being implemented and executed as planned. The
protections that we have put in place have successfully
prevented attacks. There have been no successful security
attacks on the FFM and no person or group has maliciously
accessed personally identifiable information.
As part of this mitigation plan, CMS established a
dedicated security team, of which I am a member, to monitor,
track, and ensure the activities in the ATO memo are completed.
This team is responsible for the weekly testing, aborted
devices, and Internet-facing web service and scans using
continuous monitoring tools. Ongoing vulnerability assessments
of the FFM network infrastructure and Internet-facing web
service are conducted through penetration testing, which
involves simulated attacks to breach the security defense of
the website and continuous monitoring of marketplace-related
systems to alert security professionals of any new
vulnerabilities that may exist due to recent changes or
maintenance. Information from these tests has enabled us to
prevent any successful attacks on the FFM.
While no serious security professional would ever guarantee
that any system is hack-proof, I am confident, based on the
recent security controls assessment and the additional security
protections in place, that the FFM is secure. In many instances
we have gone above and beyond what is required with layered
protection, continuous monitoring, and additional penetration
testing. CMS takes system security very seriously. My job is to
anticipate and detect any possible security threat to our many
systems, no matter how small. We continue to carry out this
responsibility, protecting the FFM to ensure that consumers can
use the system with confidence that their personal information
is secure.
Thank you, and I am happy to take your questions.
Chairman Issa. Thank you. Because we were not provided your
opening statement, what date was that security assessment that
causes you to recommend completed?
Ms. Fryer. It was completed on December 18th.
Chairman Issa. December 18th.
Ms. Fryer. I am sorry. Yes, it was completed December 18th.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Baitman.

STATEMENT OF FRANK BAITMAN

Mr. Baitman. Good morning, Chairman Issa, Ranking Member
Cummings, and members of the committee. My name is Frank
Baitman and I am the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Information
Technology and the Chief Information Officer at the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
While I appreciate the committee's interest in
Healthcare.gov, as you know, two days ago I spent eight hours
in a transcribed interview with committee staff and with you
and Representative Jordan, respectively, answering your
questions. I received the committee's invitation to testify at
today's hearing approximately 36 hours ago, at the close of
Tuesday's transcribed interview. I will do my best to answer
any questions you may still have, given the minimal time that I
have had to prepare.
I would like to make clear to the committee the role of my
office, that is, the Office of the Chief Information Officer
for the Department of Health and Human Services in
Healthcare.gov. I personally, and my office generally, have
very little visibility into the development and operational
oversight for the website. The Department manages its IT
portfolio through a federated governance structure. Most of
HHS's operating divisions have their own chief information
officer and chief information security officer, one of whom is
with us today, as well as their own IT management structure.
The vast majority of the Department's IT resources are directly
tied to appropriations made to our programs and operating
divisions, and our governance structure reflects this reality.
Management and governance of Healthcare.gov was comparable
to the management of similar IT initiatives throughout the
Department's 11 operating divisions. And as with Medicare.gov
and Medicare Part D prescription drug program, the development
and security of Healthcare.gov website has been led by CMS,
which is the business owner for the system. Neither I nor my
office had operational control over or responsibility for
Healthcare.gov.
Since I jointed the Department less than two years ago, we
have been working to restructure and update our IT governance
to bring greater visibility into what the Department buys and
builds across all of our 11 operating divisions. We are in the
process of putting in place three It steering committees to
bring together technology and program leaders from across the
Department to improve our purchasing and management of
information technology resources.
With respect to Healthcare.gov specifically, I would like
to reiterate something that I have described to the committee
on a number of occasions during my transcribed interview on
Tuesday: Any discussions that I had regarding the rollout and
launch of the website were based upon my past experiences in
the private sector and the practices of tech companies that are
often used. I did not have any personal, direct, or detailed
knowledge of the development or security of the website, so it
would not have been appropriate for me to make recommendations
on operational decisions and, accordingly, I did not. As I also
said in response to the committee's questions, it is totally
appropriate and consistent with NIST guidelines that
operational decisions about the technical aspects of
Healthcare.gov be made by the administrator of CMS because of
that individual's ability to broadly assess the acceptable risk
for operating the system.
I am happy to answer any questions you may have, Chairman.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Ms. Fryer, I am going to take you through a couple of quick
slides here. They are all from the report that was not
published. As they put up the side, these particular slides
were provided to us after we initially interviewed you, and
this was a memo never sent. Would you please tell us why this
memo was never sent?
Ms. Fryer. So this was a memo that I initially was drafting
to send to the chief information officer----
Chairman Issa. Right. And you chose not to send it because
of?
Ms. Fryer. Because events had taken place the next week
with the chief information officer drafting the risk decision
memo.
Chairman Issa. In other words----
Ms. Fryer. So it was overcome by events.
Chairman Issa.--events--okay. But it is still a good one
for us to look at because it is consistent with your
recommendations and your thought at the time.
So in slide 1 of the draft, you wrote, FFM does not
reasonably meet the CMS security requirements which are
intended to minimize CMS business risk. Is that correct?
Ms. Fryer. During the security assessment that was
conducted in September, the security testing was not able to be
completed; they weren't able to test completely----
Chairman Issa. But these are your words.
Ms. Fryer. Yes.
Chairman Issa. Okay. Additionally, you said there is also
no confidence that personal identifiable information will be
protected, correct?
Ms. Fryer. Again, there was security testing----
Chairman Issa. But these are your words.
Ms. Fryer. I drafted this initial memo.
Chairman Issa. Okay. And these are consistent with what you
were saying in meetings in the September 20th time frame.
Ms. Fryer. This memo was capturing the briefing that we had
given to Mr. Charest and Mr. Baitman and the CIO.
Chairman Issa. Okay. So the other two witnesses knew that
these are your words, but in a paraphrased what you told them.
There is also no confidence that personal identifiable
information will be protected. This is in slide 1A.
Ms. Fryer. Again, it was the results of the securing
testing that had occurred.
Chairman Issa. Okay. So in slide 1B you wrote, the
independent assessor was forced to test different modules in
multiple environments. In other words, no end-to-end, as it was
going to be launched testing, correct?
Ms. Fryer. Yes.
Chairman Issa. Okay. In slide 1C you wrote, complete end-
to-end testing of FFM never occurred. That is correct, right?
Ms. Fryer. Yes.
Chairman Issa. And that is best practices, of course,
right?
Ms. Fryer. Yes.
Chairman Issa. And you now testified in your opener that on
December 18th end-to-end testing was completed and that is why
you now have confidence that at least the snapshot of the site
as it was that day would meet the requirements, subject to
additional changes that occur in maintenance and modification,
right?
Ms. Fryer. On the testing that was conducted on December
18th, yes.
Chairman Issa. Okay. In slide 1C you wrote, the majority of
the testing efforts were focused on testing the expected
functionality of the application, not security, is that
correct?
Ms. Fryer. Yes.
Chairman Issa. Okay. Again, in slide 1C you wrote, several
factors contributed to the limited effectiveness of the SSA
modules and their interconnects. Can you expect that this could
be a problem? And I guess in 1C you are saying yes, you are
concerned about that area, is that right?
Ms. Fryer. Again, this was a memo that I was drafting; I
didn't complete it, so some of these things hadn't been done.
Chairman Issa. Okay. Slide 1C also says, valid test data
was not provided prior to testing to give the true environment,
correct?
Ms. Fryer. Yes. Normally, it is put into the system for the
security testers beforehand, so it doesn't delay testing.
Chairman Issa. So it is common to get real data, or at
least data that is substantially real in both size and in cells
and information in order to do a real assessment, and that
wasn't done, is that correct?
Ms. Fryer. Test data was put into, yes, it was just a delay
in getting the test data put into the system.
Chairman Issa. Okay. So the two witnesses here were aware
of essentially this information when you made your
recommendation that it basically wasn't ready to launch, or at
least you were uncomfortable with whether or not it was ready
because of the lack of end-to-end testing and the like, is that
correct?
Ms. Fryer. My responsibility as the chief information
security officer is to give an assessment to the chief
information officer on the risks that were discovered during
independent testing.
Chairman Issa. And Mr. Charest, of course, was aware of
this, plus had independent knowledge.
Mr. Baitman, yesterday in testimony you told us that you
recommended a less than full rollout in a meeting, I believe
September 10th, essentially saying with the problems and so on,
best practices, in your opinion, would have been to roll out a
portion of this rather than the size and scope that was rolled
out on October 1st. You didn't characterize it completely as a
recommendation, but it was certainly something you put out. In
retrospect, would you prefer that to have been the way this
site launched, in other words, more like a beta, in order to
mitigate what we now know was pretty much a bad launch?
Mr. Baitman. Well, as you point out, Mr. Chairman, it
wasn't actually a recommendation; it was a discussion topic for
the meeting, and it was based upon my experience in the private
sector, having seen this being done elsewhere. Sometimes it is
referred to as a beta launch, a controlled, measured launch. In
retrospect, I don't know that I can say because I didn't have
direct knowledge of the system, the operational, development
issues.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Over the past few months, House Republicans have made a
number of extraordinarily unfounded claims about the security
of Healthcare.gov. This scare tactic appears to be part of a
coordinated campaign to frighten people away from
Healthcare.gov's website. I want to make sure we separate fact
from fiction today and tell the American people the whole
truth.
I would like to go down the line with each of you and ask
whether there have been any successful security attacks against
the website.
Dr. Charest, let me start with you. You oversee HHS's
Incident Response Team, is that right?
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. So if there is an attack on Healthcare.gov,
you would know about it, is that right?
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. Dr. Charest, to date, I want you to look at
me, now, has there been a single successful security attack
against Healthcare.gov by a domestic hacker, foreign bad actor,
or any other malicious individual group?
Mr. Charest. No, sir, there have been no reported attacks
of any type of any malicious intent, either domestic or
foreign.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Baitman, let me turn to you. You are the
chief information officer at HHS. My constitutes and our
constitutes are looking at you, they are depending on your
information. Have there been any successful attacks against the
website?
Mr. Baitman. There have been no reported successful attacks
against the website.
Mr. Cummings. Ms. Fryer, you are the chief information
security officer for CMS. Have there been any successful
attacks against the system?
Ms. Fryer. No, there have been no successful attacks.
Mr. Cummings. So you all agree that over the past three and
a half months, since the website has been live, there have been
no successful attacks against the Healthcare.gov website, and I
think that this is a very, very critical point.
Last November the CIO of Foreground Security testified
before the House Energy and Commerce Committee, and this
company is one of the contractors that conducts continuous
security monitoring of the website. The CIO testified that
nobody could guaranty with 100 percent certainty that
Healthcare.gov was secure from external hackers. Do you all
agree with that?
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir.
Ms. Fryer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Baitman. Yes, I do.
Mr. Cummings. And he stated this, he said, ``I also would
say the same thing about Facebook or any banking website as
well.''
Dr. Charest, Mr. Baitman, during your interviews with the
committee staff, you told us that you agree with this
statement. You have both worked in the private sector. Can you
both explain why Healthcare.gov is no more risky than
commercial sites like Facebook? Mr. Charest.
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir. So, in essence, there are always
vulnerabilities, there are a number of vulnerabilities. All of
these sites rely on underlying infrastructure, third-party
softwares. All of these variables coming together create an
environment which can be compromised, candidly, at any time, so
you have to be vigilant. As the defender, we have to defend
against every possible attack and the attacker, in essence, has
to find the one way in which we have not defended. So they are
all always at some level of risk.
Mr. Cummings. Now, Mr. Baitman, would you have anything to
add to that or do you agree or disagree?
Mr. Baitman. I agree. No site is perfect, and we need to be
vigilant, which is why we have layers of security.
Mr. Cummings. Now, although there have been no successful
attacks against Healthcare.gov to date, we have to keep in mind
that there are constant attempts by malicious individuals and
groups, both domestic and foreign, to attack large complex
Government IT systems. We are all concerned about that, both
Republicans and Democrats. We have to remain one step ahead of
the actors.
I thank you for clearing all of this, the confusion that
may have occurred. Our job is to ensure that the American
people have accurate information so they are not wrongfully
deterred from obtaining the critical healthcare coverage they
need and deserve.
Now, I want to go to you just very briefly, Ms. Fryer. The
chairman asked you some questions and I just want to summarize
as I close. I want to make sure that I have this right, so let
me ask you a series of very basic questions. The draft
memorandum that he talked about, you are familiar, right?
Ms. Fryer. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. Did you ever send the memorandum to anybody.
Ms. Fryer. No, I didn't.
Mr. Cummings. Anybody?
Ms. Fryer. No, I did not, sir.
Mr. Cummings. You never sent it to your boss, Mr. Trenkle?
Ms. Fryer. No, sir.
Mr. Cummings. You never sent it to Administrator Tavenner?
Ms. Fryer. No, sir.
Mr. Cummings. So you never pressed the Send button.
Ms. Fryer. No, sir.
Mr. Cummings. During your interview with the committee
staff, you explained that you stopped working on the memo and
put it aside after you found out that your superiors were
moving forward with the December 27th ATO, which included the
mitigation measures we have been discussing, is that right?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. And did you ever finalize your draft memo?
Ms. Fryer. No, sir.
Mr. Cummings. So you never finished it.
Ms. Fryer. No, sir.
Mr. Cummings. Do you know if all of the information in the
memorandum is accurate?
Ms. Fryer. No, sir. I was still validating the information.
Mr. Cummings. Very well.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Mica.
Mr. Mica. Just a commentary. I heard the ranking member
start out. I am as concerned. I came from a family that didn't
have healthcare at times in our life, and there are 42 to 45
million Americans that don't have healthcare, and yet we have
rolled out a flawed system. Everyone from the President of the
United States to members of Congress on both sides of the aisle
said the rollout, from a technical standpoint, was a meltdown
and a fiasco. That was accessing it.
We signed up about a million people. I am one of the
unwilling participants in that and others had no other choice,
really, but we knocked six million people off of their
healthcare system. This is a great record of success. And we
probably left 41 to 44 million people still without healthcare.
So I just had to comment when I heard that.
Ms. Fryer, you did in fact draft this memo of the 24th,
right?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Mica. That was up there. Yes. And it said that this
platform basically doesn't reasonably meet the CMS security
requirements which are intended to minimize CMS business risk,
enterprise risk, or the application risk. There is also no
confidence that the personal identifiable information will be
protected. You wrote that on the 24th, right?
Ms. Fryer. Yes.
Mr. Mica. The 27th, what happened? Ms. Tavenner, didn't she
sign the Authority to Operate? On the 27th she signed the
Authority to Operate. Is that the event that overcame this? You
wrote the memo. Who did you share the contents of this memo,
that there wasn't assurance when this was rolled out? It is bad
enough the thing wouldn't work from a technical standpoint or
millions of people who wanted healthcare couldn't access the
system. In fact, I was served by a waitress the other day and
she says, I wanted to get on it; I still don't have it because
I couldn't access it. But it was flawed from the standpoint of
being able to access it or work from an operational standpoint,
right? At least initially, right?
Ms. Fryer. My responsibility was to brief my management and
the chief information officer.
Mr. Mica. You are security, but you wrote that it wasn't
ready for prime time rollout for security, right? And then you
said events that overtook this. Well, the event was, in fact,
that Tavenner, she signed the ATO. Did you sign the ATO?
Ms. Fryer. No, I did not. It is not my responsibility.
Mr. Mica. In fact, I saw at the end of the ATO you put a
little caveat to protect your rear end, kind of, you put this
paragraph at the end of the ATO, didn't you?
Ms. Speier. Mr. Chairman?
Ms. Fryer. My responsibility is to brief the CIO on its
face.
Chairman Issa. The lady will suspend. The gentleman will
suspend.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Chairman, I would like to suggest that we
all----
Chairman Issa. No, the gentlelady will state her point of
parliamentary inquiry, please.
Ms. Speier. Personal privilege.
Chairman Issa. Point of personal privilege. Please state
it.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Chairman, I think that we should show
respect to the persons who are----
Chairman Issa. That is not a point of personal privilege.
Please state a point of personal privilege.
Ms. Speier. Well, I am offended by the fact that----
Chairman Issa. Okay, if the gentlelady can organize an
actual procedural request, we will reconsider it at that time.
The gentleman may continue.
Mr. Mica. Well, I understand, and, again, protecting
yourself, I may have used a term that some member found
offensive, but protecting your rear end, everybody knows it
around here.
Ms. Fryer, last December you testified to the committee
that prior to the October 1st launch you recommended again to
deny the exchange's Authority to Operate, also known as the
ATO, which is a document necessary to the website for the
record. Is that accurate?
Ms. Fryer. Yes.
Mr. Mica. Why did you make this recommendation?
Ms. Fryer. The testing in September, there were some issues
that were encountered during the testing, so there was a level
of uncertainty as to the known risk.
Mr. Mica. Who did you make the recommendation to?
Ms. Fryer. My responsibility is to make the recommendation
to my management and the chief information officer of CMS.
Mr. Mica. Okay. Ms. Fryer, you also testified that you
communicated your recommendation to Mr. Trenkle and he shared
your concerns, is that correct?
Ms. Fryer. Yes.
Mr. Mica. Did he sign the Authority to Operate, again, the
ATO?
Ms. Fryer. No, he did not.
Mr. Mica. He did not. When did you learn Mr. Trenkle was
also not comfortable enough to sign the ATO?
Ms. Fryer. It was probably during our conversation, during
the security testing, when there were problems that were being
encountered.
Mr. Mica. So that was earlier.
Ms. Fryer. And on September 20th, when I briefed him, Mr.
Trenkle, and Mr. Baitman and----
Mr. Mica. Did Mr. Trenkle tell you why he decided not to
sign the ATO?
Ms. Fryer. No, he did not.
Mr. Mica. Did you ever brief Administrator Tavenner on the
security risks in the federal exchange?
Ms. Fryer. No, I did not.
Mr. Mica. Did you----
Chairman Issa. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Mica.--Mr. Charest and also Mr. Baitman?
Chairman Issa. You may answer.
Mr. Charest. No, sir, I never briefed Tavenner.
Mr. Mica. Mr. Baitman?
Mr. Baitman. I am sorry, could you repeat the question?
Mr. Mica. Did you counsel with Ms. Tavenner on security
issues?
Mr. Baitman. No, I did not.
Mr. Mica. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. Thank you very much.
The gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Tierney, is
recognized.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you very much.
Thank all the witnesses for their work and for being here
again today.
So essentially what we have established is that we have a
memorandum that allows the majority apparently to raise the
spectre of problems, only to find out that it was never sent to
anyone because those issues had been addressed and dealt with,
and now we have a system that has not had any successful hack
attack since then. But we continue to go over and over and over
this because, if we do go over and over and over it, maybe
somebody will think that there is a real problem.
But let's talk about the real problem. So we have spent a
lot of time doing that on this committee, Oversight Committee,
had hearings and subpoenaed documents, conducted interviews;
Mr. Baitman ad nauseam with respect to you, at least. The good
news is that there have been no successful attacks in security
against the website, but every day people do attempt, from time
to time.
So I have a modest suggestion here. Why don't we try to
find out who is doing that? This is an oversight and
investigatory committee, after all. It seems to me that if we
have a website and people want to have healthcare, but there
are people trying to prevent them from doing that, by that I
don't reference my colleagues here, I reference people that are
trying to--although many people are tiresome of the efforts to
repeal--I am talking about people that are trying to get into
the system and destroy it. We ought to go after those bad guys
on that basis.
There are reports out there, pretty wide range set of
reports, describing some of the malicious groups that are
organizing to try to do this. One example is a group that
developed a program called Destroy Obamacare. Are you familiar
with that, Mr. Baitman?
Mr. Baitman. Yes, I have seen reports of it.
Mr. Tierney. And apparently what they were doing was trying
to have a denial of service tool. Can one of you explain what
that is? Mr. Charest?
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir. So in the case of Destroy Obamacare
and in all denial of service tools, the basic premise is to
flood the website with potentially even appropriate traffic,
but such that legitimate users cannot access the site, it is
overloaded, in essence.
Mr. Tierney. So the spectre this would raise is trying to
be made true by people who are taking an overt action, trying
to interfere with the system, would that be right?
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir.
Mr. Tierney. So press reports indicate that these are, in
their words, right-wing groups motivated not by financial gain,
but sort of a political animus. They disagree with the
Affordable Care Act, so they are trying to intentionally block
applicants from actually getting access and getting the rights
entitled to them under the law. Is it a crime, Dr. Charest, for
them to do this?
Mr. Charest. I am not an attorney, sir, but I believe it
is.
Mr. Tierney. And who investigates those types of attacks?
Mr. Charest. In the event--and we did investigate the
Destroy Obamacare code and those--not the actors, that is not
our role, but the attempted attack. We found it to be
rudimentary, but we did report, as we report all these
incidents, to the Office of the Inspector General, and they
received that information and would indeed investigate, if
appropriate.
Mr. Tierney. Okay. And would they investigate to try to
determine who the individuals leading this attack are?
Mr. Charest. That is my understanding, sir, but they would
have to tell you their procedures.
Mr. Tierney. Okay. And perhaps that is a good action for
this committee, would be to meet with those people and find out
where they are going and what they are finding out. Does your
incident response team, in terms of checking out these
allegations to look to see who is undermining it, do you look
to see how you can trace back on the site, where it may
originate or where the site is hosted?
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir. We will trace back what we call the
command and control, all the elements of the attack, as best as
we can, and then we will share that with DHS, law enforcement,
and others, as appropriate.
Mr. Tierney. And do you think that if the right people were
investigating this, they would be able to in fact locate and
find who these people are? Is there a likelihood of that?
Mr. Charest. It is possible, sir, but these things are
fairly mercurial. IP addresses are rapidly changing; websites
come up and down pretty often. The reality is, though, very
often they are found.
Mr. Tierney. And it is because of that mercurial aspect and
other things in constant attacks that you have the need for
layered security, is that correct?
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir.
Mr. Tierney. And that layered security, once again, has
been successful to date in stopping any successful hacking
attack, is that correct?
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir, to date it has.
Mr. Tierney. All right. But because all systems, whether
they are private or public like this, are constantly under
attack, we have to be vigilant, and that is exactly what all of
you are doing, is that correct?
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir, around the clock.
Mr. Tierney. Well, I thank you for your efforts.
Mr. Chairman, I think that I would ask that the committee
consider an investigation pursuing those who are making
attempts to attack and hack this site, for whether it is
political animus or any other means on that. I think that would
be an appropriate activity for us to do. That seems to be the
real danger here, interfering with people's rights to have
healthcare under the plan.
Chairman Issa. The gentleman absolutely is right.
Cybersecurity is part of our core jurisdiction. Mr. Connolly
and I also spoke this morning at a cloud computing conference,
so that is an area of not only interest, but a willingness to
put staff and dais time into.
If I may, Mr. Cummings and I have been discussing, and I
will be brief, the fact that we need to link in, as part of our
committee jurisdiction, other areas of best practice flaws
within the Federal Government, but also a recognition that
those things have to be rippled out to private corporations;
the banking community. Certainly Target has been mentioned
here, but it wasn't the only commercial site hacked during this
period of time. So I join with the gentleman and you can count
on there being a series of briefings and possible committee
hearings on them.
Mr. Tierney. I thank the chairman. Yield back.
Chairman Issa. We now go to the gentleman from Michigan,
Mr. Walberg.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
witnesses for being here.
Ms. Fryer, we have dealt with the memo and your ultimate
decision not to send it, but I think there is still questions
that are there and it can't be just simply an out of sight, out
of mind issue, so let me ask you a question. In your testimony
last month before the committee you characterized the
mitigation plan identified in the risk decision memo as ``added
protections to compensate for those unknown risks.'' What did
you mean by this, specifically those unknown risks?
Ms. Fryer. So the security testing in September was not to
the level that was expected, so they weren't able to test fully
for the confidentiality and integrity areas. So in order to
compensate for those compensating controls, we added those.
Those were additional protections for the overall marketplace
system.
Mr. Walberg. Well, is a mitigation able to effectively
address the vulnerabilities in the nearly half of the modules
that made up the marketplace that were not fully security
tested?
Ms. Fryer. It was a later protection, so later protection
was put into place to mitigate the risk of those. You can't
mitigate unknown risks, so, again, we have those later
protections in place.
Mr. Walberg. Well, based upon that, let me go, Ms. Fryer
and Mr. Charest. Is it true that a good security control
assessment makes it easier to create a good, tight mitigation
plan?
Mr. Charest. I would say so, yes, sir.
Mr. Walberg. Would you agree, Ms. Fryer?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, I do, sir.
Mr. Walberg. Is it true that the more understood the risks,
the better it is to create a plan to address those risks? Mr.
Charest, Ms. Fryer?
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir, it is.
Mr. Walberg. Just establishing the pattern here.
Ms. Fryer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Walberg. Is it possible to mitigate unknown risks?
Mr. Charest. I don't know of any way to do that, sir.
Ms. Fryer. No, sir.
Mr. Walberg. How difficult is it to mitigate unknown risks?
Mr. Charest. There are always unknown risks, so when you
say how to mitigate a specific unknown risk, obviously, it is
unknown, so what you do is you create an environment as we
have, which is a defense in depth strategy; it is the
infrastructural components, it is the methodologies that you
utilize for your IT systems. It is the preponderance of all of
these elements and then those teams that are designed to watch
those elements in operation that will allow you to, in essence,
address unknown risks.
Mr. Walberg. But clearly with this testimony, to advance
the rollout with unknown risks out there, with unclear
mitigation, certainly appears, I think, to this committee to be
a concern worth addressing and worth having these hearings
over.
Chairman Issa. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Walberg. Yes, I would.
Chairman Issa. I think the gentleman makes an extremely
good point, and I might note that Ms. Fryer had made it clear
that there were tests that could have been done that would have
caused the unknown risks to be less unknown.
Mr. Walberg. I concur.
Mr. Baitman, Teresa Fryer had a discussion with you about
the security risk of Healthcare.gov, is that correct?
Mr. Baitman. There was a video conference call, I think you
are probably referring to, on September 20th.
Mr. Walberg. But you had a discussion with Ms. Fryer.
Mr. Baitman. She participated, that is correct.
Mr. Walberg. What did Ms. Fryer tell you in that video
conference call?
Mr. Baitman. As I recall, the CIO of CMS at the time was
Tony Trenkle, and I believe Tony said that both he and Ms.
Fryer were uncomfortable with signing the ATO.
Mr. Walberg. Did you relay that discomfort with anyone
about Healthcare.gov who had the Authority to Operate within
HHS?
Mr. Baitman. I am sorry, I don't understand.
Mr. Walberg. Did you relay Ms. Fryer's discomfort with the
risk in signing the Authority to Operate with HHS?
Mr. Baitman. Yes, I did.
Mr. Walberg. Did you tell this information to anyone,
including Ned Holland or Jim Corr?
Mr. Baitman. I shared it with a few people, Ned Holland and
Deputy Secretary Corr, yes.
Mr. Walberg. What did you tell them?
Mr. Baitman. I thought it was noteworthy that the chief
information security officer for CMS had expressed that she was
uncomfortable signing it. On the other hand, I didn't consider
it a red flag. So I wanted to share it with them, but Ms. Fryer
wasn't the operational security person and CMS has an official
who is responsible for that, so I thought that he was probably
in a better position to know what changes had been made and
what was going to launch on October 1st.
Chairman Issa. The gentleman's time has expired.
We now go to the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch,
for five minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the ranking
member as well.
Mr. Baitman, I want to go back some previous questioning. I
am not sure if it was Mr. Cummings or Mr. Tierney, they talked
about the beta approach that you referred to, and I just want
to be clear on this. During your interview with the committee
you had said earlier that your suggestion about the beta
approach was based on your sort of general experience in the
private sector with the rollout of IT systems, again, in the
private sector, is that correct?
Mr. Baitman. That is correct.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. So you explained your suggestion had
nothing to do with security concerns with regard to the
website.
Mr. Baitman. No. I didn't have any direct knowledge of
functional or security issues; it was more of a this is a big,
large, complex system and this is an approach that will
minimize any challenges.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. I just wanted to be clear on it. And, in
fact, you told us in your previous testimony on September 10th
that you had no specific knowledge of any security concerns
with the website. Is that still correct?
Mr. Baitman. No specific concerns, no.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. All right. Thank you.
I know we are talking about the technology, and in a moment
of complete disclosure, I voted against the Affordable Care Act
for a whole slew of reasons. However, this was not one of them.
This was supposed to be the easy part, this rollout, the
mechanical function of getting everybody up and on the system,
so it is particularly discouraging. But I do want to say this
is the law. I voted against it because I didn't think it was
being done the right way, and people can differ on that. But I
see my role going forward as one of making sure that the people
that I represent have decent affordable, high-quality
healthcare. That is my role going forward, and I think that
should be everyone's goal here. But I have had an opportunity
to sit with the folks that are running the Massachusetts
Connector, the Health Connector, and some of the folks that are
going out to sign everybody up, and I had one question.
I read the security documents for the Massachusetts Health
Connector. Of course, I can't locate it right now, but what
they do say in the security section regarding personally
identifiable information, it talks about all the precautions
they are taking, but then it says, and it is sort of an odd
wrinkle, however, once you voluntarily submit personally
identifiable information to us, the Health Connector, related
to your use of the portal, its dissemination is governed by the
public records law, the Fair Information Practices Act of
Massachusetts General Laws 66(a), so forth, and other
applicable laws and regulations. And they have this one called
out in bold, it says, for this reason, part or all of the
information you send us may be provided to a member of the
public in response to a public records request.
Now, I don't think that is what we intended when we passed
that law in Massachusetts, but I know there are a whole lot of
laws all across probably in all 50 States and the District of
Columbia that have this public records access ability. And I am
not sure if Mr. Charest or Ms. Fryer or you, Mr. Baitman, might
have some comment on that. Is that something that we are going
to have to go back, all 50 States, and say we don't mean that
your personal information should be accessible through a public
records request? Have you thought about that?
Mr. Baitman. I have to say I don't think I am in a position
to address that, unfortunately.
Mr. Lynch. How about you, Ms. Fryer?
Ms. Fryer. Same here, sir.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. Mr. Charest?
Mr. Charest. I am from Massachusetts and, unfortunately, I
still can't address it, sir.
Mr. Lynch. That's three strikes and I am out, I guess.
Well, I just want to say I appreciate your efforts and your
good work on this, and I will yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman Issa. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Lynch. Sure I will. Sure I will.
Chairman Issa. Mr. Baitman, I just had one quick follow-up,
I think Mr. Lynch would also want to know. You said that Ms.
Fryer's concerns did not raise a red flag. Do you really mean
that her being uncomfortable with the security launch didn't
raise a red flag simply because, even though she was
knowledgeable, she wasn't ``the one in charge''?
Mr. Baitman. That is what I mean, yes.
Chairman Issa. I wish you had said that yesterday in the
testimony.
Mr. Meehan is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Meehan. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Charest, what is a successful attack on the system?
Mr. Charest. It can be defined, I suppose, in a number of
ways, sir, but basically where the attacker actually has
penetrated the system and/or compromised the system or, as we
call it, exfiltrated, meaning taken away something from the
system.
Mr. Meehan. Okay, so at this point in time, then, and this
is the testimony. I am kind of interested in, on the record--
and the chairman or the ranking member went through this with
both you and Ms. Fryer and it has been your testimony there has
been no reported successful attack on the system.
Mr. Charest. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Meehan. Now, I know from my work with chairing the
Cybersecurity Committee for Homeland, a million hits a day on
our banking systems and things like this, Chinese hackers now.
The record indicates that Chinese hackers came in in November
and tried to get into the system. The last time they have ever
done it?
Mr. Charest. I just want to parse there are attempts all
the time by would-be attackers.
Mr. Meehan. So that is what I am trying to say. So we have
maybe 30, 40, 50,000 navigators around the United States
dealing with personally identifying information; we have
Chinese hackers doing millions of attacks a day; sophisticated
Russians; we had sophisticated networks that broke into Target.
They didn't know it, with the most secure systems, they didn't
know it for quite a period of time, did they? But somehow there
hasn't been a successful attack since this has rolled out, this
system?
Mr. Charest. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Meehan. All right. I am still struggling with the idea
of how this thing was approved, the ATO decision was made, from
my work with FISMA. Now, let me ask you specifically. Was there
a security assessment plan that was done prior to the ATO
decision? Ms. Fryer, Mr. Charest? Ms. Fryer, was there a
security assessment plan completed and done by HHS prior to the
decision that was made?
Ms. Fryer. So let me clarify. There was a security test
plan that was created before the testing was conducted in
September, and, yes, there was a security controls assessment
report that was completed after the testing was.
Mr. Meehan. Have you turned over that plan and that
assessment to this committee?
Ms. Fryer. I can't answer that question.
Mr. Meehan. Will you turn over that plan and that
assessment to this committee?
Ms. Fryer. I would have to bring that back to my agents.
Mr. Meehan. Why is that a difficult question? Will you turn
that plan and that assessment over to my committee on
Cybersecurity in Homeland Security?
Ms. Fryer. I believe that those documents have been turned
over; they are sensitive documents. Usually, we don't like to
have them out there, but I believe that----
Mr. Meehan. It is my understanding that, in fact, the
testing preceded the completion of those documents, that plan
and the final assessment. Is that accurate?
Ms. Fryer. The testing is conducted and then a security
controls assessment report is delivered by the contractor.
Mr. Meehan. MITRE didn't have access to the full--doesn't
it need access to the full scope of the network?
Ms. Fryer. I didn't understand that question, full scope.
They have a scope----
Mr. Meehan. Did they have full access to the information
system and the environment of the operation?
Ms. Fryer. They have access----
Mr. Meehan. Did they have, did MITRE, who was the
contractor, is it your testimony that during the period of time
when they were supposed to be preparing this report, which is
required under the law, under FISMA, did MITRE have proper
access to the information system and the environment of
operation, specifically?
Ms. Fryer. The system that was being tested, yes.
Mr. Meehan. Well, was it the system that was being tested
or the full system? Not the system that was being tested,
because what we had was parts of the system being tested. But
FISMA doesn't authorize parts of the system being tested, it
requires, under the law, the entirety of the system.
Ms. Fryer. They tested what was in scope of the security
test plan that was provided by FISMA.
Mr. Meehan. Well, that is why I want to see the security
test plan; not for the parts of the security, but the entirety
of the system. Was the security test plan dealing with the
entirety of the system prior to the OTA being made?
Chairman Issa. The gentleman's time has expired, but you
may answer and I think include the words end-to-end, perhaps,
if you think that is appropriate.
Ms. Fryer. If I understand, you are requesting the security
test plan.
Mr. Meehan. I want the security test plan, I want the
security assessment, and then I want the remediation that was
by the contractor and HHS in which they resolved all of those
issues and I want to know that they were all done prior to the
approval of the OTA, which is required under the FISMA law.
Ms. Fryer. Yes, sir, and I will bring that request back.
Chairman Issa. Thank you. I thank both of you.
I will note for the committee that we were unaware of the
December 18th study; it has not been provided, even though we
believe it would be appropriate pursuant to the subpoena that
was already in place, and it is my intention to issue a new
subpoena to make sure there is no doubt that that document that
we were not aware of as of yesterday had not been provided.
And for the record, no, Mr. Meehan, those documents have
not been provided by HHS.
Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my
understanding, however, that an unredacted copy of the test
results was subpoenaed and was provided to this committee.
Is that correct, Ms. Fryer?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, I believe the September testing documents.
If it is the December ones, like I said, I have to bring that
request back.
Mr. Connolly. Okay.
Chairman Issa. Mr. Connolly, if I may. I just want to make
sure your question is clear. MITRE Corporation, pursuant to a
subpoena, supplied us documents; neither Health and Human
Services, nor CMS have provided any such documents. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you for the clarification.
And, Mr. Baitman, let me express my regret that you were
given so little notice before being asked to testify here
today, for a committee that insists on better compliance from
various Federal agencies, and in a timely fashion. Sometimes we
seem to have a double standard, or it might be perceived that
way.
I want to ask about security, because I have to admit, when
I heard some of the statements, especially the opening
statement of the chairman, it sounded scary to me. It sounded
like only Healthcare.gov represents a potential security,
cybersecurity threat that could compromise everybody's
healthcare in America. And, of course, as you indicated, Mr.
Charest, cybersecurity attacks are going on all the time, in
the private sector as well as in the public sector. The game
here is to stay ahead of it, to develop systems to try to
prevent it, to track it down, and that is going to be an
ongoing battle forever for everybody because of the nature of
technology. Do you think that is a fair statement, Mr. Charest?
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir. We cybersecurity professionals
believe we have excellent job security.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. I want to ask about, because several of
us wrote the chairman of this committee asking for
clarification of protocols to safeguard sensitive documents,
and, Ms. Fryer and Mr. Baitman, if I am hearing you correctly,
there is reason to be concerned about providing us with very
sensitive documents that could somehow be compromised,
obviously unwittingly. Nobody on this committee would ever leak
anything to the press. But leaving it around accidentally or
whatever could in fact lead to the very result that presumably
this hearing is all about trying to deter, which is the
compromise of consumer information.
And I quote the president and CEO of MITRE, who wrote the
chairman of this committee and said, ``In the wrong hands, this
information could cause irreparable harm to the basic security
and architecture of Healthcare.gov and potentially the security
of other CMS data networks that share attributes of this
architecture.'' Is that a fair concern, Mr. Baitman, Ms. Fryer?
Mr. Baitman. I believe it is a fair concern. I think that
those documents could, if they were made public, provide a
roadmap to an attacker.
Mr. Connolly. So the very thing we are having a hearing
about today we could, again, unwittingly, actually be part of
the problem if we don't establish clear guidelines, clear
protocols for the securing of such information. Fair statement,
Ms. Fryer?
Ms. Fryer. Yes. These are sensitive documents that are
tightly controlled.
Mr. Connolly. So were someone to leak them, for example,
someone got them through, I don't know, a subpoena, for
example, and somebody decided to, as the ranking member, the
phrase he used, cherry-pick information and leaked it to the
press, again, not that that would ever happen here, in this
committee, but if that were to happen it could actually lead to
the very compromise and degradation of the security systems you
are trying to put in place, is that correct?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, it is.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Baitman, you want to comment on that? You
come from the private sector. You are looking sort of at a
little different air level on these issues, looking at how CMS
and your own department are handling it. Are you comfortable
that we have strict protocols in place here, on this committee,
for example, such that your concern would be abated?
Mr. Baitman. I am not familiar with the protocols the
committee has.
Mr. Connolly. Ms. Fryer?
Ms. Fryer. Again, I am not familiar with the protocols.
Mr. Connolly. You are not familiar with our protocols. So,
Mr. Charest?
Mr. Charest. No, sir, I am not familiar with the protocols,
but I am concerned.
Mr. Connolly. Allegedly, we have asked an outside security
agency to look at your security measures. Are you familiar with
that? Do you know who the outside--because the Democrats, as
far as I know, were not informed as to who that entity was and
whether they have come to some kind of conclusion. Have you
been made--you were here seven hours, Mr. Baitman. Anyone talk
to you about that?
Mr. Baitman. I was unaware of that, actually.
Mr. Connolly. So were we. I thank you. My time is up.
Mr. Mica. [Presiding.] The gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr.
Lankford, is recognized.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Baitman, I want to follow up real quick on a statement
that you had made earlier that the chairman had also mentioned
about Ms. Fryer and Tony Trenkle had made statements or
recommendations to say that they were not comfortable giving
authority to operate based on security issues. You had said
that was not a red flag to you because someone else has
responsibility for that. Who is that other person who has
responsibility?
Mr. Baitman. Well, as I understand it, the Healthcare.gov
project was built across various parts of CMS, some of which
were not under Mr. Trenkle's leadership. They also had a CMS
official who was responsible for all operational security for
Healthcare.gov, and that person was on the ground and obviously
more closely focused on it. Ultimately, though, I thought it
was appropriate that Ms. Tavenner, as the administrator for
CMS, be the individual who accepted risk on behalf of CMS
because the project was large and being done across various
parts of CMS.
Mr. Lankford. As a leader that I have staff around me as
well, I gather the information from multiple staff, then have
to make the final decision. Do you know if Ms. Fryer's
recommendations and Tony Trenkle's statements about the
security is not ready and this is a high risk, was that given
to Ms. Tavenner before she made her decision?
Mr. Baitman. I actually don't know.
Mr. Lankford. Would you assume that that would be given to
her?
Mr. Baitman. I would assume she would be briefed, yes.
Mr. Lankford. Because it would be an issue to me to make a
decision and then to find out later that I have staff around me
that had recommended this was a bad issue, but that information
never landed on my desk because someone stopped it.
So you passed on the information, Ms. Fryer that Tony
Trenkle had given you to other folks, and it was their
responsibility then to pass it on to Ms. Tavenner, or who was
going to give that to her?
Mr. Baitman. Well, as I said, the project was run within
CMS, so I assume that the various parts of CMS who were running
the project were actually briefing Ms. Tavenner.
Mr. Lankford. Right. But you were the one on the phone with
them, getting the information saying this security is not
ready, we are at a high risk. Does that stop with you or do you
say, okay, someone--so that does not have a duty to be able to
report or somebody else is going to pick that up?
Mr. Baitman. So during that conversation they actually told
me that they were going to bring the decision for whether or
not the ATO would be signed to Ms. Tavenner.
Mr. Lankford. Who is the they there?
Mr. Baitman. Tony Trenkle, who was the CIO at the time, and
Teresa Fryer.
Mr. Lankford. Okay.
Ms. Fryer, were you part of that responsibility of
reporting that to Ms. Tavenner?
Ms. Fryer. No, I was not.
Mr. Lankford. Do you know how that was reported to her or
if it was?
Ms. Fryer. No, I don't know that.
Mr. Lankford. So you don't know if Tony Trenkle passed that
on as well.
Ms. Fryer. No, I don't.
Mr. Lankford. In October of this last year Secretary
Sebelius said, in an ideal world there would have been a lot
more testing, but we didn't have the luxury of that, and the
law said the go time was October the 1st. Before the committee,
then, CMS Chief Operating Officer Michelle Schneider was also
asked why October 1st was chosen as a launch date; she said,
I'm assuming it was in the law or the regulation.
Ms. Fryer, is it your understanding that October the 1st
was required by the law to be the launch date?
Ms. Fryer. No, I don't know that.
Mr. Lankford. Did anyone repeat back to you, no we have
security issues and concerns, but we have to go October the
1st, that is the law?
Ms. Fryer. No, they did not.
Mr. Lankford. Mr. Charest, were you aware of any provision
in the Affordable Care Act that required October the 1st as the
launch date?
Mr. Charest. No, sir.
Mr. Lankford. Anyone say to you we have to keep moving
because the law requires this?
Mr. Charest. No, sir. From my perspective, it was just a
date in a project plan.
Mr. Lankford. How about you, Mr. Baitman, did you have any
knowledge of the statute requiring October the 1st?
Mr. Baitman. I don't have any knowledge. When I joined HHS,
it was already sort of ordained that October 1st was the date.
Mr. Lankford. Do you know of any particular reason to say
we have security questions and issues, October the 1st, if that
is not in statute, if we have issues, maybe we should stall
this until we deal with some of the security issues and make
sure we are ready to go?
Mr. Baitman. Again, we work on a federated structure, so
CMS had direct knowledge of what the requirements were.
Mr. Lankford. Is there any possibility that there may be a
mistaken belief about the October the 1st date, that the
secretary states obviously in October that the law requires
this? Is it possible that the Administration was working on a
misbelief that the law required October the 1st?
Mr. Baitman. I can't speak for why other people had their
opinions of that.
Mr. Lankford. Mr. Baitman, you had testified you had
suggested a phased rollout after some beta testing. Was that
suggestion taken?
Mr. Baitman. It was a beta launch. No, that wasn't the
approach that was taken.
Mr. Lankford. Did you ever ask anyone why? I mean,
obviously, by mid-October, in quiet moments at your house,
surely you had some thought it probably would have been better
to do a phased launch of this thing. Do you have any idea why
that suggestion was ignored or delayed?
Mr. Baitman. At the meeting that you are referring to, CMS
indicated, and CMS was in the best position to know, that they
were confident the system would be ready for October 1st
launch.
Mr. Lankford. Confidence seems to be misplaced.
I yield back.
Mr. Mica. The gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Duckworth, is
recognized.
Ms. Duckworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I strongly believe that when my constituents are dealing
with the Government, the last thing they should be concerned
about is that their personal data is being compromised.
Information security should be a top priority for any
Government website, so I would like the panel to sort of bear
with me as we go through exactly what is in place, to make sure
that I have a better understanding, because we have sort of
talked about all different things.
Ms. Fryer, could you walk me through the security
precautions? You mentioned that there were many different
layers that are in place. Can you explain what those three
layers of protection are, and what procedures and processes are
used?
Ms. Fryer. Yes. So there is the operational security, the
day-to-day activities; there is code software reviews, that is
the operational marketplace security team that does those
activities; and they also have continuous monitoring, they have
a group that has continuous monitoring tools in place; and then
there is my group that is the oversight for CMS, and we also
have continuous monitoring tools in place, as well as
penetration testers that try to go in and hack into systems and
penetrate the systems. HHS also has tools insight into our
systems. So there is a layered protection of security for all
of our CMS systems.
Ms. Duckworth. So basically you are saying that it is not
just the team that reports to you, but there are other groups
of Government employees and contractors who oversee and conduct
day-to-day security activities, is that right?
Ms. Fryer. Yes. Yes, there are many business information
system security owners that have the day-to-day security
activities, as well as my office.
Ms. Duckworth. Are there systems in place, for example, at
CMS, to ensure that the code is security tested on an ongoing
basis, not just when it is first implemented, but on an ongoing
basis with secure code reviews and software assurance?
Ms. Fryer. Yes. Any time a change is made to a system, they
have to do code reviews, and there is a very strict change
management process that is followed before the change is put
into production.
Ms. Duckworth. And then I also understand that there is a
weekly, as you said on penetration protection, weekly scanning
and penetration testing of perimeter devices such as firewalls,
is that correct? Is that ongoing as well?
Ms. Fryer. Yes. So that is above and beyond best practices.
We do weekly scans of all the perimeter devices and all the
external web-facing servers that are related to marketplace.
Ms. Duckworth. So touching on what you are saying about the
best practices, are you confident that the security systems and
procedures that are in place are well within or not superior to
the best practices that are ongoing with similar types of
security that is needed for other websites?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, I do.
Ms. Duckworth. Mr. Baitman, how does that compare to
industry?
Mr. Baitman. I would say that practices in the Federal
Government generally exceed industry.
Ms. Duckworth. Generally exceeds industry? Thank you.
Have all of these layers of security, Ms. Fryer, been in
place since the website was launched in October?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, it has been.
Ms. Duckworth. And they are still in place and ongoing?
Ms. Fryer. Yes.
Ms. Duckworth. Does CMS have a security team dedicated to
ensuring that these multiple layers of protection are
overlapping and continue to be effective?
Ms. Fryer. Yes. That was part of the ATO memo. Myself, I am
on part of that team.
Ms. Duckworth. How often does that team meet, talk to one
another, review the procedures?
Ms. Fryer. On a weekly basis.
Ms. Duckworth. On a weekly basis. Thank you. Can you sort
of talk about how these multiple layers help to protect
confidential consumer information and how they interact? For
example, I signed up for healthcare reform and, by the way,
saved $60. I went from $295 a month for my healthcare plan to
$239 a month for the exact same plan, so I am pretty happy I
got a savings. But when I put all that information, how do I,
as a customer, know that I am protected? I know this is a very
broad question, but can you sort of sketch how those different
layers work with each other, say with my personal information
that I have entered?
Ms. Fryer. Well, there are different layers, again, so if
there are attackers coming in from the inside, we have many
protections to detect these attacks. As mentioned before, there
has been no successful attacks, but attacks are being made all
the time on the website, so we have these tools in place to
detect anomalies, all these tools. Even if one tool doesn't
pick it up, we have this layer of protection, so we have other
various tools in place to detect.
Ms. Duckworth. So you could, for example, if there is just
an unanticipated pattern that emerges or certain things that
are happening, you can actually identify, wait, something is
going on here that is unusual, we need to take a closer look at
it?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, we have tools that will pick up anomalies.
Mr. Mica. I thank the gentlelady.
Ms. Duckworth. Thank you.
Mr. Mica. I thank the witness.
Mr. Meadows, the gentleman from North Carolina.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to follow up on Ms. Duckworth's questioning there,
if I could, Mr. Charest. This question is to you. She went
through a long list of all the security that has been
implemented and you were very, it seemed like, caution in the
way that you said that there was no malicious attacks. Has
there been inadvertent personal information that has been
shared with someone else in this particular website?
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir, there has.
Mr. Meadows. There has. How many times has that happened,
personal information from someone else getting shared with an
inappropriate person?
Mr. Charest. I don't know the exact count, but in the early
stages of the launch there were a number, I think somewhere
less than 10. But there were some that were reported both in
the media and to us.
Mr. Meadows. All right, so somewhere less than 10. Now, it
is interesting that you wouldn't know the exact number, because
you are very emphatic that there had been zero malicious
attacks, but inadvertent disclosure you can't give us an exact
number.
Mr. Charest. Well, I, in fact, have the categories in front
of me here, sir, if you would like me to give you the numbers.
Mr. Meadows. Just the number.
Mr. Charest. Okay, no problem.
Mr. Meadows. So how many total disclosures of personal
information to other people have we had?
Mr. Charest. We classify these incidents by----
Mr. Meadows. Total numbers.
Mr. Charest. It would appear, from the numbers I have in
front of me, there are 13 category one, which is where we put
potential PII----
Mr. Meadows. Thirteen. Total numbers. Total numbers, 13.
Mr. Charest. That is what I have here, yes, sir.
Mr. Meadows. So there was no others. So it wasn't less than
10, it was more than 10.
Mr. Charest. Well, no, not necessarily, sir, because the 13
in the category don't always mean there was a disclosure. They
also could be exposure, but not disclosure.
Mr. Meadows. Exposure, but not disclosure.
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. Well, we will save that for another day,
because I think what the American people want is honesty and
transparency, and to hear you testify less than 10 and more
than 13. But more problematic for me is for you to lead this
group to say that there were no malicious intent, and yet
knowing full well that there has been disclosure. They just
want honesty and transparency.
Wouldn't you agree, Ms. Fryer, that that is important?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Meadows. Okay.
In that, you have testified before, so in your preparation
today to come before, have you met with attorneys to prep you
on your testimony?
Ms. Fryer. I have been briefed on what to expect.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. How long has that briefing taken place?
How much time did you spend in that prep? How many days?
Ms. Fryer. It was over a few days, couple hours each day.
Mr. Meadows. Okay, so how many hours does it take to be
briefed to tell the truth?
Ms. Fryer. It doesn't.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. So why would that have gone on? Have you
ever been told, well, we would prefer that you don't answer a
question that way by an attorney?
Ms. Fryer. No, sir.
Mr. Meadows. All right. Have you ever had your previous
testimony looked at and said, well, we wish you hadn't have
said that?
Ms. Fryer. No, sir.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So you believe that from an honesty
standpoint that you can tell the American people that their
private information will not be disclosed to a third party?
Ms. Fryer. As a result of the recent security controls
testing, yes.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. So the recent security you are talking
about in December, that security testing.
Ms. Fryer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Meadows. Now, we have been led by other testimony here
that the website and programming and modules continues today.
Is that correct?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Meadows. So how do you, based on a security analysis
done in December, assure that the modules that are being
written as we speak are secure?
Ms. Fryer. Because, again, there is the operational
security that the marketplace security team has in place every
time they do either--and it is done during the security
development life cycle of a system and any time change is made
to code they have all types of different security testing that
is done on a day-to-day basis.
Mr. Meadows. All right. But we will have additional
security risks that have to be assessed.
Ms. Fryer. No, that does not mean to say there is
additional security risk.
Mr. Meadows. Okay, when is the next independent security
assessment going to take place?
Ms. Fryer. We are requiring one every quarter.
Mr. Meadows. Okay, so we can expect one and you will submit
that to this committee?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. And when will the next one happen?
Ms. Fryer. We are scheduling that right now for the books,
which will happen in----
Mr. Mica. I thank the gentleman and the witness.
The gentlelady from California, distinguished gentlelady,
Ms. Speier.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Let me just say at the outset how delighted I am that the
committee recognizes the importance of protecting the security
of personally identifiable information in data systems and, as
such, is making it a focus, because I think that one of the
next hearings we should have is one on the breach that took
place at Target with 110 million Americans who were impacted,
and Neiman Marcus that was impacted as well, and I understand
there were a couple other retailers. So the potential for being
hacked is real, it happens in Fortune 100 companies, and we
should do our due diligence by making sure that efforts in the
commercial sector are being as secure as possible.
Having said that, let's focus on the testing that took
place, the most recent testing that took place. Ms. Fryer, when
you were here on December 17th, that testing was ongoing at the
time. My understanding is that it has been completed, is that
correct?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Speier. And since it has been completed, can you say
with certainty that it was completed in a stable environment,
that all security controls were successfully tested and that it
was a full end-to-end security test?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, it was a full comprehensive end-to-end
security test and it was completed in one stable environment.
Ms. Speier. All right. Having completed that, is it your
understanding as well, Dr. Charest, that it was completed under
those standards?
Mr. Charest. Yes, ma'am, Teresa related that to me.
Ms. Speier. So the purpose of this testing is to identify
vulnerabilities in an IT system so that they can be remediated.
Is that fair?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Speier. Does the fact that the SEA testing identifies
vulnerabilities mean the system is exceptionally risky?
Ms. Fryer. No. A security controls assessment is conducted
to discover vulnerabilities so they can be mitigated.
Ms. Speier. So just like Target needs to do these
assessments and determine if there are vulnerabilities, it is
appropriate for you to do that within the ACA.
Ms. Fryer. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Speier. Now, the December testing has been completed
and you have seen the results of that testing. I have a
question for all three of you.
Ms. Fryer, do you have any reason to believe that consumer
information submitted in the system is not secure at this time,
based on the testing?
Ms. Fryer. No, I did not.
Ms. Speier. Dr. Charest?
Mr. Charest. No, ma'am, I do not.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Baitman?
Mr. Baitman. No, I do not.
Ms. Speier. So this is like giving the system a clean bill
of health, is that correct?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Speier. Knowing full well that just like Target and
Neiman Marcus and any number of other companies that have been
hacked into, there are persons out there, around the world,
attempting to hack into systems. But at this point in time,
having done the testing, we can say with confidence that the
system is not subject to being breached, is that right?
Ms. Fryer. Well, there always is a chance for
vulnerabilities, but the testing was completed successfully, it
had good results, so we are confident that the risks have been
identified and they are being mitigated.
Ms. Speier. Now, CMS has been running the Medicare system
for decades, and I guess my question is has there ever been a
major data breach of that system?
Ms. Fryer. For the two years that I have been there, not
that I know of.
Ms. Speier. And how about the IRS data system?
Ms. Fryer. I can't answer that.
Ms. Speier. All right.
I have one more question. This committee passed a
bipartisan measure that is referred to as FITARA, which is the
Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act. It would
give CIOs much more authority in terms of hiring personnel and
being in control of their operation. Do you see that as
appropriate and helpful in doing your job? Mr. Baitman?
Mr. Baitman. I think that we would be well advised to look
at some of the challenges that we have not just with this
project, but other software projects the Federal Government has
done and identify solutions so that we do a better job of
managing IT going forward.
Ms. Speier. So are you suggesting that we should amend
FITARA and add to it? Are you familiar with FITARA?
Mr. Baitman. I am somewhat familiar with FITARA, but
getting into specifics I am not prepared to do right now.
Ms. Speier. Maybe you could do us a favor and review FITARA
and make any recommendations you think would be appropriate to
augment that bipartisan measure.
I yield back.
Chairman Issa. [Presiding.] Would the gentlelady yield?
Ms. Speier. I certainly will.
Chairman Issa. I think the gentlelady's question is a good
one, and perhaps the other witnesses could answer the question
of do they think that budget authority and a single point of
accountability would enhance these kinds of projects. Mr.
Baitman commented on that yesterday, so perhaps asked that way
your question could get a more illustrative answer.
Mr. Baitman. I certainly think that you get greater
accountability when you have one person who is clearly in
charge.
Chairman Issa. Ms. Fryer?
Ms. Fryer. Again, I agree with Mr. Baitman that it would
give greater authority if one person had budget authority, yes.
Mr. Charest. I also believe that to be true, and I believe
it would increase efficiency, reduce cost, and have a number of
other ancillary effects.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Thank you, Ms. Speier.
Mr. Bentivolio.
Mr. Bentivolio. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Fryer, Mr. Charest, Mr. Baitman, we are not here today
to examine whether the Healthcare.gov website is safe to use.
We have already established that the Healthcare.gov website was
certainly not safe to use on October 1st and is likely not safe
to use today either. While you claim the website meets, and
even exceeds, security industry standards and claims that no
breach of the website has occurred, contradictory evidence is
in abundance and is overwhelming. This evidence includes well-
documented examples of security problems, some systematic, of
extreme carelessness.
For example, an email disclosure of vulnerability was
identified that would allow an attacker to enumerate email
accounts for individuals. In another example, a user logged
into to the Healthcare.gov website and saw information from a
completely different person's profile. For another example,
security researchers discovered an open URL redirection bug,
which allows users to visit the website thinking they were
going to the legitimate Healthcare.gov website, but instead be
redirected to a malicious website that would completely hack
their computer. This was only fixed after it was discovered
when the website was online.
Ms. Fryer, you recommended denying an ATO, a necessary
Authority to Launch Healthcare.gov, correct?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bentivolio. If officials had accepted your
recommendation, would you have been prepared to suggest an
alternative date or would it have been an indefinite delay?
Ms. Fryer. Again, that wasn't my responsibility.
Mr. Bentivolio. Would you have recommended an alternative
date or would it have been an indefinite delay, yes or no?
Ms. Fryer. Again, that is not my responsibility. I can't
answer that.
Mr. Bentivolio. What would you have done had your
recommendation been accepted, if you had one? You are the IT
person. Would you recommend a delay or an alternative day?
Ms. Fryer. My responsibility is not to determine whether or
not to--when a system goes into operation, mine is, again, to
identify the risks and make sure that they are being mitigated.
Mr. Bentivolio. So you identify the risks, but you don't
make any recommendations?
Ms. Fryer. I brief the chief information officer on the
security risks, and there are many other risks that have to be
taken into consideration when a system is going operational.
Chairman Issa. Would the gentleman yield for a second?
Mr. Bentivolio. Yes.
Chairman Issa. I am not sure you were in the room, but 77
days after the launch Ms. Fryer did testify that she now has
confidence that the end-to-end that she would have asked for
and so on has been properly mitigated. So I think an answer to
your question to a certain extent is 77 days would have been
enough because it occurred.
Mr. Bentivolio. Thank you. Thank you.
Do you know whether Ms. Tavenner was informed of your
concerns and your recommendations on the security risks?
Ms. Fryer. I am sorry, sir, I didn't hear the question.
Mr. Bentivolio. Do you know whether Ms. Tavenner was
informed of your concerns and your recommendations?
Ms. Fryer. I don't know that.
Mr. Bentivolio. To your knowledge, what IT security expert
did Ms. Tavenner rely on to override your concerns on the risks
of----
Ms. Fryer. I can't answer that question.
Mr. Bentivolio. Do you know if she spoke with any IT
security experts prior to overruling your recommendations or--
--
Ms. Fryer. I don't.
Mr. Bentivolio. You don't know.
Ms. Fryer. No, I don't know.
Mr. Bentivolio. Thank you. That is all my questions.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman. We now go to the
gentlelady from New Mexico, Ms. Grisham.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to
thank the panel for being here. It is clear that we are all
concerned about securing the financial and health-related
private information on the website. Whether it was this
healthcare website or any other application by the Federal
Government, that is going to be one of our priority concerns
for our constituents, so I appreciate your attention and
willingness to engage directly in this hearing.
And like everyone, I think, I am happy that there haven't
been any significant or malicious security breaches to date, so
that we are not seeing a significant problem with the security
measures taken to date to protect that information for
consumers and users. And, I want to make sure that that is the
goal of this conversation, that we continue to do whatever
oversight and enhance those security tests and measures all of
the time, because every day those risks are greater because
people figure out better and more enhanced ways to get access
to that information; and given that I am from a State that has
a particularly high uninsured population, we are going to have
a high user end result, I hope, in the marketplaces and
exchanges. So I want to go just back to a couple things.
Ms. Fryer, it is my understanding that the Federal
Information Security Management Act defined the security
control standards for all Government information technology
security systems. Is the Healthcare.gov compliant with all the
standards set forth in FISMA?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, security testing was conducted in
accordance with FISMA.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. And are CMS and HHS implementing
additional controls or best practices beyond what is called for
in FISMA?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, ma'am. We are exceeding industry best
practices, as well as we have HIPAA controls in place.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. And that is important to me because
during our last hearing on Healthcare.gov it was clear that
there were inherent security risks in any electronic system, so
getting a sense that you are going beyond that and looking at
best practices is critical. Can you give me a sense of what
exactly you are doing to continually monitor and mitigate
security risks on the website, some examples?
Ms. Fryer. Again, we are keeping in place those additional
above and beyond the additional requirements of the weekly
scanning or continuous monitoring tools, the weekly scans of
the external web-facing marketplace servers, and----
Ms. Lujan Grisham. So you are going beyond the weekly
scans. That is what I am trying to get at. Give me a concrete
example of what in addition you are doing.
Ms. Fryer. Well, we are continuing those, those that are in
the mitigation plan, so we are continuing that. And then there
is the operational day-to-day security that is in place as well
by the other group.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. I appreciate that, and I would also
encourage you to lead in best practices and do everything in
your power to go back and describe that. It is certainly my
opinion, and I would guess the opinion of many more, that you
would do everything and enhance your mitigation plan to the
highest degree and lead that for the Country, given the
importance and the value of the information on the website.
Thank you.
Ms. Fryer. Yes, ma'am.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
There was no question pending, was there? Okay.
I want to inform everyone that there is a vote on the
floor. We are going to stay as long as we can. Mr. Baitman will
not be here, if, and, or when we reconvene. You have a hard
stop at 12 and we are clearly not going to be back in time for
that. So we are going to go as quickly as we can.
Mr. Jordan.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Fryer, the memo you wrote, but didn't send, dated
September 24th, 2013, you testified earlier that the reason you
didn't send it was because there were subsequent events that
happened that caused you not to think that it was necessary to
send, is that correct?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jordan. Why didn't you send it, though, the day you
wrote it? If things happened after the fact that tell you, oh,
I don't need to send it, on September 24th, when you wrote
this, you believed everything you wrote, correct?
Ms. Fryer. Yes. Yes. That was being prepared as a memo.
Usually an ATO package would go up to the chief information
officer, and that is a draft.
Mr. Jordan. All I am asking is on September 24th, the date
on the memo, when you wrote there is no confidence that
personal identifiable information will be protected, that is a
big pretty statement. Why didn't you send it that day?
Ms. Fryer. Because this was just trying to capture what was
already briefed on September----
Mr. Jordan. Something that important--again, you said it
was events that happened the next week that caused me not to
send it. But on that day you believed everything you wrote
here. These are big statements. Why not send it? Did someone
talk to you and tell you, hey, Teresa, don't send that memo?
Ms. Fryer. No, sir. A decision had been made to elevate to
Marilyn Tavenner.
Mr. Jordan. That doesn't change the fact that you were
going to send this to Mr. Trenkle, directly above you in the
chain of command. I just wonder why you didn't send it. If I
write all this stuff down, important stuff, and also based on
testimony we had at a previous hearing, you were the only one
who read the MITRE report prior to this memo. I would assume
that had a big impact on why you wrote the things you did. All
I am wondering is why you didn't send it. If I have this
information, I know this thing is not ready, I do this memo,
hard-hitting memo that says this thing isn't even close to
being secure, no end-to-end testing is done, and then I don't
send it.
Ms. Fryer. Because it was part of the ATO package that was
not going up to Mr. Trenkle.
Mr. Jordan. All right, let me change here a little bit. You
were interviewed a month ago by the committee, and the young
lady behind you, Ms. O'Connor, accompanied you in that
interview, is that correct?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jordan. And, Mr. Charest, you were interviewed last
week and Ms. O'Connor also accompanied you in that interview?
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir, that is correct.
Mr. Jordan. And, Mr. Baitman, you were interviewed two days
ago and Ms. O'Connor also accompanied you to that interview, is
that correct?
Mr. Baitman. That is correct.
Mr. Jordan. In the interviews we learned, Mr. Charest, you
said that there was a meeting on, I believe, September 10th,
where all the key leadership folks from Ms. Tavenner, Mr. Corr,
CMS and HHS were there, and after the meeting--you weren't at
that meeting, Mr. Charest, but Mr. Baitman was. After that
meeting, Mr. Baitman, you had a conversation, and here is the
transcript. You said, after the meeting he recommended a
delayed rollout. Your answer was, that's my recollection, yes.
A delayed rollout of Healthcare.gov? Your answer, that's my
recollection.
Now, two days ago, when we talked to Mr. Baitman, which I
wasn't in your interview, but I was in Mr. Baitman's interview,
Mr. Baitman said that was not accurate. Do you stand by the
statement you made to the committee staff one week ago?
Mr. Charest. Yes, I do.
Mr. Jordan. Okay, Mr. Baitman, he said that you said to
him, in a conversation after that meeting, you recommended not
rolling it out. Is that accurate?
Mr. Baitman. That is accurate. I am sorry, could you
rephrase that? I am sorry.
Mr. Jordan. You recommended not rolling out Healthcare.gov
on October 1st.
Mr. Baitman. No, that is not.
Mr. Jordan. So which one of you told the truth? Which one
is lying and which one is telling the truth? Mr. Charest said
you had a conversation--now, you have worked with Mr. Charest
for a while, Mr. Baitman?
Mr. Baitman. I have.
Mr. Jordan. Do you have a good working relationship?
Mr. Baitman. We have a great working relationship.
Mr. Jordan. Mr. Charest, is that accurate? You have worked
with Mr. Baitman obviously a while. Do you have a good working
relationship?
Mr. Charest. Yes, I do.
Mr. Jordan. Do you normally understand, when he
communicates to you, what he is saying?
Mr. Charest. Yes, I do, sir, but I----
Mr. Jordan. So your recollection was he recommended, that
Mr. Baitman recommended not rolling out Healthcare.gov. He is
saying that is not what happened at all in that conversation.
Mr. Charest. With all due respect, sir, that is not exactly
what I--my testimony, I was asked that question several times
to sort of clarify what I meant by delayed rollout, and what I
hope I made clear, and I would like to make clear here to you,
sir, is that I didn't know exactly what he meant. This
conversation took place, it was probably less than two minutes,
literally, and it was four months ago, and I didn't ask him the
details. To me, as an IT professional over 30 years, a delayed
rollout could have been a phased rollout, which is actually
what I was thinking it meant, but I didn't ask and he didn't
offer. I don't know what he meant and that is my recollection,
though.
Mr. Jordan. But the point is there was no delayed rollout.
Mr. Charest. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Jordan. You understand that was what he wanted to do?
Mr. Charest. I understand that he made a recommendation----
Mr. Jordan. You agreed with that, Ms. Fryer agreed with
that, and it wasn't done.
Mr. Charest. No, it wasn't done.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. Prior to coming today, did the three of
you sit down with Ms. O'Connor and talk about what was going to
take place at today's hearing, and discuss what kind of answers
you might give, what kind of questions you might receive?
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir, I did.
Mr. Jordan. Ms. Fryer?
Ms. Fryer. Yes.
Mr. Jordan. Mr. Baitman?
Mr. Baitman. Yes, I did.
Mr. Jordan. Oh, so you worked it out after you had this
disagreement. One said that you said delay, then you said there
wasn't. You sat down and talked this out?
Mr. Baitman. No, that isn't what happened.
Mr. Jordan. Okay.
Mr. Chairman, I see I am over time. I yield back.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now go to the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Cartwright.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to start off by giving Mr. Charest and Mr. Baitman a
chance to more fully respond. My colleague just basically said
one of the two of you was not telling the truth, and I want to
give you each a chance to fully talk about that.
Mr. Baitman. So let me begin. As I said earlier, at the
September 10th meeting there was a discussion topic about a
beta rollout. It was simply a discussion topic. I, after the
meeting, mentioned it to Kevin Charest. That meeting was four
months ago. I talk to Mr. Charest 10 times a day about various
things in an operational capacity. This wasn't a high priority
topic and I am sure that the words could have changed over
time.
Mr. Cartwright. I thank you for that.
Mr. Charest?
Mr. Charest. Yes, sir. Basically, I don't believe that what
I said is inconsistent with what I understand Mr. Baitman has
been saying, which was an alternative rollout schedule. There
are many different terms used in IT, and I may have just
processed it that way, but fundamentally we are saying the same
thing.
Mr. Cartwright. And my understanding is, just to be clear,
Mr. Baitman's recommendation had nothing to do with security,
is that correct, gentlemen?
Mr. Baitman. It simply had to do with my observation from
seeing how other companies have rolled out large, complex
systems to the public.
Mr. Cartwright. All right.
Now, Ms. Fryer, I didn't mean to leave you out. You are the
chief information security officer at CMS. In that capacity you
raised concerns in September about the status of security
testing for the website, is that right?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cartwright. And during your interview with committee
staff, you explained that in your roll as chief information
security officer your job is to make recommendations to your
boss, the chief information officer. At the time that was Tony
Trenkle, right?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cartwright. You explained to the committee staff that
your roll was not to make the final decision on whether to go
forward, am I correct in that?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Cartwright. The chief information officer, Mr. Trenkle,
was a career executive with decades of experience, is that
true?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cartwright. Did you have respect for Mr. Trenkle? Did
you value his experience and his expertise?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, I did.
Mr. Cartwright. You told us during your interview that
during the two years in your position Mr. Trenkle often
accepted your recommendations, but there were other instances
when he did not, and those were unrelated to the Healthcare.gov
website. Am I correct in that?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cartwright. Now, in this case, Mr. Trenkle decided to
recommend to Administrator Tavenner that she go forward with
the Authority to Operate, but that was only after strong
mitigation strategies were added to the ATO in order to
mitigate against the risks you identified. Sitting here today,
do you believe that you provided Mr. Trenkle with the
information necessary to enable him to make an informed
decision about moving forward?
Ms. Fryer. Yes. I provided him the risks that were
discovered during testing from a security perspective. And as
the chief information officer, he takes that in and there are
many other teams that provide other risks, there are business
risks, mission risks, and all that is taken into consideration
when a decision is made to put a system into operation.
Mr. Cartwright. You said during your interview that Mr.
Trenkle, in his capacity as chief information officer, had a
broader perspective on various risks for the federally
facilitated marketplace. So when he was making his evaluation,
you were one of several sources from which he was receiving
information, is that true?
Ms. Fryer. Yes, that is right.
Mr. Cartwright. Okay. Ultimately, Administrator Tavenner
signed the Authority to Operate based on her recommendation
from her chief information officer, Mr. Trenkle. So in your
view of the appropriate rules and authorities of various CMS
officials, do you believe Mr. Trenkle's actions complied with
FISMA?
Ms. Fryer. Again, he was the one responsible for whether or
not a system goes into operation. I can't answer or speculate
as to what path he took, but, you know.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, thank you. My time is up and I thank
all of you for coming today.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Now we go to Mr. Woodall. Mr. Woodall, we are very close on
time, so be as pithy as possible.
Mr. Woodall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, as we enter hour
three. My questions are primarily for Ms. Fryer and Dr.
Charest. I want to thank you both for your military service, as
well as your service.
I understand you, Dr. Charest, have spent some time in the
great State of Georgia over the years. We welcome you back. Any
time you want to come back, bring your big brain and your
pocketbook down there to spend with us.
Mr. Charest. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Woodall. I want to talk about a meeting that took place
back on September 23rd. I don't believe either of you all was
there. It was a meeting with Michelle Schneider and George
Linares and Tony Trenkle. You prepared a slide for that
presentation identifying some of the high risks that you had
found, Ms. Fryer, and I want to put a slide up on the wall. I
want to ask you to help me understand this. This is about
Authority to Connect agreements.
And what I want to look at is, from my reading of this
slide, and I want you all to help me with it, it says 17 States
did not have Authority to Connect agreements here on September
23rd, and the recommendation was to go ahead and allow these
States to have day one operation authority notwithstanding the
risks that are listed below; and those risks listed below
include things like, in most cases, one or more reviews of
security documentation have not been completed. In other words,
no review of security documentation has been completed. And
even more troubling, the third risk, CMS is accepting risk on
behalf of its Federal partners, the IRS, DHS, and SSA, which
could have legal implications in the event of a data breach.
Am I reading this slide correctly, to say that in many
cases no review of security had taken place, but it was the
decision of CMS to assume the risk to allow these 17 States to
connect on day one? Ms. Fryer?
Ms. Fryer. I can't speak to this slide; I did not have
input into this slide. But I do know that CMS did establish a
baseline of secure requirements that the States had to meet in
order to be granted an Authority to Connect by the chief
information officer.
Mr. Woodall. There was such an authority in place, but what
this slide says is in most cases not even one review had been
completed, and we are willing to waive that responsibility and
assume that risk for a period of 90 days. At least that is how
I am reading this slide. But you are saying, as chief
information security officer, you weren't involved in that
decision-making at all?
Ms. Fryer. No. Again, this was the marketplace security
team that was involved in the State-based security
requirements.
Mr. Woodall. Dr. Charest, is that something that you have
seen before? There is not one colleague out of 434 that has the
authority to accept risk on my behalf and on behalf of my
constituents. This seems incredibly unusual, CMS is accepting
risk on behalf of the IRS and the Department of Homeland
Security. Is this something that you have seen before? We have
talked about best practices a lot while we have been here. This
seems alarming to me. Am I misreading what I am seeing on this
slide?
Mr. Charest. Well, sir, what I can tell you is I have not
seen this other than it was shown to me during my transcribed
interview, but basically this is a PowerPoint presentation, so
when I look at that, I am assuming, and I would have to assume
it, that some discussion between CMS and those entities it is
indicating it is accepting risk for took place.
Mr. Woodall. Again, we have talked a lot about best
practices today. Is it best practices to, again, while formal
testing has not been completed, while no site visits have
occurred, and while, in most cases, not even one review of
security documentation has been completed and weaknesses are
not known, is it best practices to allow folks to connect to
CMS, HHS, IRS, and DHS, or was this an extraordinary exception;
and if we go back and review another 10 years of documentation
we are likely not to see anything else like this again? Can
you? Because you are the experts.
Mr. Charest. I have not seen it before, sir.
Mr. Woodall. Ms. Fryer?
Ms. Fryer. And, again, it is best practices, and I know CMS
had baseline secure requirements in place for the State. Again,
I can't speak to, you know----
Mr. Woodall. Now, Mr. Baitman, had you been in this
meeting, instead of Mr. Trenkle, at the time, would this have
raised red flags for you?
Mr. Baitman. Yes. I didn't have the background on this, so
I wouldn't be able to answer that. I can say that all decisions
involve some degree of risk, and there probably were
discussions, as Mr. Charest said, that mitigated that risk.
Mr. Woodall. I wish we had time to talk about whether
October 1 really was a legal deadline or whether it was just a
politically desirable deadline, and whether we needed to assume
those risks on behalf of the American people. But as you said
earlier, Mr. Baitman, we are going to do more of these rollouts
in the future, and whatever we can learn from this one will no
doubt make us better next time around. Thank you all for being
here.
Mr. Chaffetz. [Presiding.] I thank the gentleman. I now
recognize myself for five minutes as we wrap up.
Mr. Baitman, is it accurate that you didn't make a
recommendation of a limited launch of Healthcare.gov until
after you were aware of significant problems with the
development of Healthcare.gov and after you heard of concerns
with security testing?
Mr. Baitman. I made the recommendation--it wasn't a
recommendation, it was a discussion topic, on September 10th,
and I hadn't been directly involved. We have a federated
structure, so I wasn't directly informed of any specific issues
other than----
Mr. Chaffetz. Let me keep going. Mr. Baitman, do you, or
anybody, ever recall a time when an ATO was elevated to an
administrator of an agency because both the chief information
security officer and the chief information officer refused to
sign the ATO?
Mr. Baitman. I am not aware of any.
Mr. Chaffetz. Ms. Fryer?
Ms. Fryer. No, sir.
Mr. Chaffetz. Mr. Charest?
Mr. Charest. I am not aware either.
Mr. Chaffetz. Do any of you ever recall reviewing an ATO
that did not list a single specific security that was
identified by the security control assessment? Anybody ever
recall that?
Mr. Charest. I am sorry, sir, I am not sure I understand
the question.
Mr. Chaffetz. Security risk, I should say. Do any of you
ever recall reviewing an ATO that listed the main risk for
proceeding as a lack of complete security testing? Ms. Fryer?
Ms. Fryer. We do have systems that have indicated that the
security testing, there were issues raised during security
testing and it is a risk. Normally, it is----
Mr. Chaffetz. Any others that were launched without doing
the security risk assessment?
Ms. Fryer. No, sir.
Mr. Chaffetz. Let me ask you when it was launched, Ms.
Fryer, what percentage of the data transfer to the local
servers was done over a secure socket layer?
Ms. Fryer. I can't answer that question; I was not involved
in the operational day-to-day security and the details of that.
Mr. Chaffetz. But you are the chief security officer, are
you not? What percentage today of the data transfer is done
over a secure socket layer?
Ms. Fryer. Again, that is the operational. I am not
involved in the development and implementation of the----
Mr. Chaffetz. But you are in charge of the review of it,
correct?
Ms. Fryer. I am in charge of the review of the findings
during the security control assessment, the independent
security control assessments that are conducted, yes.
Mr. Chaffetz. Are any of you aware what percentage of the
data, when it goes from the computer to the server, is done
over a secure socket layer? None of you know the answer to that
question? How much of this data that is transferred is
encrypted?
Ms. Fryer. The data is encrypted. It is a requirement to be
encrypted.
Mr. Chaffetz. What percentage of the data is encrypted?
Ms. Fryer. It is encrypted.
Mr. Chaffetz. What percentage of it?
Ms. Fryer. It would be 100 percent of the data.
Mr. Chaffetz. But you just said you don't know what
percentage is done over an SSL.
Ms. Fryer. You are asking what percentage during testing.
Mr. Chaffetz. No. I want to know of the actual live site,
when somebody in Missouri signs up and they are sending data
information, is it all done over an SSL?
Ms. Fryer. They don't send the information over--it depends
on if it is a State-based marketplace or they access----
Mr. Chaffetz. If you are using Healthcare.gov, is that
information encrypted or not?
Ms. Fryer. Yes.
Mr. Chaffetz. What percentage of it?
Ms. Fryer. It is encrypted, it is 100 percent.
Mr. Chaffetz. Was it on day one?
Ms. Fryer. Yes. That was the requirement to be in place.
Mr. Chaffetz. But you don't know what percentage was done
over a secure socket layer, which is somewhat similar to saying
is it encrypted or not, and you said you didn't know.
Ms. Fryer. Again, I don't know the technology; I am not
involved in the operational day-to-day security. I have almost
200 FISMA systems in CMS. That is why we have information----
Mr. Chaffetz. So when I have questions about Java script
and how you encrypt some of that, you wouldn't know the answer
to that.
Ms. Fryer. I know the technical, I don't know of every
system in CMS. I don't know the technical----
Mr. Chaffetz. We are talking about Healthcare.gov. It is
probably the most visible--who does know the answer to that
question?
Ms. Fryer. The information systems security officer is the
group for the day-to-day development and implementation of
secured requirements for Healthcare.gov.
Mr. Chaffetz. It scares the living daylights out of me that
none of the three of you know the definitive answer about SSLs.
If anybody else cares to offer anything, we have a vote on the
floor. I am about to close this hearing. Does anybody else have
something to offer regarding that point? Listen, we need this
stuff to be encrypted, 100 percent of it, 100 percent of the
time.
I thank you all for your participation today. This hearing
is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:49 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


