- STATUS OF U.S. FOREIGN ASSISTANCE TO AFGHANISTAN IN ANTICIPATION OF THE U.S. TROOPS WITHDRAWAL

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STATUS OF U.S. FOREIGN ASSISTANCE TO AFGHANISTAN IN ANTICIPATION OF THE
U.S. TROOPS WITHDRAWAL

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SECURITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 13, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-97

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

87-460 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2014
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, JR., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         JACKIE SPEIER, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          MATTHEW A. CARTWRIGHT,
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina               Pennsylvania
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
DOC HASTINGS, Washington             ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 TONY CARDENAS, California
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              STEVEN A. HORSFORD, Nevada
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         Vacancy
KERRY L. BENTIVOLIO, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Stephen Castor, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on National Security

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
JOHN J. DUNCAN, JR., Tennessee           Ranking Minority Member
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           JACKIE SPEIER, California
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           PETER WELCH, Vermont
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
KERRY L. BENTIVOLIO, Michigan

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on March 13, 2014...................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Donald L. Sampler, Jr., Assistant to the Administrator and
Director, Office of Afghanistan and Pakistan Affairs, U.S.
Agency for International Development
Oral Statement...............................................     5
Written Statement............................................     9
Mr. Charles M. Johnson, Jr., Director, International Affairs and
Trade, U.S. Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    19
Written Statement............................................    21

STATUS OF U.S. FOREIGN ASSISTANCE TO AFGHANISTAN IN ANTICIPATION OF THE
U.S. TROOPS WITHDRAWAL

----------

Thursday, March 13, 2014,

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on National Security,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:31 p.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jason Chaffetz
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chaffetz, Lummis, Mica, Duncan,
Woodall, Tierney, Maloney, Speier, Welch, and Lujan Grisham.
Staff Present: Caitlin Carroll, Majority Press Secretary;
Linda Good, Majority Chief Clerk; Mitchell S. Kominsky,
Majority Counsel; Sarah Vance, Majority Assistant Clerk; Sang
H. Yi, Majority Professional Staff Member; Jaron Bourke,
Minority Director of Administration; Devon Hill, Minority
Research Assistant; Peter Kenny, Minority Counsel; and Julia
Krieger, Minority New Media Press Secretary.
Mr. Chaffetz. The committee will come to order.
I would like to begin this hearing by stating the Oversight
Committee mission statement: We exist to secure two fundamental
principles: first, Americans have a right to know that the
money Washington takes from them is well spent and, second,
Americans deserve an efficient, effective Government that works
for them. Our duty on the Oversight and Government Reform
Committee is to protect these rights.
Our solemn responsibility is to hold Government accountable
to taxpayers, because taxpayers have a right to know what they
get from their Government. We will work tirelessly in
partnership with citizen watchdogs to deliver the facts to the
American people and bring genuine reform to the Federal
bureaucracy. This is the mission of the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee.
Good afternoon. I would like to welcome everybody to this
hearing today, which is entitled, Status of U.S. Foreign
Assistance to Afghanistan in Anticipation of the U.S. Troops
Withdrawal.
I would like to welcome Ranking Member Tierney, members of
the subcommittee, and members that are joining us here today in
the audience.
Today's hearing is critical because Afghanistan is
consistently the leading recipient of U.S. foreign assistance.
This assistance continues, but our greatest contribution to the
future of Afghanistan has been the sacrifice of 1,795 U.S.
military personnel. In addition, 19,665 Americans have been
wounded in action since September 11th, 2001. We can never
forget them. We owe them so much gratitude for their sacrifice
for this Nation. There are countless others that have taken
time away from their families and their careers to serve on
behalf of the United States of America.
Since 2002, the United States' Government has appropriated
more than $102 billion for relief and reconstruction in
Afghanistan. That does not include the war fight. That does not
include our troops. That does not include the food for our
troops or the military equipment. This is for relief and
reconstruction. In recent years, the United States and other
donors have funded about 90 percent of Afghanistan's total
public expenditures. Of that 90 percent, the United States
contributed roughly 62 percent. The United States continues to
make substantial military and financial commitments in
Afghanistan. Meanwhile, Afghanistan is perhaps the most corrupt
nation on the face of the planet. We know this, it is not a
secret.
The challenge is in properly overseeing the assistance we
provide Afghanistan are already difficult in the current
environment with a United States military presence. For
example, onsite monitoring is often restricted by security
concerns. These challenges will only grow as U.S. troops leave
Afghanistan. I have traveled to Afghanistan several times with
the support the help, and the protection of the United States
military, which is drawing down its efforts.
The hearing will focus on this pivotal question: If we
can't sufficiently oversee the billions of dollars we are
spending now, should we continue spending billions with less
visibility, less oversight, less security? And yet you will
find through this hearing that we are actually going to be
spending more money than ever in Afghanistan, which I think
will be a surprise to most Americans.
At the same time, the national security and economic stakes
of our mission in Afghanistan are higher than ever. Therefore,
we must ensure our aid programs are properly monitored.
American taxpayers cannot afford to have their hard earned
dollars sent overseas only to find our aid efforts plagued by
waste, fraud, and abuse. Americans deserve better and so do our
international partners.
Ranking Member Tierney and I have held numerous bipartisan
subcommittee hearings addressing some of the worst cases of
waste, fraud, and abuse encumbering effective U.S. foreign
assistance in Afghanistan. The subcommittee, prior to my even
joining this committee, had been doing and working on this. The
subcommittee has investigated petroleum oil and lubricants
provided to the Afghan National Army by the United States
totaling nearly half a billion dollars. Meanwhile, the Defense
Department failed to properly maintain receipts for these
transactions, and the Department of Defense wants to given them
even more money.
We have also investigated Dawood Hospital, where the United
States provided more than $150 million in medical supplies in
just an 18 month period. Unfortunately theft, mismanagement,
and human suffering became rampant at Dawood. We still don't
have the proper accounting on that.
In 2012, a $1 billion bank scandal, one of the worst in
banking history, erupted at the Kabul Bank. We will talk more
about that later.
Corruption in Afghanistan is likely the biggest threat to
our ability to effectively administer foreign assistance. We
are now at a point where uncertainty of troop levels beyond
2014 in Afghanistan will hinder our ability to effectively
administer foreign aid. This Administration's failure to secure
a bilateral security agreement with the Afghan government means
that agencies like USAID are left guessing at how much onsite
monitoring of aid programs will be possible. But, again, we are
going to be spending more money, giving more money direct to
the Afghan government than ever before.
Yesterday, the Senate Armed Services Committee held a
hearing and heard from the Defense Department that because of
the absence of a signed bilateral security agreement,
Department of Defense will begin planning for various
contingencies in Afghanistan. Today I look forward to hearing
from USAID's contingency plans. We need to know that U.S.
foreign assistance to Afghanistan will be properly monitored
after the withdrawal of our troops.
In 2012, I held a subcommittee hearing assessing the
transition from a military-to a civilian-led mission in Iraq.
The transition in Iraq was an unprecedented mission for the
State Department and our diplomatic corps functioned without
the protections of a typical host nation. The USAID Inspector
General's Office testified that ``According to the USAID
mission, the security situation has hampered its ability to
monitor programs. Mission personnel are only occasionally able
to travel to the field for site visits.''
Afghanistan is likely to offer even greater challenges, and
I want us to learn from our experiences in Iraq. In that 2012
hearing, I asked the witnesses to think towards the future in
planning for the transition in Afghanistan. Today we are much
closer to that transition and I look forward to hearing from
our witness panel.
I would now like to recognize the gentleman from
Massachusetts, the ranking member, somebody who has poured an
awful lot of energy into this issue and understands it quite
well, Mr. Tierney, for his opening statement.
Mr. Tierney. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
the hearing. This is, as you mentioned, the third in a series
of hearings held by the full committee and the subcommittee on
national security in the 113th Congress and about the
challenges of administering and overseeing foreign aid in
Afghanistan. So today's hearing is going to focus on the
civilian side of development efforts in light of the planned
draw down of United States military forces.
Mr. Chairman, as you know, the vast majority of foreign
assistance in Afghanistan is not managed by USAID, but by the
Defense Department. Since 2002, the vast majority of that
money, $59 billion, is for the Defense Department's programs to
train, equip, and sustain the Afghanistan national security
forces. We have had a number of hearings on that in the past
and I believe that you agree with me that we are to do more
hearings on that as we go forward.
Even this year, when we plan to draw down many of our
troops, we still plan to spend more than four times as much on
Defense Department assistance programs than we will on civilian
assistance programs. USAID's share is still substantial,
however. Over $15 billion has been invested since 2002. We have
to ensure that in Afghanistan, as in other high-risk locations,
USAID is properly managing and accounting for how the taxpayer
dollars are being spent. This includes improving efforts to
collect data and monitor and evaluate program performance and
outcomes.
Assistant Administrator Sampler brings some significant
experience to the table on this, having lived in Kabul and
traveled to Afghanistan and Pakistan over 60 times, as I
understand. I look forward to Mr. Sample's testimony today on
what USAID is doing and what they can do to still keep its
personnel and its partners' personnel safe, and to ensure the
accountability of taxpayer funds in Afghanistan.
This subcommittee and the full committee have also taken a
closer look at the Administration's policy of providing
assistance directly to the Afghan government, which the
chairman just mentioned. A recent Special Inspector General for
Afghanistan Reconstruction Report raised serious concerns over
USAID's decision to move forward with direct assistance at
seven Afghan ministries, despite external audits identifying
many deficiencies at these ministries, deficiencies that have
not been corrected.
While I understand that USAID takes a different view of the
actual risk to taxpayer funds, it would be unfair to only focus
on this report today in the absence of our Inspector General
John Sopko. Nevertheless, I look forward to hearing more about
how USAID is ensuring that direct assistance in Afghanistan,
how it is protecting from waste, fraud, and abuse, especially
given the endemic corruption that exists in Afghanistan.
At our full committee hearing nearly one year ago,
Inspector General Sopko raised serious concerns that the draw
down of the United States military will limit the ability of
U.S. personnel to directly oversee projects both because of
security concerns and because movement can only be supported
within a one-hour round trip of any medical facility. This
could limit access to some reconstruction sites, including the
$75 million USAID-funded Kajaki dam project. Although the
inspector general is not here today, I look forward to hearing
whether the Government Accountability Office is experiencing
some of those same challenges to access.
Mr. Chairman, as you know, USAID operates in some of the
most challenging parts of the world, including Pakistan, Iraq,
and South Sudan, and, in these locations, USAID does not depend
on the United States military either for their personnel
security or to facilitate direct oversight of their projects.
We may want to hear some of how that works in those locations
and how it will be applied to this situation going forward.
There are currently 34,000 United States troops in
Afghanistan. By the end of this year, there will be 12,000 or
10,000 or perhaps 8,000 troops remaining to train and equip
missions, as well as limited counterterrorism operations. Yet,
conditions on the ground, and most prominently President
Karzai's refusal to sign the bilateral security agreement, has
led President Obama to recently ask our military to consider a
complete withdrawal by the end of the year.
I hope that today's hearing will be the beginning of
additional hearings focusing on the Administration's policy
regarding a continued troop presence, whether it should in fact
be a zero option or whether it should be 2, 4, 6, 8, 12 or
however many troops. One line of question will certainly be: If
the zero option, or close to it, is chosen, or if relatively
few troops are maintained in Afghanistan, will any portion of
them be utilized to ensure oversight of USAID programs? Are
they necessary or desirable for such tasks? What are the other
options to ensure safe oversight of USAID projects and
spending?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
I remind members that they have seven days to submit
opening statements for the record.
We are now going to recognize our first panel. Mr. Sampler
is the Assistant to the Administrator of the Office of
Afghanistan and Pakistan Affairs at the U.S. Agency for
International Development, often referred to as USAID. Mr.
Johnson is the Director of International Affairs and Trade at
the U.S. Government Accountability Office.
I want to thank both you gentlemen for your expertise, your
commitment to our Country and our Nation. I know you care
deeply about her and your expertise is appreciated here today.
We are going to ask some difficult questions but, again, don't
let there be any question about your personal patriotism, your
commitment to our Nation. This is a good back and forth with
the United States Congress and we appreciate your being here
today.
With that, we will now, pursuant to committee rules, all
witnesses need to be sworn before they testify, so if you will
please rise and raise your right hands. Do you solemnly swear
or affirm that the testimony you are about to give will be the
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth?
[Witnesses respond in the affirmative.]
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. You may be seated.
Let the record reflect that the witnesses both answered in
the affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, we would appreciate
you limiting your testimony to five minutes. But given that
there are two panel members and only one panel, feel free to
take a little bit of liberty with that. Just also know that
your entire written statement will be made part of the record.
With that, we will now recognize Mr. Sampler.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF DONALD L. SAMPLER, JR.

Mr. Sampler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your remarks, for
your welcome. Thank you both very much for allowing me the
opportunity to testify today and discuss the role of the U.S.
Agency for International Development in Afghanistan.
We understand that the fiscal reality that our Nation faces
at home means that resources available for Afghanistan will
decline. This is going to require tough decisions, prioritizing
investments so that we identify the ones with the greatest
potential for long-term sustainability. We are committed to
safeguarding taxpayer funds and to ensuring that the
development progress in Afghanistan is maintained and made
durable.
I have been working on and in Afghanistan, both in civilian
and military capacities, since 2002. In addition to having
worked with the Afghan Emergency Loya Jirga, the Constitutional
Loya Jirga, I have served as a representative of an
international NGO, I was the chief of staff of the UN
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, and I have been a civilian
representative of both the Departments of State and USAID. I
bring all these perspectives to my work and to my testimony
today.
After the fall of the Taliban regime, I saw firsthand an
Afghanistan that had been utterly destroyed by decades of war.
In 2002, Afghanistan was starting with literally nothing.
However, since that time positive developmental trends have
been truly remarkable and they strongly reflect areas of USAID
and U.S. Government interest and investment.
Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton recently said,
when woman succeed, the world succeeds. Well, in Afghanistan
today, there are over 3,000 women-owned businesses and
associations. Almost 20 percent of Afghans enrolling in higher
education or college are women, and women are active
participants in Afghan political processes.
On the UNDP Human Development Index, an important global
metric for professional professionals, Afghanistan made the
largest gains on a percentage basis of any country in the past
decade.
In 2002 there were less than 900,000 Afghan children in
school. Today there are almost 8 million Afghan children in
school, and 30 percent of those are girls.
With respect to health, one of the areas where we made the
most progress, life expectancy has increased from 42 years to
62 years in Afghanistan.
Maternal mortality rates have decreased by over 80 percent
and child mortality has decreased by 50 percent.
Again, in 2002, less than 6 percent of the Afghan
population had access to electricity. Today that number is
approximately 20 percent.
Finally, in 2002, there were no fixed telephone lines, and
if I wanted to make a call out of the country it required a
satellite phone. Today the combined phone networks cover 90
percent of the population of Afghanistan; 85 percent of the
women in Afghanistan have access to a cell phone; and the
telecommunications sector is Afghanistan's greatest source of
foreign direct investment, the largest remitter of taxes to the
government of Afghanistan, and the biggest listed employer,
providing over 100,000 jobs.
To assist the Afghans in securing these important gains and
to enable them to build on these gains, USAID is engaged with
the U.S. Interagency and with other donors to ensure that we
have a transition policy that is sound, and I am happy to talk
about that today. We are also focused on assuring that the
Afghan government remains accountable during the transition
process. At a senior officials meeting in Kabul last July, I
announced a U.S. incentive fund of $75 million. These funds
would be released to the Afghan government as they met specific
thresholds of progress in five key areas: elections,
subnational governance, human rights, public finance, and
economic growth. To date, we have released $30 million of the
$75 million, we have denied $30 million of the $75 million for
inadequate progress, and $15 million is still in play pending
Afghan performance.
USAID places high priority on ensuring that American
taxpayer dollars are used wisely, effectively, and only for
their intended purpose. In a post-2014 environment, it will
continue to be a difficult place to operate and we know that we
will face challenges in the delivery of development assistance.
Looking ahead, I believe the main challenges we face will be a
volatile and uncertain security situation, oversight and
monitoring of a complex and still robust portfolio, and the
Afghan capacity for governance at all levels and in all
sectors, which continues to grow. But, to be clear, USAID will
terminate or redesign programs if we determine that a
particular program cannot be adequately overseen or that it is
not making adequate progress.
One developmentally sound technique for building Afghan
capacity to sustain the gains we have made so far and to allow
the United States to transition out of our assistance program
over time is government-to-government, or direct, assistance.
USAID has a rigorous system of oversight for direct assistance
programming with the Afghan government. It is complicated;
different ministries have different strengths and weaknesses,
and different programs are funded in different ways. But, in
summation, there are a number of multiple levels of protection
that we use to identify and mitigate risk before we disburse
any funds: we may require the establishment of a non-comingle,
separate bank account for each project; we disburse funds only
after USAID has verified that a particular milestone has been
reached or after we have verified the accrued costs; we require
an annual audit by a USAID inspector general-approved external
audit firm; we will insist on substantial involvement in
ministerial procurement processes.
All direct assistance requires compliance with USAID
accountability and oversight procedures. This includes site
visits. If Afghan ministries fail to adhere to these measures,
the agreements are subject to immediate suspension or
termination.
In conclusion, let me say that USAID is always mindful of
the enormous sacrifices made by Americans, our allies, our
Afghan partners to build and secure a stable Afghanistan, and
we fully understand the need for constant vigilance,
particularly during this delicate transition period. Whether in
the military, as a government civilian, as an implementing
partner, I personally know the risks and sacrifices my brothers
and sisters in the services have made, and their families have
made as well, and I thank them also for their service.
We are under no illusions about the challenges, though,
that we continue to face in Afghanistan. Problems of limited
capacity and corruption certainly exist in Afghanistan, just as
they do in many of the other places where we operate, and they
will continue to be a challenge for us, as was noted. However,
these problems are not reasons to abandon our vital national
interests. Instead, they are reasons to redouble the care and
diligence of our efforts as we assist Afghanistan and as we
pursue U.S. national interests. It is an honor to be able to
share with you today a glimpse of what USAID is doing in that
regard, and I look forward to the conversation. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Sampler follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you, Mr. Sampler.
We now recognize Mr. Johnson for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHARLES M. JOHNSON, JR.

Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Chaffetz,
Ranking Member Tierney, members of the subcommittee, I am
pleased to be here today on behalf of the GAO to discuss three
issues related to USAID's efforts in Afghanistan that we
outlined in our most recent Afghanistan key issues and
contingency contracting reports. These issues are: the
continued need for oversight and accountability, the need for
continued monitoring and evaluation of projects, and the
importance of planning in advance for the withdrawal of combat
troops.
Before I delve into these issues, it is important to point
out that various factors, such as the security environment, the
prevalence of corruption, which Mr. Sampler pointed out, and
the limited capacity of the Afghanistan government, have
challenged U.S. efforts.
Now, with respect to oversight and accountability of funds,
we have found that USAID did not always conduct pre-award risk
assessments to identify and mitigate against risks of providing
direct assistance to Afghan ministries. While USAID took some
steps since our report to complete risk assessments, recent
inspector general reporting indicates that USAID may not have
mitigated for all identified risks.
We also reported that USAID generally rely on multilateral
organizations to ensure accountability over direct assistance
provided through the Afghan Reconstruction Trust Fund. However,
we found that USAID had not consistently complied with its risk
assessment policies in awarding funds to the trust fund. In
following up on our recommendation for action, we learned that
USAID did take steps later in awarding additional funds to the
Trust Fund to conduct pre-award risk assessments.
With respect to monitoring and evaluation, which we also
point out is a very important control that needs to be put in
place, while USAID has taken steps to improve the management of
its programs, various factors continue to challenge its ability
to monitor program effectiveness. These factors include
inconsistencies in USAID's application of its performance
management procedures, shortfalls in maintaining institutional
knowledge, and missed opportunities to enhance oversight and
management of contractors.
Concerning application of performance management
procedures, we previously noted that USAID did not always
follow its performance management procedures which, among other
things, call for USAID to collect, analyze, and interpret
performance data. While USAID took action in response to our
recommendation, once again results of recent oversight have
raised concerns about its continued efforts.
Concerning institutional knowledge, USAID has historically
faced obstacles in this area. Frequent staff turnovers have
made it more difficult for USAID to analyze and interpret
performance data. Further, according a recent USAID report, the
majority of the foreign service national staff in Afghanistan
have applied for special immigrant visas to the United States,
potentially leaving the agency at risk of losing key staff with
institutional knowledge.
Concerning oversight and management of contractors, we
recently reported that USAID had identified increasing
performance reviews as one of its highest priorities with
respect to performance reviews of their contractors. We also
reported that USAID had established a working group to, among
other things, develop a compendium of best practices and
lessons learned for monitoring projects in a non-permissive
environment. USAID, however, missed opportunities to leverage
institutional knowledge by not assessing if the mission level
policies and procedures should be considered agency-wide. In
response to our recommendation, USAID has noted that it will
create a working group to gather and share lessons learned.
Finally, with respect to planning for future development
efforts in Afghanistan, the USAID's ability to conduct mission
and monitor its projects in Afghanistan is likely to be
challenged by the planned withdrawal of combat troops.
Additionally, finalizing plans for the post-combat environment
is complicated by the absence of a signed bilateral security
agreement. As combat troops continue to withdraw from
Afghanistan, USAID's opportunities to directly monitor programs
in certain parts of Afghanistan may be challenged, given that
the military presence helped USAID gain access to less secure
areas. As such, USAID will need to plan for how it will
continue monitoring its projects in what is just as likely to
be and remain a non-permissive environment.
In closing, as the United States plans for the withdrawal
of combat troops and transition to a civilian-led presence, it
is important to have safeguards in place to help ensure
sustainment of our gains. This will require continued oversight
and accountability of U.S. funds, consistent application of
USAID's monitoring evaluation policies, planning for challenges
that are likely to result from the withdrawal of combat troops.
Undertaking these steps, we believe, may help to better ensure
accountability and could lessen the likelihood of waste, fraud,
and abuse.
Mr. Chairman, ranking member, members of the subcommittee,
once again I thank you for the opportunity to testify. This
concludes my opening statement. I would be happy to take any
questions for the record.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. Thank you both.
I now recognize myself for five minutes.
I want to start, Mr. Sampler, with my understanding is we
have about $20 billion that is yet to be disbursed in
Afghanistan. Yet, I am looking at this SIGAR report, this is
the Special Inspector General for Afghan Reconstruction. We
refer to it as SIGAR. Here is the concern. I have general
concerns overall about USAID's forward program. It is laudable
to set goals, but I really have deep concerns about this.
And let me just read part of this assessment that came out
in January of 2014. Ernst & Young and KPMG came in and did
assessments. All of the 16 ministries assessed ``were unable to
manage and account for funds unless they implemented
recommendations.'' There were 696 recommendations that were
made, and yet here I am finding that SIGAR found that USAID
required that ministries only implement 24 of the 333
recommended risk mitigation measures prior to receiving funds.
The report says, ``Although USAID-Afghanistan concluded in
each of the 7 risk reviews that the ministry was unable to
manage direct assistance funds without a risk mitigation
strategy in place and that the mission would not award direct
assistance to the ministry 'under normal circumstances', USAID-
Afghanistan signed the agreements with each of the reviewed
ministries to approve direct assistance programs.''
As the report points out, the U.S. Government has committed
to providing at least 50 percent of its developmental aid to
Afghanistan through on-budget assistance to the Afghan
government. We are talking about 50 percent of $20 billion. And
yet none of the ministries could even pass the basic test by
the outside groups that you cited in your opening statement as
coming in and doing the audit. Why are we doing this? That was
a question, yes.
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, thank you. We are in Afghanistan
because we were attacked from Afghanistan.
Mr. Chaffetz. No, no, no, no, no.
Mr. Sampler. We are not doing this because----
Mr. Chaffetz. Wait, wait, wait. We don't need the history
of why we are there.
Mr. Sampler. Right.
Mr. Chaffetz. The reality is we are there. We have invested
lives. Americans have given their lives. The last thing we want
to do is just abandon and forget. We have invested a lot there.
I am concerned about giving tens of billions of dollars to the
most corrupt foreign country that there is. This is the most
corrupt nation on the face of the planet and we are going to
give them tens of billions of dollars with less oversight than
ever. Why are we doing that?
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, let me just challenge the
question from the SIGAR report, if I may. It was an audit of
our audits. Our audits were found to be sound, as you noted.
They audited 13 ministries and it was a soup-to-nuts audit of
all the risks in all the ministries that we could identify.
Mr. Chaffetz. I believe it was 16 ministries, but go ahead.
Mr. Sampler. We are not working with all of those
ministries; we are working with 7. That was a deliberate
decision based on development needs, the needs of the
Government, and U.S. Government priorities. So in those 7
ministries we again identified every possible risk we could
through these audits, but we focused on projectized money. We
don't give money to the government of Afghanistan, we spend
money on projects with the government of Afghanistan, and that
is what is missing in the SIGAR audit, is a recognition that--
--
Mr. Chaffetz. There is no direct assistance, no on-budget
assistance? You are telling me there are no dollars going
direct to the Afghan government?
Mr. Sampler. There are some terms of art, Congressman, and
forgive me if this sounds bureaucratic. When we talk about
doing direct assistance, that is programs that we do with
ministries of the government of Afghanistan, and we control
every dime of that money. When we talk about doing on-budget
assistance, that is when, as Mr. Johnson referred to, we are
giving money to a multi-donor trust fund that is administered
by The World Bank; and within that trust fund there is a small
window of funds, called recurrent costs, which do go to the
government of Afghanistan to meet salaries. But every step of
that is still audited by international auditors that our
inspector general has approved.
So I refute the notion that we give money to the government
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Chaffetz. I just went through this with USAID, with the
Kabul Bank situation, nearly $1 billion in missing funds. When
I went to Afghanistan and sat in the room and I asked those
people how much of that is U.S. money, they said we have no
idea; when we just give it to the Afghan government, we have no
more accountability, it is hands off, we can't even tell you.
When I went to Afghanistan, I just asked for a simple
spreadsheet of the schools that we had helped. USAID couldn't
even provide me a spreadsheet of those. Now, later they
followed up and gave us some of those.
But you are telling me that there is no money, U.S.
taxpayer money going direct to the Afghan government?
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, there may be some that goes
through The World Bank multi-donor trust fund and through the
recurrent cost window----
Mr. Chaffetz. That is not the oversight that is happening
here. We are not giving all this money to The World Bank. That
is not how this is working.
Mr. Sampler. No, Congressman, most of our money is done in
direct assistance, and that is where USAID professionals work
with the ministries of the seven ministries I named on specific
programs. So most of it is projectized money. But you asked me
directly if we give money to the government of Afghanistan, and
the only way that could be interpreted as happening is if it is
done through the very carefully regulated World Bank multi-
donor trust fund.
Mr. Chaffetz. When it says in this report, ``SIGAR found
that USAID-Afghanistan has only required the ministries to
implement 24 of the 333 recommended risk-mitigation measures
prior to receiving funds,'' true or false?
Mr. Sampler. True, Congressman, but inaccurate. The
inaccuracy is we identified every possible weakness within
these ministries, but our projectized risk, the risk to a
particular project in the Ministry of Public Health, doesn't
require all those risks to be mitigated at once. The conditions
precedence, the things that we forced them to fix now, before
we give them money, are risks that are specific and immediate
to a particular project.
And I will note that we do address all the risks through a
completely separate technical assistance goal. Our goal was to
create ministries that do this themselves, and that is the
reason the direct assistance is a valuable tool. But our first
priority is safeguarding taxpayer resources, so we don't put
money into any of these ministries.
Mr. Chaffetz. I am way past my time.
I recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Tierney,
the ranking member.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson, does the Government Accountability Office have
staff on the ground in Afghanistan?
Mr. Johnson. Yes, we do.
Mr. Tierney. And how important is their presence to the
investigations of the programs and the policies in that
country?
Mr. Johnson. Their presence, which the Congress has
supported and we thank you for that support, has been extremely
valuable, it gives us the firsthand, realtime experience and
interaction with our colleagues who were there in the IG and
oversight community, as well as with the agencies that we do
oversight for you, whether it is DOD, State, and USAID. So
their presence has been extremely valuable.
Mr. Tierney. And how important is it that those individuals
have access to documents that they believe are relevant to
their investigations and audits?
Mr. Johnson. That is extremely important to our work, and
with respect to the work in Afghanistan we have had a pretty
good relationship with respect to our Afghanistan-related work.
Mr. Tierney. So how open would you say the United States
Agency of International Development has been to reviews of
those documents by the General Accountability Office?
Mr. Johnson. If the focus is on our Afghanistan oversight,
we have had pretty good interaction with the folks at the
mission with respect to our Afghanistan oversight.
Mr. Tierney. So you have been allowed to review the
documents, even documents that were marked sensitive, but
unclassified?
Mr. Johnson. In some cases, and with respect to
Afghanistan, that answer would be an affirmative answer.
Mr. Tierney. You have been able to do that.
Mr. Johnson. With respect to Afghanistan.
Mr. Tierney. And with respect to where have you not had
that kind of cooperation?
Mr. Johnson. I think it has been somewhat not an access
issue, but more so we have experienced some challenges in terms
of the processes we have had to go through to gain the timely
ability to review documents.
Mr. Tierney. Can you explain that to me?
Mr. Johnson. I guess basically there are some cases where
we have to have our staff come over to a reading room and other
areas to look at materials, and that has basically created more
of a strain on our resources and been somewhat more costly.
Mr. Tierney. So these are unclassified documents that your
staff has had to be brought over to a facility and the work is
done there?
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Tierney. And whose policy is that?
Mr. Johnson. This is actually within USAID's policy.
Mr. Tierney. And in practical terms how does that affect
the work that you are trying to do?
Mr. Johnson. Well, as I pointing out, most of the effect
has to do with a resource constraint. We see it as something
that creates an additional cost for our resources.
Mr. Tierney. Mr. Sample, I would be a little concerned if
those sets of policies are being used in any way at all for
abusive purposes. I understand that sometimes it is necessary
to have documents have some level of secrecy, but if you are
going to be marking things that are sensitive, but not
classified, it seems that there could be a better policy worked
out to allow access without causing such a strain on resources.
What do you say?
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, first, of course USAID does not
in any way want to hamper the work of GAO or your committee,
and it is our policy to share information that is required for
those duties. When we mark information sensitive, but
unclassified, we provide always, in camera, access to full,
unredacted documents, in every case, as far as I am aware.
Mr. Tierney. You just make them spend extra resources
getting over to take a look at them.
Mr. Sampler. The problem, Congressman, is that in the
generation of some of these documents, they include information
that is sensitive. The example I have used in Afghanistan is
some of the documents we created actually named members of
oversight bodies like your own in the government of Afghanistan
who are providing oversight and trying to prevent Afghan fraud,
waste, and abuse; and naming them in a public document would
put them literally at risk of their life, and that is sensitive
information. It is not classified because it doesn't do risk to
the United States' national interest, but it is sensitive.
Mr. Tierney. I don't think it is anybody's surprise who the
members of this panel are and that we are doing this kind of
work. I mean, I am concerned because when Mr. Sopko went over
there, it was working the same issue. He reported back that he
was coming into some of the same restrictions on that and that
when he asked for an explanation of it, he was told that
documents could be disclosed, except that they would be found
to be embarrassing.
Now, I don't think that you drafted the policy, for sure,
but you may be stuck with trying to implement it from time to
time. Have you come across any of those situations where things
were not disclosed primarily because they would just be
embarrassing if they were, as opposed to being so sensitive for
security reasons?
Mr. Sampler. No, Congressman, we would not hold documents
back and we have not, to my knowledge, redacted documents
because of that. The issue that you are describing with the
special inspector general may well have an impact, however, on
the next round of engagements with the government of
Afghanistan. They opened all their books to us in an
unprecedented level of access to do a collaborative assessment
of risk in their ministries expecting that those would be kept
internal to the U.S. Government.
They have since not been kept internal to the U.S.
Government. The reactions are to protect personal interests and
individuals, and in a couple cases to protect against the
revealing vulnerabilities in Afghan systems that would indeed
open them up to exactly the kind of exploitation that we are
trying to avoid and train them not to do.
Mr. Tierney. Well, I have some sympathy for the sensitivity
issue with respect to the Afghan officials, but I have no
sensitivity to them not opening their books fully in order for
us to review and audit whether or not they are spending the
money that the United States appropriates wisely. So obviously
there is a question of a balance there on that that we have to
strike on that basis, but I would like to see some effort be
made to lighten the burden on personnel that the General
Accountability Office and the inspector general have in getting
access to those documents so that it doesn't become onerous,
sort of a stepped-up effort to make sure there really is a
national security issue on sensitivity on that before any kind
of restriction is put on them at all.
Recently there was a proposal, USAID proposal to hire
photographers in Afghanistan, and the expressed purpose, I am
told, was ``to counter negative visual images coming from
Afghanistan with high-quality positive images.'' To the extent
possible, can you explain the reason behind that original
proposal?
Mr. Sampler. Certainly, Congressman. Our staff work is not
always as good as it should be before it is released to the
public. I will just be candid. If I had seen that, I would not
have released it to the public as it was written. The staff in
Afghanistan are passionate about the work that they do, and by
the time newspaper reports in Washington get put up on the
Internet and go back to Kabul, the real experience our staff
have on the ground with what is reported in the international
media just doesn't sync. They have a cognitive dissonance
between what they are doing and what they see with their own
eyes and then what they see reported in the international
press.
Now, I personally push aggressively, from my time in
private practice, to encourage every staff member to collect
stories and pictures and opportunities to talk about and
demonstrate the effects of the good work that is being done,
but the quality of what we collect ourselves is not that good;
our cell phone photographs and our selfies that are taken in
the field don't tell the story adequately well. So the intent
of this was merely to capture positive news stories in
Afghanistan that we know are there and make them available for
people who wish to see them. It was not an attempt to
propagandize, it was not an attempt to gain or to counter
negative stories. It was, though, an attempt, and in my opinion
a poorly executed, but well intended attempt, to tell the good
news stories of the work that USAID, the U.S. Government, and,
indeed, all the donors are doing in Afghanistan.
Mr. Tierney. Well, when you use an expression like
``counter negative visual images,'' it sort of flows against
what you are trying to tell us here on that, so it was at least
a most unfortunate use of language, if nothing else. I assume
that now that that project has been cancelled and there has
been some attention brought to the matter, it is a lesson
learned for folks. I think most of us are never happy with the
press and the visual and verbal images that they project when
they fly by and write a story and go off into the sunset, but I
don't think it gives us license to try and create our own
stories on that.
Mr. Sampler. No, I agree, Congressman.
Mr. Tierney. Appreciate your remarks. Thank you.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
We now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Mica, for
five minutes.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A couple of things. Let me go first to Mr. Sampler. Got
this amount, $102 billion U.S. assistance in aid, non-military,
since 2002, is it? Is that correct?
Mr. Sampler. It is, Congressman, depending on how you parse
the money. As was previously noted, a large percentage, over
half of that was, in fact, used for development and assistance
to the military.
Mr. Mica. How much is their annual budget? I have $7.5
billion. That is the federal budget for Afghanistan?
Mr. Sampler. I think that is right, but I can't confirm
that.
Mr. Mica. And my calculation is that we have been pouring
in an average of about $10 billion in economic aid, not
counting military aid. Is that a ballpark figure?
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, I am not sure what you asked, I
am sorry.
Mr. Mica. Well, it is about $10 billion in economic aid a
year over that period, maybe 9 or something.
Mr. Sampler. I am sorry, development assistance, yes.
Mr. Mica. On average. So that my point is that the average
aid, non-military, exceeds their annual budget. That would be
correct. It has to be more than the $7.5.
Now, the chairman cited that we had a hearing here with the
special inspector general and he sat right in that chair. I
almost fell of my chair when he said there is $20 billion right
now in economic aid that the Afghans have neither the capacity
to absorb or ability to spend or steal, and when I got to
question him a second time I said did I hear you say capacity
to spend or steal, and I think he confirmed that was the case.
Do you believe that also to be the case?
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, we are working aggressively to
increase their capacity to spend that money and decrease their
capacity to steal it.
Mr. Mica. But his review was quite critical, that the level
of corruption is extremely high. Now, you go after people who
misuse your money, USAID money. I guess you have administered
about 47 percent of that. Does that include the money going
through NGOs or is the 53 percent given to other international
organizations?
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, some goes through local and
international NGOs, and our money is aggressively pursued and
overseen.
Mr. Mica. Has there been any case in which the United
States has pursued people who have misused our dollars that you
could site?
Mr. Sampler. There have been programs that we shut down
because they were not performing.
Mr. Mica. Have we had the ability--it is within another
jurisdiction--to go after them, or have the Afghanis prosecuted
anyone for corruption, fraud, or abuse of that aid?
Mr. Sampler. The first question, I don't know the answer to
that. I don't know if we have actually----
Mr. Mica. Can you provide it to the committee?
Mr. Sampler. We can.
Mr. Mica. Okay.
Mr. Sampler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Mica. To your knowledge, has anyone been prosecuted for
misusing U.S. dollars?
Mr. Sampler. In Afghanistan?
Mr. Mica. Yes.
Mr. Sampler. We actually arrested a USAID staff member in
Afghanistan who our own inspector general had investigated----
Mr. Mica. So you can testify that some of our people have
done wrong. Any Afghanis or any other folks that we know of
that we have gone after? It sounds like we have lost billions
to corruption as high as the President's office and family,
and, again, when I went over there, Mr. Chaffetz had been over
there and cited that, I remember pointing out, I went to a
forward operating position in one of the villages and the
troops pointed out, see that school over there, we constructed
it? That is the village joke because we paid five or ten times
what it should cost to build that. Are you aware that that kind
of misuse of our hard-earned taxpayer dollars has gone on,
continues to go on?
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, let me answer your first point
first, about billions of dollars in corruption. I will state
categorically USAID has not lost billions of dollars to
corruption in Afghanistan. To your point of a specific school
in a specific----
Mr. Mica. Well, then it will be to overpayment and misuse,
waste.
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, I cannot honestly categorically
say there have not been overpayments. Doing reconstruction and
development in a war zone is a challenge. Our guidance, our
rules don't allow for it. When we find it, we pursue it.
Mr. Mica. If I wanted to stop the aid, what do I have to go
through, which budget, would that be State? Most of this AID
money is coming through the State.
Mr. Sampler. From the Foreign Operation, yes, Congressman.
Mr. Mica. So that is where I have to target it.
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, I am not certain of the process--
--
Mr. Mica. Well, I want you to help me because I want to cut
us off. You may not be inclined to cooperate other than
providing me with assurance that if I cut it off, there will be
able to stop some of the waste and abuse.
My time is up, but I have lots more questions, Mr.
Chairman, I would like to submit and get follow up responses,
and I yield back.
Mr. Chaffetz. The gentleman yields back.
All members' questions within the time frame will be
submitted, and we would appreciate both of you, Mr. Johnson and
Mr. Sampler, to help us, in a timely way, getting answers to
those questions.
Duly noted for Mr. Mica.
We will now recognize the gentlewoman from California, Ms.
Speier, for five minutes.
Ms. Speier. I believe Mr. Welch is next.
Mr. Chaffetz. Mr. Welch, my apologies. You are now
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Welch. That is okay. Thank you very much.
I agree with the statement of Mr. Chaffetz, your opening
statement, and Mr. Tierney, your opening statement. I really
appreciate the fact that you are having this hearing at this
time, and I think the whole committee does; it is really
refreshing for me to be part of a constructive oversight
operation.
You know, you are here, but we have a problem that you
didn't cause; to a significant degree, Congress has been
complicit in this. We have a situation now in Afghanistan
where, obviously, it is in our interest for them to maintain
the gains that have been made. It is in our interest for
Afghanistan to have maximum stability.
But having said those are our interests, does it mean that
if we continue pumping money into a country that has
institutionalized corruption, weak institutions, and a revenue
system that is basically non-existent, we can have any
confidence whatsoever that that money will achieve the goals of
maintaining gains or stability? I mean, that is really my
question. I would not have a problem sending resources to
Afghanistan if I had the slightest bit of confidence that it
would actually work.
And you have laid out a number of the steps that you have
tried to take in order to maintain some accountability and
transparency, but there is, it seems to me, a problem, and that
is no matter what steps you take, no matter how much you try to
stay ahead of the game, if you have a government that will not
even establish a revenue system, that basically says, hey, 3
percent of our revenue will come from what we collect and 97
percent will come from foreign aid, and then that foreign aid,
as I think everybody knows, has been used basically as a source
of funding the private lives and an institutionalized system of
corruption, rather than building up institutions, I think it
makes it hard on both sides of the aisle to be confident that,
even if we share the goal that you are trying to achieve,
sending the money is going to get the job done.
So my question is this: Given that skepticism, which I
think is widely shared, what are some specific concrete things
that we could do that are easy to understand, easy to monitor,
that would guarantee that the money delivered was not stolen?
That is number one. Number two, should there be some
preconditions like, for instance, that the Afghanistan
government establishes a revenue system whereby they have some
skin in the game before we are just sending checks that we are
not confident are going to be used?
So that is kind of a long question, but I think it states
the dilemma that we are in. Start with you, Mr. Sampler.
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, I appreciate your skepticism. I
make it a point, once a month, to try and get outside the
Beltway and talk to business organizations, and I get exactly
the same skepticism from ordinary Americans; and I think it is
important that we be reminded that the people providing us
these resources are skeptical.
The first point I will make in terms of assuring success is
that the money we have invested thus far has produced
spectacular development returns. And I use those words
advisedly. They truly are, in the realm of development,
spectacular returns; in the area of health, education,
infrastructure, and even in the area of building governance.
In 2002 there was not an intact building anywhere in Kabul.
There were no ministries in 2002. Next month, in less than 30
days, we will have an election in Afghanistan where a
democratically elected government will pass the reins of power
to another democratically elected administration, we hope.
I think you are right to look for preconditions. I think,
at this point in time, this government is in less than an
advantageous position to impose them. But I know from working
with the ministers, the technocrats who have been selected to
lead the government, that they do understand both the
skepticism in the parliaments and in the populations of the
donor countries, and the requirement that they begin to show
that they do have skin in the game and that they are interested
in weaning themselves off of donor dependency.
With respect to specific measures, I wish I could say that
there are simple things that we can do; and there are some, but
they get very complicated quickly as we begin to explain them.
If this were particularly risk-free and particularly easy and
direct to do, I would expect us to pass this to the private
sector. That is what they do. What we do is work in situations
where the risks cannot always be eliminated.
But you asked for specific things. With respect to
projectizing money, that is probably the principal way we
assure that the admittedly corrupt government of Afghanistan
does not, in turn, corrupt our programs. We projectize money;
we do not give money to the government. We control the bank
accounts. In these projects, we insist that they set up a
separate, non-comingled bank account that USAID has control of
and oversight over.
If the money is being paid out to a ministry as they
achieve a milestone, then we verify the achievement of that
milestone, and we do it through various and multiple data
collection methods. It maybe technological, through satellite
imagery; it may be crowd sourcing, where we talk to the
recipients of the program; it may be self-reporting from the
government or self-reporting from a partner. But we take
multiple inputs and we have a unit that has been created at the
embassy, called the Institutional Support Unit, that analyzes
this data and renders a very dry and a very detached
perspective of is this data collection acceptable and can we
say they have met the milestone. If we can't, we don't pay. If
they meet the milestone, we do.
Separately, we may pay cost accruals, where they turn in
receipts. But, again, we validate those receipts through
multiple external sources.
So there is a number, and I would argue an adequate number,
of different kinds of mechanisms, counters and checks and
balances in place. They haven't been reported in the special
inspector general reports, but they are there, and hopefully a
future inspector general report will examine those as well.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
I thank the gentleman.
To suggest that they are trying to wean themself off of
foreign assistance defies logic. They are not doing anything
like that, and we are spending more money there than ever. We
are increasing the spending there, we are not decreasing it.
Why would they do it? Why would they wean themselves off of
this money when we just give it to them for free? That is a
ridiculous assertion and you should be ashamed for making that
comment.
We now recognize the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Duncan,
for five minutes.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
don't have any questions, but I do want to make a statement. I
have no criticism of Mr. Sampler or the Agency for
International Development, because I am sure they are doing the
best they can with the assignment they have been given. But I
will criticize the policy, because I think it is totally crazy
what we are doing over there in regard to particularly the
amount of money that we are spending.
This is my 26th year in the Congress. When I first came
here, our national debt was less than $3 trillion. I thought
that was terrible. But we have lost sight up here of how much
money a trillion dollars is. We can't even comprehend anything
like that; yet now we are over $17 trillion in debt and they
say we are going to double that in another eight or nine years.
Yet, we are sending all this money down a rat hole in
Afghanistan.
I have been given several articles here, one from the
Huffington Post, that says, as Afghanistan draw down looms,
inspector general warns of graft, and it says he is watching
the country slip away and he is quoted as saying, every time I
visit, I am told by people that we are succeeding, says John
Sopko; and he has been here to testify in front of us several
times. I am not an expert on war fighting, but I know I can see
less of the country every time I go because of security
problems.
Then there is an article from some publication called The
Interpreter that says, Foreign Aid: Is Afghanistan a Welfare
State? Well, I voted for the go to war in Afghanistan, but I
sure didn't vote for a forever war or a permanent war, or to
turn Afghanistan into a welfare state, and that is what we have
done. This is a country that had a GDP of $21 billion before we
went in there, and now, according to the World Affairs Journal,
there is an article here that says, Money Pit: The Monstrous
Failure of U.S. Aid to Afghanistan. And it says in this
article, it says, in a recent quarterly report, the U.S.
inspector general for Afghanistan reconstruction said that when
security for aid workers is figured in, the total amount of
non-military funds Washington has appropriated since 2002 is
approximately $100 billion.
You know, it is unbelievable what we have spent militarily,
but $100 billion. And that was the figure last July. And it
says, since then, Congress has appropriated another $16.5
billion for reconstruction, and it says in this article, it
says, What has all this spending accomplished? ``The short
answer is not so much,'' said Masood Fayvar, a senior Afghan
journalist. And it says, or as the International Crisis Group
put it, ``Despite billions of dollars in aid, state
institutions remain fragile and unable to provide good
governance, deliver basic services to the majority of the
population, or guarantee human security.'' Lastly, Heather Barr
of Human Rights Watch, a long-time representative in
Afghanistan, said, Afghanistan in many ways is sort of a
perfect case study of how not to give aid.
You know, when we are borrowing 42 percent, or whatever it
is, of every penny that we spend, it is just ridiculous to
think that we have spent this much money over there. Our
Constitution doesn't give us the authority or the right to run
another country and do everything imaginable for them. I mean,
I am for trade and tourism and cultural educational exchanges
and helping out to a very limited extent during humanitarian
crises, but I will say again it is just ridiculous. It is just
crazy for us to spend this much money that we don't have,
because it is long past the time when we need to start putting
our own Country and our own people first once again, and stop
trying to do all this that we are doing over in Afghanistan.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. Appreciate that.
We will now recognize the gentlewoman from California, Ms.
Speier, for five minutes.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
And to Mr. Sampler and Mr. Johnson, thank you both for your
service to our Country and for the leadership that you have
shown.
I think what you are feeling here on this dais is that we
believe that USAID has a purpose, and around the world, when we
create this soft money to go into countries and to help people
build their infrastructure and their economic prowess, we do it
expecting that it is going to work. We spent a lot of money in
Iraq, maybe not as much as we spent in Afghanistan, and then
they kicked us out. And, Mr. Sampler, you would agree that
money is basically down the tubes, right?
Mr. Sampler. No, ma'am, not categorically I wouldn't. I
mean, the development good that was done in Afghanistan is a
lasting good; the children that were fed, schools that were
built. So development money is development money. So I don't
categorically agree that that money is lost because of a
political schism between us and Iraq. The development good that
we did in Iraq has lasting effects. I am not a specialist, I
haven't done Iraq, but, in general, I don't believe that just
because we are not still there doesn't mean that the good we
did was lost.
Ms. Speier. How much money did we spend on this spin
doctor?
Mr. Sampler. I am sorry, ma'am, I don't understand.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Tierney had queried you about the position
that was created.
Mr. Sampler. We never hired that position.
Ms. Speier. Well, how much were you slated to spend on it?
Mr. Sampler. I don't know the answer to that.
Ms. Speier. Could you find out and return that information
to the committee so we know what the priority was there?
Mr. Sampler. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Speier. In 2010, President Karzai said we could no
longer rely on contractors to provide security for our convoys
and the people that we had there, and that we had to rely on
the Afghan Public Protection Force. Now President Karzai is
reporting that he is disbanding the APPF. So I think we are all
very concerned up here that we not have another Benghazi, that
we don't lose members who are providing services for USAID or
from the State Department.
How are we providing security for our facilities and our
personnel there?
Mr. Sampler. Yes, ma'am. No one shares your concern about
the safety of our staff more than I do. A point of fact,
though, a clarification. APPF, as you noted, was decried by
President Karzai in 2010. APPF, however, does not provide
security for diplomatic enclaves. So U.S. Government direct
hires, my staff and the State Department staff----
Ms. Speier. All right, let's talk about the people that
aren't your staff.
Mr. Sampler. Okay. Partners, Medicins Sans Frontieres, for-
profit partners who work for us in Afghanistan, if they wish to
have armed guards, they must be hired through APPF by Afghan
law. At the time of APPF's creation, only about 20 percent of
our partners actually used armed guards. So 20 percent of our
partners were required to enter contractual agreements with the
state-owned enterprise known as APPF for their guards.
Ms. Speier. All right, I already said that. I want to get
to your answer. What is happening now that Karzai is disbanding
APPF?
Mr. Sampler. Yes, ma'am. It is an internal Afghan
government discussion, it is ongoing. The most recent
diplomatic engagement with Minister of Interior Daudzai, he
assured us that there would be no interruption of services
being provided by APPF to our partners. He provided static
security and convoy security, the latter primarily for the
military, but Daudzai made a very clear statement to senior
U.S. Government officials, because we asked him very pointedly
these questions, and he said there would not be an interruption
of service.
Ms. Speier. Well, if the APPF is being disbanded, who is
going to provide the security?
Mr. Sampler. Again, the context is that Afghanistan is
facing a presidential election in less than a month. There is a
fair amount of confusion inside the Afghan government about
what they are going to do, which is why we went to the minister
for his assurance. I think there is an expectation on the part
of some that APPF will be absorbed back into the Ministry of
Interior and to the Afghan Uniform Police Service----
Ms. Speier. So we don't know, but we are relying on a
minister within the government, who may or may not be there
after the election.
Mr. Sampler. Ma'am, in all candor, in most countries that
is all we have.
Ms. Speier. And maybe you can't do more than that. But I
just want a straight answer. I think the committee deserves a
straight answer, and we need to have our eyes wide open in
terms of what kind of protection or lack of protection is there
for those who are what we are engaged in having us provide
assistance to the Afghan people.
You said that there are no funds that go directly to the
government and that you control these funds. So, if I
understand you correctly, you have money that is going to an
NGO or someone providing services who is a for-profit, you put
the money in a bank, a central bank in Afghanistan, and
withdrawals are only made by you, is that correct?
Mr. Sampler. The withdrawals are authorized by USAID, yes,
ma'am.
Ms. Speier. Well, do you make an authorization of $20
million or $4,000 because that is what the invoice is for?
Mr. Sampler. It depends on the program, ma'am. In every
case we are either paying for reaching a milestone, in which
case we externally validate that they reached the milestone and
then we pay them what we agreed for that, or we are paying for
the accrual of expenses, in which case they submitted batches
of receipts and we, in turn, audit the receipts and externally
validate that the receipts are good. But in either case we
validate what we are paying for before we pay it, and then we
validate that the check actually went to the person or the
organization that performed the services.
Ms. Speier. And how do you validate that?
Mr. Sampler. We ask them.
Ms. Speier. So you call them up on the phone and say did
you actually get this check?
Mr. Sampler. We can in some cases. There are different ways
that we can do that, but, yes, ma'am, most of the NGOs that do
this work, in public health, for example, are NGOs that are
known to us. We have been in Afghanistan now for a dozen years
and some of these NGOs have been there for 40 or 50 years. So
when the Ministry of Public Health, with our oversight and
permission, engages a particular NGO to do a health clinic, we
know the people that run that clinic and we know that NGO, and
we are able to ask the clinic did you get the resources, did
you get the $12,627 that you asked for.
Ms. Speier. All right.
Mr. Chairman, my time has expired, but I still have an
abiding question as to how a billion dollars in funds at the
Kabul Bank got distributed to a group of 18 individuals and we
don't know why or how, and we are presuming this money was not
U.S. money, which is what I guess everyone is presuming. I
yield back.
Mr. Chaffetz. And I think the point there, if the
gentlewoman would yield, is that there was a significant amount
of U.S. money. Part of this went to Karzai's brother. He is
listed as one of the people taking this money. And the excuse
that we get from USAID is, well, once we give it to the
government, it is hands off, we don't get to see it anymore;
that is their business, not our business. And there have been
external reports done on this. This is one of those big
concerns.
And I would point also the gentlewoman back in September
there was a criticism from the SIGAR focused on a $236 million
USAID program called Partnership Contracts for Health. In
fairness, USAID denied that they were giving money directly to
the government, but SIGAR said that there was a--I don't want
to put words in their mouth, but it obviously caused them great
concern. So this is why we have a special inspector general;
they get to go in and be objective, and they don't come back
with glowing reports.
Let me recognize the gentlewoman from Wyoming, who has been
waiting patiently, Mrs. Lummis, and we will go from there.
Thank you.
Mrs. Lummis. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sampler, I want to go back to a response you made to
Mr. Mica and ask you to elaborate a little. What did you mean
by increasing the Afghan capacity to spend our money?
Mr. Sampler. Yes, ma'am. There are multiple ways to achieve
development objectives in Afghanistan. If it is, again, health,
to use that example, if the goal is to innoculate children, we
can do this directly through NGOs very effectively. But that
doesn't get us out of the business of supporting Afghanistan
and it doesn't reduce their donor dependency. So----
Mrs. Lummis. Why not? Why not?
Mr. Sampler. Because we are doing the work ourselves,
rather than teaching the government of Afghanistan how to do
it. It is complicated and it requires mentoring. So when I say
increasing their ability to spend our money, the government of
Afghanistan ministries have underperformed, over the past few
years, with respect to budget execution. Money that they have
in their budgets and that the government of Afghanistan, in
their fledgling attempts to allocate budgets and resources,
they haven't been able to spend it----
Mrs. Lummis. Okay. Now, Mr. Sampler, I am going to
interrupt you just because I have to go to my constituents, and
when they find out that we are giving money for aid in
Afghanistan, and these are people in my State who have been to
the Pine Ridge, South Dakota Oglala Sioux Reservation. Some of
them have been to Detroit since it has gone bankrupt and whole
buildings are being occupied by people with drug problems and
communities are deteriorating in this Country. They have seen
the grinding poverty among some Shoshone and Arapaho on the
Wind River Indian Reservation in Wyoming and elsewhere.
How can I tell them that we are working so hard to increase
the capacity of the Afghan government to spend our money when
the response I am going to get is why would we increase the
Afghan government's capacity, a government that you acknowledge
is untrustworthy and corrupt, when we have uses here in this
Country where there is grinding poverty right before our eyes
in American cities, around American Indian reservations? I am
having trouble answering that question, so help me answer that
question. Assume that I am your constituent.
Mr. Sampler. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Lummis. And you have to respond.
Mr. Sampler. Again, I go out every chance I get, back to my
home State of Georgia, and have exactly these conversations
with businessmen at home, to include my dad, and the challenge
is if we don't do it right in Afghanistan, we may find
ourselves having to do it again in another 12 years. Someone
has to secure the space of Afghanistan; it is an incredibly
wild country.
Mrs. Lummis. It is. I have been there. I have been there
with the gentleman from Vermont at the end of the table, and we
were out in Kandahar Province and we saw--the U.S. had rebuilt
the third holiest Muslim site in Afghanistan in a remote area
in Kandahar Province because their own people, in a civil war,
had destroyed their own religion's third holiest site. So we go
and rebuild it, and then we have Army Rangers Special Ops
people out there, Americans, trying to defend it from being
destroyed again by Muslims in their own country. It just defies
logic to me that that is how we are spending our money.
Again, try to help me explain that.
Mr. Sampler. Yes, ma'am. The question of corruption is one
that I think deserves a lot of attention. It is perhaps the
single greatest challenge that we are facing. And the point
that I make when I go out to speak to constituents is that, in
my opinion, in developmental theory, the best way to combat
corruption is strong institutions. Again, in 2002 there were
not even strong, solid buildings, never mind strong, solid
institutions. The work that we are doing with the government of
Afghanistan is intended to build institutions that will help
them fight corruption themselves; it is not something we can
fix overnight, but it is something that we are determined to
fix.
Mrs. Lummis. Do you think a corrupt government can be
taught to be honest?
Mr. Sampler. I am not sure if I would answer it that way.
Instead, let me offer this. On your next trip out, meet with
the ministers and the people they get up, but also ask to meet
with some of the young Afghans. The ministries now are
populated by Afghans from 25 to 35 years old, and they don't
have to be taught to be honest. In my opinion, the vast
majority of them, they are patriotic, because they could be
working for me at the U.S. Embassy; they are college educated,
they have been abroad, but they come back and choose to work in
their ministries for a lower salary because they want
Afghanistan to succeed. They don't have to be taught to be
honest; they don't have to be taught to be patriotic; they just
need a chance.
Mrs. Lummis. Thanks, Mr. Sampler.
My time is up and I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for
your indulgence.
Mr. Chaffetz. I thank the gentlewoman.
I now recognize the gentlewoman, Mrs. Maloney, for five
minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. I thank the chairman.
Are either of you spending much time in Afghanistan? Are
you there, are you up here? Where are your offices?
Mr. Johnson. The GAO does have a permanent presence in
Afghanistan. I actually have three members behind me who
actually staff that presence for about six months each, and we
currently have a staff of six people, three people there for
six months. I have made multiple visits to Afghanistan, as well
as Pakistan just across the border.
Mrs. Maloney. What about you, Mr. Sampler, have you spent
much time there?
Mr. Sampler. Yes, ma'am. I go about every 60 days. I expect
to go at the end of the month. I lived there for about three or
four years.
Mrs. Maloney. Are you hopeful? Are we making progress
there?
Mr. Sampler. That is a great question, and thank you for
asking it. In some areas we absolutely are; in other areas we
are facing still difficult challenges. But I am cautiously
optimistic.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, I think many of our concerns, and I
want to echo my colleague on the other side of the aisle, we
agree on a lot of things on women rights and we agree on this,
that it is hard to finance an area that is so disgustingly
corrupt, and it is again and again and again and again.
Probably the biggest example was the Kabul Bank, which was once
Afghanistan's largest private bank.
But by the time it reached near collapse in 2010, the Kabul
Bank had been looted by $935 million primarily by 19
individuals and companies, including the Bank's ex-CEO. These
two figures only received five years in prison, and they are
now appealing it. So when you see that type of action, I am
concerned about USAID's bank accounts over in Kabul. Do you
feel like your money is secure over there?
Mr. Sampler. Yes, ma'am. Kabul Bank has come up a couple
times, so let me just make a couple points. We lost no U.S. tax
dollars in Kabul Bank. We did not have any money in that bank.
USAID did not have any money in that bank.
Mrs. Maloney. But we do now, don't we?
Mr. Sampler. We do not. We have a relationship with the
Kabul Central Bank, which would be analogous to our Federal
Reserve. Kabul Bank would be perhaps a State bank in one of the
States. Kabul Bank was an Afghan-on-Afghan crime, and our
outrage is shared and exceeded, perhaps, by the Afghan
depositors who lost their savings. We are still, in fact,
working with the government of Afghanistan to pursue the
culprits who were associated with the Kabul Bank fiasco.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, we are facing the same challenge,
really, over in the Ukraine, where it has been reported that
$88 billion is missing from the prior government, and we are
getting ready to send a billion over of uncapped aid. So the
question really is what safeguards do we have that our money
actually gets to the people and the causes that we want. In
terms of the Ukraine, reported in the press is that even IMF
loan guarantees, the loan guarantee money came in, they
immediately took $23 billion and sent it offshore. So how can
we really make sure that it is going for the purposes that we
want to help in Afghanistan, Ukraine, or anywhere?
Mr. Sampler. Yes, ma'am. The situation in the Ukraine is
different and I can't really speak to that, but in Afghanistan
we projectize our money. The USAID money that goes to
Afghanistan does not go to the government of Afghanistan. But
we work with a particular ministry or a particular office in
that ministry to achieve a particular project; and we identify
either milestones that must be accomplished for particular
payments or accrual of payments.
Mrs. Maloney. I want to mention contracts, because
historically our private sector and public sector are very
strong when they work together. And when contracts were offered
in Afghanistan to the private sector, what I heard, it was
impossible for an American company to ever win one because we
didn't bribe and we weren't corrupt. One of my constituents
told me he bid on a copper plan, copper mine, managing it. His
RFP or his proposal ended up in a competitor's hand that then
won the contract. The competitor then did not even know what to
do with the cooper mine and came back and tried to hire him.
So when you see this type of corruption, which I think is
very shortsighted on behalf of the Afghan government, if they
had allowed American business to be fairly treated, then they
would be there helping the country. But what happened is an
American business could never win a contract and then our
servicemen and women had to risk their lives protecting
contractors that came in from other countries who hadn't
invested a dime in helping the country. So something is very
wrong with that equation and I really am disturbed by it.
Mr. Sampler. Yes, ma'am. On the issue of tenders, when the
Afghans are able to capitalize on the mineral wealth, I think
it will be a good day for Afghanistan. We are working
aggressively, the Ministry of Mines and Petroleum, which is the
ministry here in question, I believe, to make sure that they
have a capacity to do business in ways that western
organizations understand. That has not been the tradition for
decades, if not centuries. It has been a very patriarchal
society and a very----
Mrs. Maloney. But, Mr. Sampler, what I would like to point
out is we spent billions in treasure and life----
Mr. Sampler. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Maloney.--and commitment, and then this country, what
I was told by American businessmen, they were incapable of ever
fairly winning a contract. Their applications were given to
their competitors. I know American businessmen who run around
the world giving speeches against investing in Afghanistan. So
you know the stupidity of the country, but also the stupidity
of our Country in that we are financing everything and
protecting foreign investors who bribed and got the contracts,
and yet American businessmen and women were not successful.
What can we do to allow American businessmen and women to
have a fair shot at a contract in Afghanistan? I guess now they
don't even want to try, but I think, going forward in other
areas that we are involved, we were not only paying the bill
protecting everybody, losing American lives, spending a
trillion a day or whatever it was, but other countries came in
and benefitted from everything that we did, yet American
business and investment could not. Now, there is something very
wrong with that equation.
Mr. Sampler. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Maloney. It is not a winning strategy, to say the
least.
Mr. Sampler. The goal will be institutions in Afghanistan
that are transparent and educated, capable and competent, and
we are not there yet.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay.
Mr. Chaffetz. I thank the gentlewoman.
I will now recognize myself for five minutes.
Mr. Johnson, I want to go back about the idea, talk about
is the U.S. Government contributing and funding payments to the
Afghan government. You issued a report in 2011. What is your
perspective on this?
Mr. Johnson. Chairman, if you are referring to our report
on the direct assistance, we did find situations where the U.S.
Government and USAID, as well as DOD, were providing money
through trust funds, and that is the Afghan Reconstruction
Trust Fund, which Mr. Sampler noted, would be sort of an on-
budget type of assistance that the Afghan government could have
somewhat some say-so control in, as well as through LOFTA,
which DOD managed. So there was quite a bit of money that was
going through that route.
Mr. Chaffetz. So you wrote in this report, ``The United
States and other donors funded about 90 percent of Afghan's
estimated total public expenditures from solar years 2006 to
2011. Of the 90 percent, the United States provided 62 percent
of total expenditures.'' Is that correct?
Mr. Johnson. The U.S. has been the predominant funder of
expenditures. I would note that the bulk of our expenditures
were in the security sector. We were close to about 40 percent,
but we were the largest contributor for the non-security sector
as well. But altogether there was the international community
contributed slightly more in a cumulative, if you added it all
up, but we were quite a substantial contributor, as was noted.
Mr. Chaffetz. So another way of saying it is of the public
expenditures by the Afghan government, they collect, the
Afghans, only collect about 10 percent, a very rough number,
about 10 percent of what they are able to spend, correct?
Mr. Johnson. Bulk of the money at the time was off-budget,
so they didn't really have visibility into the funding until
the decision was made to go more direct assistance, and then
there began to be an increase in the amount of money to go to
enable the Afghan government to do two things, to fund their
local operations, as well as pay their own salaries through the
direct assistance route and build their capacity.
The issue we had when we sort of not cautioned against it,
but highlighted, there needs to be controls in place before you
try to do the two things at the same time, and that is where I
talked about doing pre-award risk assessments and, more so,
mitigating against the risks you have identified, which we have
seen happen in other parts of the world, across the border in
Pakistan, for example, a similar situation pretty much where we
were trying to go the direct assistance route, but in those
situations we found they were actually embedded in the
contract, cooperative agreements, bilateral agreements, as well
as embed folks in the ministries to ensure that there was
accountability of our funds.
Mr. Chaffetz. So to suggest that the U.S. Government does
not give money directly to the Afghan government, how would you
react to that?
Mr. Johnson. I would say that is not totally true that
money has not gone directly to the Afghan government for them
to have on budget to expend.
Mr. Chaffetz. Let me find this issue. I want to come back
to this because, Mr. Sampler, you go way out of your way to try
to suggest to us that none of the U.S. taxpayer money is going
to the Afghan government.
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, USAID does not give money
directly to the U.S. Government.
Mr. Chaffetz. You mean to the Afghan government?
Mr. Sampler. I am sorry.
Mr. Chaffetz. You said U.S. Government. To the U.S.
Government.
Mr. Sampler. I apologize. Let me restate it. USAID does not
give money directly to the Afghan government. That was what I
meant to say, and I hope I have said it consistently.
Mr. Chaffetz. You have. I have great concern about that
statement, but we will have to continue to sort that out. You
said at one point we control the bank accounts. Explain that to
me. And I want to set the context here. We are going to be
spending more money than ever; our troop levels are coming
down; we are going to have less security in place to actually
do the verification and to get out in the field and go see
these types of things. Those things just don't add up; they are
going in the wrong directions. I mean, it was bad before. When
I was there and we were at near our peak of when we had the
number of troops on the ground that we could protect our
people, they still complained in the offices that they couldn't
go out and see these projects.
When I was there, they couldn't let me go out and see these
projects. I asked to go see them. I couldn't get out there and
go see them. When I talked to the inspectors, they couldn't get
out into the field everywhere that they wanted to go. And when
I talked to the USAID people, who are just great, brave,
patriotic people in the most difficult of situations, they said
we can't get out and see these projects.
How is that getting better? It seems like it is going to
get worse.
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, this is a problem that has been
coming for some time. They have been closing PRTs for two years
now, and, in fact, they are mostly gone, so this isn't
something that we are suddenly waking up and realizing we need
new mechanisms for monitoring programs. What we have done is,
building on expertise in Pakistan, 12 years in Afghanistan. I
have personally worked in both Afghanistan, Pakistan, Yemen,
Colombia, West Bank, Gaza, places where we have had to
supervise programs, and yet we cannot, on a regular,
predictable basis put U.S. direct-hire boots on the ground, we
have developed alternative mechanisms that I will argue are
good.
The lessons learned from Iraq on this is don't rely on one
source of information; do rely on local communities, because
they are the beneficiaries of these, and if it is not right
they will tell you. Focus on finding ways that are
technologically innovative and different to validate programs.
So it is not that we have a way to fix these things; we have a
new office, the Institutional Support Unit, who are responsible
for, in a very cold and deliberate way, analyzing all the
inputs about a particular program and saying does this meet our
requirement. If it meets the requirement, then we will make a
decision; if it doesn't meet the requirement, then we suspend
or terminate the program.
Mr. Chaffetz. Mr. Johnson, your ability, the ability of the
SIGAR to get out and be able to actually see and verify, there
are reports after reports after reports of mismanagement of
funds, overpaying funds. There was one we were paying $500 a
gallon for fuel. When you go out and spend $100 billion, there
is going to be some waste, fraud, and abuse. It is just
inevitable, particularly in the difficult circumstances that
are Afghanistan. I don't expect it to be perfect, but I do
expect that we get better at this. And the disconnect for me is
we are spending more money with less personnel and less safety
and security.
There is no doubt a ton of good that USAID has done and
will do in the future, but how in the world are we possibly
going to oversee the proper expenditure of $20 billion in this
type of atmosphere?
Mr. Johnson. That is definitely something that is going to
challenge all U.S. agencies, including USAID and the oversight
community, with the withdrawal of the combat troops, and any
other security forces if that is not mitigated in advance. I
think that is something we all have to plan for.
Mr. Chaffetz. But what do you see, from your objective
point of view? Were they even achieving that before, when we
had the maximum amount of security?
Mr. Johnson. It was definitely a challenging environment
for us to do oversight, as well as for the agencies to carry
out their missions. I think there are other examples, other
models, as Mr. Sampler alluded to. If we can't go out directly
and oversee the projects ourselves, there are other means by
which you can mitigate those things, using global imaging
systems, things of that nature; not just relying on your NGOs
and the implementing partners to bring you data and provide
progress reports, but also using photographs, media reports,
other things that you can use to validate what you are
receiving from the folks you are giving money to to carry out
the program. So you need to have multiple ways of validating
what you are getting from the folks you are paying.
Mr. Chaffetz. I agree. We have asked in previous instances
can we just see a photo of what we built, can you provide a
photo. Couldn't even do that.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, if I can just note. Some of the
work we did on the other side of the border, we found that that
was being done, and even on the Afghan side, data was being
collected by USAID; however, a lot of the data was not being
retained or documented. So that was part of the gap. So I think
we made recommendations in that area. We were happy that, later
on, we saw that those recommendations were addressed back then
and that things were done to document it. We have not looked at
that issue in a couple years with respect to documentation, but
that was a weakness previously.
Mr. Chaffetz. If you could, that would be great.
I have gone way over time. I will now recognize the
gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Tierney.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you.
I think this last series of questions sort of got to the
nub of it, what we are talking about on this. So the first
determination is ours, it is the policy decision of the United
States' national security interest to continue giving aid to
Afghanistan there or not there, right? And that is our issue,
not yours, on that. And from what I understand, the things that
we are now providing money for through USAID are agriculture,
governance, rule of law, and trying to increase the economic
growth of that country. So we have to determine that those
missions are in fact in the United States' sufficiently, our
national security interests, that we want to keep putting money
into that. And we have, at least to date, done that because
there is money going out and you are in charge, Mr. Sampler, of
doing that.
Let me say people have been pretty pointed with you this
afternoon. Whether people up here agree with what is happening
out there or not, I hope you don't take it personal on that.
And I want to tell you that you are and have been an excellent
spokesman for your agency. We need people to believe in their
mission. Some people up here may not think it is a good
mission, bad mission, whatever, but it is something that our
Government has asked you to do; and if they send you out there
and somebody is totally cynical and not doing it for the right
reasons, then we are not being well served. And you, sir, I
think are fully committed to what you are doing, and I want to
thank you for it. I appreciate it. And your staff that is with
you as well. Know that.
But it is our job to look at this and then say, well, fine,
we have committed the money, so the next question is how do we
do it. How do we do it to bring us back some assurance that
there is accountability, that the money just isn't going off
into the ethos somewhere. So we want to talk about the amount
that we give, the manner in which it is given, how we account
for it, and we want to document that it has been to the benefit
of our Country, as well as the country that is on the receiving
end of it.
And that is what today's hearing has been about and,
fundamentally, at the very end of it we are sort of honing in.
If we don't have security sufficient to take us to where these
projects are, whether it is a far-flung agricultural project or
even rule of law issue in a remote province somewhere on that,
how do we know it is happening? Or if we are building a school
someplace, how do we know that it is functioning properly and
that it has been constructed well?
In Pakistan we had one problem of having too few USAID
people to actually monitor it even when they could get to a
location. So it turned out that what we discovered was we were
oftentimes taking the recipient of the grant, a not-for-profit,
and then asking them how did they do; and remarkably they all
thought they were doing pretty darn well. So that obviously
wasn't an effective way to do it.
Mr. Johnson has now told us there are other methods that
you are looking at. One of them is to take visual images on
that. But I do have to say we spoke a little bit earlier in the
questioning about people on your staff taking visual images of
things but not really having great images because of the
technology that they were limited to and the process. But that
is one of the very things that we are now going to count on to
tell us that things are going well. So that has some questions
raised right there, right?
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, first of all, thank you for your
kind comments.
The photographs that we take with our cell phones are not
meant to document, they are not meant to be documents of
record.
Mr. Tierney. So you have another kind of photograph that
you are taking for proof of something happening in an area that
you cannot physically get to?
Mr. Sampler. As an example, one of our monitoring partners
has a set of cell phones that have very high digital resolution
cameras and a built-in GPS and a date/time stamp. So if they go
out to take photographs of a school or photographs of another
project, we not only know where they were and when they were
there and what the photograph is of, but even which direction
the camera is facing.
Mr. Tierney. And this partner is a private partner or an
Afghan national, or who may it be?
Mr. Sampler. It is an international private contractor who
uses local Afghan subcontractors to do the work.
Mr. Tierney. All right. And they have been vetted to our
satisfaction?
Mr. Sampler. They have. We have a vetting program that is
pretty aggressive and they have been vetted before the contract
was let.
Mr. Tierney. All right. So, of course, a further part of
that is it is one thing to build a structure, it is another
thing to be able to complete the inside of it, staff it
properly, and get a product out of it. So those things still
remain a challenge, I would think.
Mr. Johnson, once we build a school, how do we make sure
that it is functioning if we don't have the security to go out
there and physically do it? Do we have a solution for that type
of issue?
Mr. Johnson. I think there have been situations and, again,
some of this goes back to the security environment. If we build
a school, what the security environment allows for it to be
used, and that is an issue where, in advance, you should have
studied that, you made that determination before you invested
the U.S. dollars. I think there have been a few situations
where that may have occurred.
But I think, getting back to an earlier point that was made
that Mr. Sampler pointed out, and I am quite pleased to hear
sort of the imaging that is being taken. If there is some GPS
tracking embedded, there is some date stamping, that is one of
the things we felt like was needed, when you have the evidence,
but you need to document it better, that we see would enhance
the capability of USAID to show or have proof in its records.
This all goes back to the knowledge transfer, having
institutional knowledge. I mentioned the turnover ratio that
takes place. When the next person comes in, they will have that
evidence there and know how to build on that and use that to
make future decisions.
Mr. Tierney. The whole validation issue is a problem for
us. I go back to Pakistan again only because we had some
concrete examples. In fact, I think the inspector general's
report out of the whole Iraq process helped us with Iraq. I
think some of our experiences in Pakistan helped us look at
this. But in Pakistan, where the premise early on was to give
the money to the government and then take the receipts and
check the receipts, we were getting great receipts back. I was
just telling the chairman here that we spent millions of
dollars fixing 35 helicopters and had the receipts for them,
and the money was approved and sent. When we went there on the
ground and asked to be taken to those helicopters, funny thing
is none of them could fly on that. So I don't know how you get
beyond that, but that is a concern that we have, is who is
validating those receipts beyond just having an Afghan partner
come up and say here are the receipts, we really did this work.
How does that work?
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, if I may, technology helps us.
And I will use the school example because, in developing
countries, schools are often a way that a government is able to
spread the largesse in ways that are not necessarily above
board, by ghost teachers or ghost schools. In Afghanistan, if
we build a school and we wish to validate whether the school is
functioning properly, we don't ask the Ministry of Education
and we don't ask the teachers; we can ask the community. And,
again, that is why these independent monitoring contracts are
valuable, because they can go and have a local shura meeting
where they talk to the community and say are you getting what
you want from this school.
If they are not, the community may not stand up and waive
their arms and draw attention to themselves, calling out
corruption within the Ministry of Education, but before the
monitoring unit leaves town, very often they will pull them
aside and say they don't have 20 teachers at that school, they
have 3.
So we have SMS technology that we can use for things like
that. We have independent contractors.
And, Mr. Chairman, to your point earlier, even if you gave
me back 100,000 troops on the ground, the security situation
would do what it is going to do, but I would still use the
multiplicity of monitoring techniques that we have developed
over all these countries and over all these years because,
again, one of the lessons from Iraq was do not depend on a
single point of reporting; require multiple reports, and in
that there are discrepancies, find out where the discrepancy
is. And that works independent of the number of international
or U.S. troops on the ground.
So that is the reason that I have some level of confidence,
going forward, that we are focusing on the right things. We
haven't fixed all the problems yet, but we are focusing on the
right things to fix them.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you for that, Mr. Sampler.
So we have a requirement that we have a separate bank
account established for each project when we do it, is that
correct?
Mr. Sampler. That is correct. We monitor the accounts and
control the funds.
Mr. Tierney. And are we depositing that United States
assistance into the Central Bank?
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, I don't think so. I think it goes
into whichever commercial bank we have identified with that
ministry will be the repository of those funds, much like an
escrow account would be here in the States.
Mr. Tierney. And so we do have actual physical oversight of
that account, it is not a question of going off to the Central
Bank and then we are relying on an international organization
with limited oversight capacity.
Mr. Sampler. It is not. We do not have to go to the
government of Afghanistan and ask to see our bank accounts.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you.
So I will just wrap up here again, just reiterate what I
said about both of the gentleman that are testifying here today
and their staffs. We know you are committed and that you are
out there and you are working very, very hard. We appreciate
it. Our job is to keep this oversight up.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for having this hearing, again. As
long as we make the policy decisions about having this kind of
aid and assistance go out there, then it is our responsibility
to have you oversee it and implement it, and our responsibility
to make sure that you are doing that as much as we can. I think
a lot of this is going to be, in the long-run, as long as we
decide to do that, whether or not it is working and what are
the results. I guess there is no real system we can set up that
is pay for success, because some of this money has to be put
out in order to get that success, but I think we have to
regularly and steadfastly oversee it and make periodic
assessments as to whether or not this is a risk worth taking
and whether our national security interests are being furthered
or not by that.
So I thank you, and thank you again, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. I appreciate your ongoing concern
about this issue.
Let me just wrap up here. I want to hit just a couple
different things.
I am concerned about the automated directive systems,
Chapter 593. This prevents the GAO from removing sensitive, but
unclassified materials from USAID's secure workspace facility,
even if it is needed for official auditing purposes.
We trust the GAO. They may be sensitive, but they are
unclassified. We expect, I think, auditors to be able to have
unfettered access. I don't know that that policy or directive
is consistent with the law. We are going to go back and look at
that.
Does USAID provide classified materials to GAO?
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, to the best of my knowledge, we
do. Again, to reiterate, we provide all the information that
they ask for, that any of the oversight bodies ask for.
Mr. Chaffetz. But I don't think that is true.
Mr. Sampler. Not always in the form of a document that is
actually released in an unredacted form.
Mr. Chaffetz. We are not asking to release it. Auditors
ought to be able to see whatever they want to see.
Mr. Sampler. Absolutely.
Mr. Chaffetz. But what you said is in direct contradiction
to that.
Mr. Johnson, is this the case? Explain to me what happens.
When you want to see something that is sensitive, but
unclassified, what happens?
Mr. Johnson. Well, I guess I would start by pointing out
that this is not always the case. It happens in a few
situations. We are required to come up to a reading room in
some cases, and that does put a strain on our resources and
becomes more costly for us, as well as USAID.
Mr. Chaffetz. And the subjective nature to that, the
inconsistency of that causes me concern. Even the documents
that have been provided to Congress have had redactions in them
that I think were uncalled for. It is something we are not
going to sort out in the last few minutes here; it is an
ongoing concern.
Mr. Johnson, if there are any particular documents that you
specifically need in your possession to do your job--and I am
saying that broadly for GAO--I would like to know about it if
you can't resolve that directly with USAID. But the principle
here is an important one. We are supposed to allow the auditors
to come in and see what they want to see, particularly if
documents may be sensitive, but they are unclassified.
And I do have a problem if GAO or somebody was releasing
information that is going to put somebody's bodily harm in
their way, but this is not the only agency that they work and
engage with; there are some pretty darn good sophisticated
policies over a host of agencies, it is not just USAID. I mean,
they do this for every department and agency, essentially. So
it is something that I would appreciate your working on and we
will pay attention to to make sure that we are making progress
on that.
Number two, I do think my ranking member here, Mr. Tierney,
I do think it would be helpful to have Mr. Sopko come here, as
well as Mr. Shah, and do so together to talk about this broader
context. It is something that I look forward to doing, and we
will have to get on the calendar so we can appropriately
schedule specific to Afghanistan, but also be able to talk
maybe a little bit broader, certainly with Mr. Shah. I find him
to be very responsive when I have wanted to chat with him
before, and I think it would be a healthy hearing, particularly
as we talk about Afghanistan. We are talking about $100 billion
that we have spent, so I look forward to doing that as well.
And one thing that Mr. Tierney has persuaded me, I think,
over the course of time here is the need for internal
competency at USAID. We have a lot of great passionate people.
Nobody is questioning your commitment to the mission here. We
were chatting here while some other members were asking
questions. Mr. Sampler, in particular, we appreciate your
passion. You can tell you believe in the mission and what you
are doing, and I think you for your military service, as well
as your service to USAID.
But we can't just always rely on third-party vendors all
the time. The mission of USAID is not we can't just flip a
switch on and off. Hopefully we are not engaged in prolonged
contracted military engagements over a long period of time, but
there does need to be a bank of wisdom that we gain, and that
we just don't go out and hire, let's go find another vendor;
because we should learn from Iraq. We have to learn from
Afghanistan if we are going to do this better in other
countries, in Africa and all across the world.
And I would join Mr. Tierney in the support of making sure
that that core competency is developed over a long period of
time in a broad range of people. I think that pendulum swung
one direction and then it swung over here to say, oh, let's
just contract it all out, but this is probably one agency where
you need an internal core competency.
One quick question, then we are done here. How many USAID
personnel do we have in Afghanistan at this time?
Mr. Sampler. Congressman, the last time I saw a formal
report, it was 138. We will, by the end of this year, be down
to between 100 and 110. And to put that in context, in 2012 I
was up at 387. That is U.S. Government direct hire U.S.
employees.
Mr. Chaffetz. Again, maybe you could get back to me on this
or maybe Mr. Shah could help me answer this, Administrator
Shah. We are spending more money than we ever have before. We
are drawing down not only the security personnel, but the
people on the ground if we are having roughly a third, right,
of what we had at its peak. I don't know what the proper ratio
is, but we are going to spend $20 billion.
My State of Utah, we spend about $13 billion in an entire
year. We have 22,000 State employees, and here we are going to
spend $20 billion over it is hard to tell what time period and
we have just over 100 people trying to administer that. I just,
physically, I don't understand how that would work. But if you
could help us clarify that.
Again, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Sampler, the people, the support
staff that is here, I thank you for your passion and your work.
It is vital, it is important. America, as I said at the
beginning, has invested lives, treasure. It is a very, very
important mission. I appreciate your passion on this. This is
enlightening. There is more information that we would like to
glean from you, but we again thank you for your service. We
thank you for your patriotism, and God bless those men and
women who are actually out there on the front lines in these
difficult situations doing the great work. Please let them know
how much we love and care for them and wish them nothing but
the best of success.
With that, we will adjourn this hearing today. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 4:15 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


