- OBAMACARE IMPLEMENTATION: STICKER SHOCK OF INCREASED PREMIUMS FOR HEALTHCARE COVERAGE

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OBAMACARE IMPLEMENTATION: STICKER SHOCK OF INCREASED PREMIUMS FOR
HEALTHCARE COVERAGE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 22, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-78

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

----------

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

86-723 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2014
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, JR., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         JACKIE SPEIER, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          MATTHEW A. CARTWRIGHT,
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina               Pennsylvania
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
DOC HASTINGS, Washington             ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 PETER WELCH, Vermont
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              TONY CARDENAS, California
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                STEVEN A. HORSFORD, Nevada
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
KERRY L. BENTIVOLIO, Michigan        Vacancy
RON DeSANTIS, Florida

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Stephen Castor, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on November 22, 2013................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Dan Waters, Preesident, Dan Waters & Associates
Oral Statement...............................................     7
Written Statement............................................     9
Ms. Sherry Overbey, Director, Belmont Crisis Pregnancy Center
Oral Statement...............................................    11
Written Statement............................................    13
Mr. Joel Long, President, Gastonia Sheet Metal Services
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Written Statement............................................    17
Mr. Jason Falls, Owner, Falls Insurance
Oral Statement...............................................    21
Written Statement............................................    23
Mr. Tav Gauss, President, The Action Group Human Resources
Solutions
Oral Statement...............................................    27
Written Statement............................................    29

APPENDIX

Inserts for the Record, 2 Articles offered by Chairman Issa, and
Excerpts from the Heritage Report on Healthcare Costs Under the
ACA............................................................    46

OBAMACARE IMPLEMENTATION: STICKER SHOCK OF INCREASED PREMIUMS FOR
HEALTHCARE COVERAGE

----------

Friday, November 22, 2013

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
Washington, D.C.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in the
Gaston County Courthouse, 325 North Marietta Street, Gastonia,
North Carolina, Hon. Darrell Issa [Chairman of the Committee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Issa and McHenry.
Also Present: Mr. Pittenger.
Staff Present: Drew Colliatie, Professional Staff Member;
Linda Good, Chief Clerk; Meinan Goto, Professional Staff
Member; Mark D. Martin, Deputy Staff Director for Oversight;
and Rebecca Watkins, Communications Director.
Chairman Issa. The Committee will come to order.
As is the practice in the House of Representatives, every
morning we begin our ceremony with the Pledge. Since we are
here and not in the House, I have asked Congressman Pittenger
to lead us in the Pledge.
Will you all please rise?
[Audience rises.]
[Pledge of Allegiance recited.]
Chairman Issa. Please be seated.
The Oversight and Government Reform Committee exists to
secure two fundamental principles. First, Americans have a
right to know that the money Washington takes from them is well
spent. And second, Americans deserve an efficient, effective
government that works for them.
Our duty on the Government Oversight and Reform Committee
is to protect these rights. Our solemn responsibility is to
hold government accountable to taxpayers, because taxpayers
have a right to know what they get from their government. It is
our obligation to work tirelessly in partnership with citizen
watchdogs to deliver the facts to the American people and to
bring genuine reform to the federal bureaucracy.
I regret that there are no Democrats here today. Mr.
Cummings had initially said he would be able to make it and
then said he could not.
I would now ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from
North Carolina, Mr. Pittenger, who is not a member of the
committee but a member of Congress in good standing, be allowed
to participate in the hearing today. Without objection, so
ordered.
In a sense, I made my opening statement before we even
began. In another sense, today is a day that no American can
start his day without thinking that 50 years ago today, John F.
Kennedy died in Dallas, Texas. I was 10 years old. He was only
in his mid-40s.
Medicare had not been created. Most of government spending
disproportionately was on the military, more than half.
Healthcare was important and talked about, but it was mostly
veterans, Indian health; and quite frankly, after that, most
healthcare was not delivered through federal means. Much has
changed over those 50 years.
America has, on a bipartisan basis, established Medicare to
secure healthcare for the elderly. We have expanded a number of
other healthcare programs and three and a half years ago,
President Obama signed into law the Patient Protection
Affordable Care Act. We are not here today to question that Act
or its validity. What we are here today is to review what is
happening in light of its rollout.
Our committee has primary jurisdiction over a number of
areas, and you have seen it, you have seen us dealing with the
failure of the website, which per se is not the failure of
Obamacare, it is a contracting failure. And we will continue to
work to try to reform the systems that deliver information from
the federal government to all of you.
At the same time, the rollout of the Affordable Care Act
has had major problems. The most important one to me is the
access to care. More than four and a half million Americans
have lost the plans they have so far. That is about 44 people
losing their plans for each one getting into an exchange under
the Affordable Care Act. We need to do better.
Under the Affordable Care Act, it was forecasted that rates
would go down by $2500 per family. So far, they have gone the
opposite way. We are here in North Carolina because it is one
of the states with one of the higher raises in care. For many
people, the Affordable Care Act also means not only higher
initial payments, but higher deductibles.
The President has responded to this ad launch, if you will,
by proposing that people should be able to keep plans they
already have. We will, as a committee, look into whether that
is feasible, can we get people to be able to stay in plans they
have, plans that cost less, plans that have lower deductible.
This will require legislation, it will not be done alone by
presidential action. But I believe that Congress, once they
have heard all the facts, looked at viable legislation, worked
with insurers to find out what they can do and maintain their
financial integrity, with hospitals and other healthcare
providers, what they can do--we will react.
Today's hearing is really about that. We know some of the
problems, the most important of which is access and then
affordability. Those are important issues that we are going to
hear from our witnesses today and in the days to come.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here today. I look
forward to their testimony and I now recognize the
distinguished gentleman on this side from North Carolina, Mr.
McHenry, for his opening statement.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And first of all, I
would like to welcome you back to western North Carolina and to
the town I grew up in, my hometown of Gastonia. And our host
today, the Gaston County Commission, in their chambers here in
Gastonia.
It is a particularly special thing because I grew up just
two miles from where we are sitting here with a big rambling
family and what I saw in Gastonia and Gaston County is what
most of the country has experienced with tough economic times.
We just experienced it over a longer period of time with the
loss of textiles and much of manufacturing in this country. So
the town I grew up in, I saw declining wages, I saw less
economic opportunity because high paid manufacturing jobs,
textile jobs, were going overseas. So the loss of benefits,
loss of pay is something very real to me because I lived it and
saw it with my friends and neighbors growing up here in
Gastonia.
So it is of particular concern today when we are talking
about the cost of health insurance and access to health
insurance. Access and cost are often linked. So I brought
Congress to North Carolina to understand the real impact of
Obamacare on real Americans.
And while the President is talking about administrative
fixes and tech searches, what I am most concerned about and
focused on are people. That cannot be lost in this whole thing
about stats and statistics--the actual real people that are
being adversely affected by this law. Now there are some folks
that are benefitting from the law, but by and large, most folks
are feeling the pain as a result of higher insurance costs.
Here in the Tenth District, my constituents are struggling,
they are struggling to understand why the health insurance
policies they like are being canceled. They are struggling to
make ends meet now that healthcare costs are going up two or
three times what they were before. Ultimately, they are
struggling because of broken promises of this administration
under this healthcare law.
Few states have been as hard hit by Obamacare's broken
promises as North Carolina. It was promised that signing up for
healthcare will be as easy as shopping on Amazon or booking a
flight on Kayak. Yet, through the first four weeks, only 1662
North Carolinians managed to select a plan on Healthcare.gov.
The President promised that if you liked your health
insurance, you could keep it under Obamacare. Yet, over 180,000
North Carolinians have received notices that their policies,
the ones that they chose and liked, are being canceled. The
President claimed that these issues are temporary and can be
resolved. He said the website will soon be fixed, although the
Administration's definition of fixed is that one in five
Americans who try to log on will still not be able to log on to
the website. That is not acceptable.
President Obama admitted he misled the American people when
he said if you like your plan, you can keep it. Another
administrative fix was in order to resolve that promise.
Regrettably, nothing will fix the broken promise that has
hurt the people of North Carolina the most. President Obama
promised this law would bring down health insurance costs. But
North Carolinians are not seeing prices go down. They are
seeing the complete opposite, as prices have simply gone up.
Prior to the exchanges opening, Forbes magazine reported a
study that estimated underlying premium prices for health
insurance in our state would increase 136 percent on average.
No administrative fix or tech search will resolve that
troubling statistic that affects people. These exorbitant
premium prices do not discriminate either. In North Carolina,
it does not matter if you are a man or a woman, young or old,
you are likely to see premium prices go up.
Older North Carolinians in particular are hardest hit.
Forbes reported the average premium price for women age 64 in
North Carolina would increase over 180 percent. These folks are
often early retirees or have lost their jobs, their well-
paying, good-paying jobs, and yet are not eligible for Medicare
yet. They are usually on fixed incomes and cannot afford to pay
nearly double what they were previously paying for their health
insurance.
These are people like a constituent of mine, Roberta, here
in Gastonia. She ended her career early to take care of her
ailing mother. She had a policy that cost her $150 a month for
health insurance, but it was canceled. The new Obamacare-
compliant policy costs over $500 a month. She cannot afford
that.
There is Jonathan, in Iron Station, just up in Lincoln
County. He has a fixed income of $950 a month. You may not know
Jonathan, but we all know a Jonathan who is under this similar
circumstance. His new insurance policy price tag is $350 a
month. He cannot afford that.
Tom, in Hickory, retired at age 62 due to a downturn in the
economy and losing his job. His premiums jumped from 450 bucks
a month to over $1200. He cannot afford that. He does not know
how he is going to be able to get health insurance now and he
said he is likely to go uninsured until he is eligible for
Medicare in a couple of years.
We all know a Tom. We all know a Tom, we all know a
Roberta, we all know a Jonathan. This is about people.
So when we talk about government policy in our discussion
today, I think it is important that we think in those terms.
And I am sure our witnesses here today, a great panel, will be
able to talk more about this and how they are dealing with the
day-to-day consequences of this failed healthcare reform.
Now it is a particular honor to have a hearing from
Congress anywhere outside of Washington. And today, as I said
to Chairman Issa, that North Carolinians, even if we disagree,
are a polite lot. Heck, we are Southern, cannot help it, can
we? So even when we disagree, we can do it in an agreeable
fashion.
I appreciate the Chairman starting the hearing out with
that tone because southern California has some of those same
qualities as the real south, right?
But if I may, Mr. Chairman, I do want to recognize our host
and the distinguished elected officials we have here today. As
I said, our county commissioners here in Gaston County have
given us use of this chamber, and I want to thank the full
county commission. But in particular, our two county
commissioners that are here today--Mr. Tracy Philbeck and Jason
Williams. Thank you.
And additionally, we have our Register of Deeds here in
Gaston County, who is here today, Susan Lockridge, thank you.
We also have State Representative Dana Baumgardner, is here
today; former State Representative Mike Harrington; and our
State Senator for Gaston County, Kathy Harrington. Thank you.
And then finally, on a healthcare note, we have our
hospital administrator for our local hospital here in Gaston
County for our region, Doug Lockett--sorry--Luckett--sorry.
Doug, thank you so much for being here.
And then finally, I want to thank our Sheriff, who secures
this courthouse for judges and for the public on a daily basis
and serves our county in a very able fashion. Has been a
distinguished public servant and I would consider him a friend,
and that is Alan Cloninger. Thank you, Alan, for your service
to our county and for hosting us here today.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the generosity
of your time and I yield back.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Pittenger.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do appreciate
this time that you have yielded to me.
Chairman Issa. Well, thanks for letting us come to your
district.
Mr. Pittenger. Well, I came to Mr. McHenry's district. And
I appreciate the courtesy that Congressman McHenry offered, and
your coming here, it means a great deal to all of us in our
region, that you would bring you and this committee to listen,
to learn of the challenges, the difficulties, that are faced
with the individuals and businesses and the complexities and
the problems of Obamacare.
While I do not sit on this committee, I do appreciate the
impact, the effects that the Affordable Care Act is having on
hard-working tax-paying Americans.
This hearing will shed light, I am sure, on the problems
that North Carolinians have faced as a result of the healthcare
plan. My office, frankly, continues to receive a barrage of
emails and phone calls every single day, of personal concerns
that individuals have. Tom Mount is here today from my
district. We were on a Google chat yesterday where he shared
his experience. He has an IT background and business experience
in terms of processing. And the real challenges that are out
there, even affecting our personal information that can be
exploited because it is not properly assessed and addressed on
their system to date.
We are aware that only 100,000-plus people have been able
to process out their healthcare through the current system,
while currently five million people have been denied their
healthcare. Upwards to 10 million we expect to hear by the end
of this year will be denied their personal healthcare. So these
are very troubling.
Congressman McHenry shared the numbers in North Carolina.
Premiums are going up, you know, 200 percent on many healthcare
plans.
So all these are a basis for a real concern of why it is
important, particularly in our state, to hold this hearing.
I do realize that the promise that Mr. Obama made said that
you could keep your healthcare plan if you wanted to, frankly
appears to be very misleading and we need to understand the
impact that that statement has had on many people. Today, the
American people and our state deserve to have their voice heard
and your coming out today to these fine witnesses and all those
who are here, to sense the real concerns, we appreciate your
being here. We are your public servant and we are here to do
the job for you. So thank you, Mr. Chairman, again, for
allowing me to be here and for conducting this hearing.
Chairman Issa. Thank you, Rob.
I now ask unanimous consent that the Manhattan Institute, a
Published Study of State-by-State Analysis of the Impact of
Obamacare Premiums be placed in the record. Without objection,
so ordered.
Additionally, I ask that excerpts from USA Today today and
excerpts from the Heritage Report on Healthcare Costs under the
Affordable Care Act be placed in the record. Without objection,
so ordered.
Additionally, I ask unanimous consent that all members may
place additional and extraneous material in the record for up
to five days after this hearing. Without objection, so ordered.
Lastly, as I said before the hearing opened, I ask general
leave that individuals present today may have up to five days
to submit additional written material as a result of their
attendance here, for the record. Without objection, so ordered.
We now go to our distinguished panel of witnesses.
Mr. Dan Waters is President of Dan Waters and Associates.
Welcome.
Ms. Sherry Overbey is Director of the Belmont Crisis
Pregnancy Center. Again, welcome.
Mr. Joel Long is President of the Gastonia Sheet Metal
Services. I guess that is one of the remaining heavy
manufacturers. Welcome. Thank you for being here.
Mr. Jason Falls is owner of Falls Insurance. Again, thanks
for your presence.
And lastly, Mr. Tav Gauss is President of The Action Group
Human Resource Solutions here in North Carolina.
Pursuant to the committee rules, all witnesses must be
sworn. Will you please rise and raise your right hands to take
the oath.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Issa. Please be seated. Let the record reflect
that all witnesses answered in the affirmative.
This is a field hearing. It is just as formal as anywhere
else in Congress. One of the formalities that we observe is
that your entire opening statements be placed in the record.
However, we observe a five-minute rule and, to the greatest
extent possible, equally enforce it against ourselves for each
round of questioning. So when you see the light go from green
to yellow, it's just like here in North Carolina, you had
better hurry, or else.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Issa. When it gets red, if you are in the middle
of a phrase, please finish it, but do not start a new subject.
It will be placed in the record in its entirety.
Additionally, during questioning, it is often possible if
you have left something out of your opening statement to
essentially answer it as part of a question.
And I will do the same for those of us on the dias. We may
go multiple rounds, but our last question, you will have as
much time to answer as is reasonable, but we will not ask
another question after we have gone to red, until the next
round, if necessary.
So I want to thank you all for being here, and Mr. Waters,
I am told that I kick off with you first. You are recognized
for five minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF DAN WATERS

Mr. Waters. Thank you, Chairman Issa.
My name is Dan Waters and I'm President of Dan Waters and
Associates in Hickory, North Carolina. I am a lifetime resident
of Catawba County and a graduate of Lenoir Rhyne University
with a degree in economics. I have served the people of Hickory
as an insurance agent and broker for 33 years.
During my tenure in the insurance industry, I have seen
companies come and I have seen companies go. I have seen
policies change and policies terminated. I have offered Basic
Benefits, Basic Benefits with Extended Coverage, Basic Benefits
plus Major Medical, and Comprehensive Major Medical. At no time
did these benefits require 2700 pages of explanation, let alone
2700 pages that neither the clients, their agents or their
Congressional Representative fully understand or have
personally read.
Now, agents and brokers are tasked with the challenging job
of trying to explain this complex law to our groups and to
individuals. Everywhere we turn, there is confusion,
misinformation, questions about the programs offered, cost of
premiums, tax ramifications and more.
In order to prepare brokers and agents, they have been
attending seminars, webinars, reading the NAHU Washington
Updates, taking the required PPACA certificate course, better
known as--we call it P-PACA. In addition, we have been keeping
up with the latest technology tools for group clients as well
as individuals. Our goal is to be able to communicate the
benefits in an understandable way, quote the accurate premiums
and in general allay the fears and concerns of our clients with
regard to new plans.
Some examples of these concerns are--I am hearing from my
office on a daily basis like you have:
I like my current plan. Why can I not keep it?
Why do I have to pay for benefits I will never use such as
maternity benefits, birth control, pediatric vision and dental,
rehab services?
How will I pay for higher deductibles I must have in order
to make my plan affordable?
Do I qualify for a subsidy? Why do I not qualify for a
subsidy?
Why is my health care premium so much higher than before?
And then some say I don't want to pay for insurance. Why is
it not my right to choose without having a penalty?
Do our current medical policies need to be changed in many
ways? Some reasonable parties will agree that this is the case.
Do we want to provide coverage for those who can't afford it,
but need it or want it? Yes, definitely. Should there be a way
for Americans with preexisting conditions to keep or get
coverage at a reasonable rate? Yes, of course. Is the
government mandated Affordable Care Act, requiring all policies
meet the same minimum standards, regardless of the needs or
stage in life, the answer? I would say from the reaction of my
clients, that would be a resounding ``no.''
As soon as the ACA became law, PPACA, Obamacare, became
law, our office phones were ringing with questions as to what
it means for our clients, particularly our individual clients.
After the cancellation notices were received, new premiums were
announced, those calls and the frustrations of our clients
increased exponentially, since clients found their monthly
costs more than doubling. An example of what I am saying is my
wife had a monthly premium of $396 with a $2500 deductible was
canceled and will be replaced with a premium of $735 with a
higher deductible. And as with many of our clients, she is
choosing to go with a significant increase in her deductible in
order to reach a reasonable cost. Since the recent announcement
of the President that people could keep their current plans, a
large portion of my individual clients are seeking to wait and
do just that, if the laws permit.
I fear that the mandatory ACA will be detrimental to my
community as a whole. We have experienced an economic downturn
in the last decade resulting in industries closing, a depressed
housing market, an overall lowering of disposable income. While
struggling employers are required to pay more in benefits,
either they will be forced to reduce their workforce,
contribute less to the employees' health plans, or drop those
plans altogether. Less income on the part of the business or
the individual translates into less spending and less growth
for our area.
Thank you for your time to consider these important matters
and for the opportunity to share my concerns. It is my hope
that together we can come to a better solution that will allow
healthcare to be fair, yet affordable, for employers and
individuals without making it a burden to our society.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mrs. Overbey.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Waters follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT OF SHERRY OVERBEY

Mrs. Overbey. I am one those who recently received an
astronomical increase of my insurance rates from Blue Cross
Blue Shield of North Carolina. As you can see, I am a woman and
I am healthy.
My monthly health insurance premium for 2013 is $395.60.
Beginning in January 2014, my renewal rate will be $713.11.
This amount of $713.11 is higher than my mortgage and my second
mortgage combined. This amount will, in all likelihood,
continue to rise every year. I also have a higher deductible
and higher out-of-pocket amount, but, of course, I have
maternity coverage and I also can get free birth control pills,
which at age 58 I am sure I am going to need both frequently.
[Laughter.]
Mrs. Overbey. As we all know, President Obama on numerous
occasions was telling the American people, ``If you like your
health insurance, you can keep it.'' But we now know that the
opposite was true. Now you can call this deception, deceit,
falsifying information, fabrication, whatever. But the bottom
line is no matter what nicety you give it, a lie is a lie is a
lie.
Our very own North Carolina Senator Kay Hagan was right
there alongside Obama delivering the same message. Senator
Hagan stated, and I quote, ``People who have insurance they're
happy with can keep it. We need to support the private
insurance industry, so that people who have insurance they're
happy with can keep it.'' This is another lie.
Women like me are being hurt by these lies and changes
brought about by this unjust law. We now have fewer choices
than we have ever had.
I contacted my Blue Cross Blue Shield agent asking him what
alternatives I have. His reply to me was, ``No one is sure
what's happening.'' He checked the subsidies amount and because
I am married and my husband and I make just above the $62,040
amount, I am disqualified. Oh, and by the way, if I were not
married and I could live with my boyfriend, we could make
$45,000-plus each, that's $90,000-plus as a couple, and qualify
for these subsidies in the Affordable Healthcare Act. And by
the way, the name Affordable Healthcare Act is just a lie by
virtue of the title itself. It should be called the
Unaffordable Healthcare Act.
This huge increase in my monthly insurance premium and out-
of-pocket expense and deductible does not supply any more
coverage, nor does it provide better coverage.
The American people did not ask for, nor vote for this
unaffordable health--oh, excuse me, I mean Affordable
Healthcare Act.
For people not to have a choice in keeping their insurance,
to be required to buy insurance they do not want and be fined
for not doing so takes precious freedom away from every
American. How Supreme Court Justice Roberts could have cast the
deciding vote as constitutional is beyond any reasoning.
For the first time in our government's history through
Obamacare and some exchanges, we will be paying for abortions
with our tax dollars. We can now go into the safe, protective
home of the womb and kill an innocent baby by this healthcare
law. That is another thing that is beyond any reasoning.
If the same scenario were my car insurance, I'd be calling
other companies, getting better rates and adjusting the
coverage as necessary. Now, because of the 10 required
government inclusions, I am paying an unfair price for less
coverage. I did like my insurance coverage, most Americans do.
Another lie that is circulating at the present time is that
most Americans do not like their coverage. There is an old
saying that goes, ``Tell a lie long enough and it becomes the
truth.''
This is the foundation of Obamacare and Obama's
Administration, for that matter. President Obama wants his
legacy to be Obamacare, this is what his whole presidential
tenure was based. But the legacy is going to be Obamacare is a
lie. We had the most wonderful healthcare system in the world
until the President, for reasons of control, began dismantling
it.
As a woman, President Obama and Senator Kay Hagan have
taken away my choice and with my choice, my rights and freedom.
I have talked to other women who are in similar situations as I
am and their policy was canceled altogether. I have friends who
recently retired, their policies were canceled under the
Affordable Healthcare Act. And others? Well, they cannot get on
the website, they cannot afford the insurance, and they cannot
afford the penalty for not having the insurance.
The bottom line and the truth, which we will not hear from
this President, is this has never been about healthcare. It is
about control. Think about it. A majority of Americans had some
healthcare coverage. Why not let those people keep it? Our
taxes are going up anyway, who do you think is going to pay for
Obamacare? Why not provide coverage for those who are without?
This would be a win-win situation. Americans would be happy to
keep their insurance. Those without insurance will be happy
because they have coverage. That's what makes sense if
Obamacare had not been about control. But Obamacare is about
control. What better way to control the lives of American
people than through healthcare. It is the number one issue that
concerns us all. It is the gathering of all kinds of
information into one system about you and me.
Thank you.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Long.
[Prepared statement of Mrs. Overbey follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT OF JOEL LONG

Mr. Long. Good morning, Chairman Issa and members of the
committee in attendance today. Thank you for taking the time to
come to our neck of the woods to learn more about how the new
healthcare law is impacting our day-to-day lives. Too many
times leaders in Washington forget they represent real people
with real challenges. You are to be commended for taking the
discussion outside the Washington bubble.
My name is Joel Long and I am the CEO of GSM Services/
Gastonia Sheet Metal, Incorporated. We are a third generation
heating, air conditioning, and commercial roofing company
founded in 1927. My brother Steven and I own and operate this
business and employ 146 co-workers.
I applaud your efforts today to hold this hearing on one of
the most important issues facing the citizens of our nation. I
cannot think of an issue that touches more people than
healthcare.
For the purpose of my remarks here today, I would like to
ask that you not look at me as a business. I would ask that you
instead look at me as a job creator. As such, I would further
ask that my remarks be received as coming from someone who has
worked to help create, build and improve the quality of life
for those living in my community, as well as a provider for the
foundation of a quality career for those who work in my
company, my co-workers.
I am the job creator who must live with the very decisions
and policies Congress and the regulatory agencies establish
which either improve or inhibit my ability to create jobs. I am
the job creator who believes our government must be a partner
for our mutual success. I am the job creator who believes the
business community has been asking for many years to be treated
as partners with lawmakers--not as the opposition.
In my limited time, I would like to touch on two of the
most important ramifications we are experiencing in the
business world related to healthcare reform.
Rising insurance premium costs. One of the most talked-
about issues during the healthcare reform debate was that
rising insurance premiums needed to be brought under control. I
couldn't agree more. But in my experience, that's the
difference between policy and the real world. For my company,
while our rates have risen consistently over the last decade,
we have maintained a strong partnership with our insurance
company and co-workers, and believe our current insurance plan
has evolved into a plan that is providing excellent coverage at
affordable rates for our co-workers. I've included our 10-year
history of rate increases. I've also included our current 2013
health insurance rates for you.
In 2009, we transitioned to an HRA plan that allowed our
co-workers to enjoy the low rates of a $10,000 deductible and
also protect them and their families from large expenses in
case of a health issue. Our plan is a partnership between GSM
Services, our co-workers and our insurance company. GSM
Services pays the first $1000 of our deductible, co-workers pay
the next $2000 and we both split the next seven evenly. Total
out-of-pocket expenses for our co-workers is $5500 per year per
family in case of a large health event. Most of our co-workers
never exceed the $1000 deductible GSM pays.
In our 2012 plan year, GSM had a potential HRA medical
liability of $481,500 and we only paid $41,532. Our
prescription benefit under the HRA had a liability of $72,000
and we only paid $1906, a testimony of our co-workers usage of
85 percent generics. Our total HRA potential liability was
$553,500 and we paid out $43,438. Numbers do not lie. This is a
testament to the effectiveness of this strategy for GSM and our
co-workers.
Our company, our co-workers and our insurance company were
happy with this agreement, with this partnership. We were all
successful, it was our plan.
As of this date, we have been forced to change our renewal
date from May of 2014 to December of 2013 to avoid the
projected minimum rate increase of 30 percent as our current
plan will no longer be offered by our insurance company next
year. We believe this minimum will be closer to 50 percent
under the current conditions. This early renewal is an attempt
to delay our increase as long as possible in the hope that
legitimate changes will be made in 2014, so companies like ours
can continue to offer better and more affordable options to our
co-workers.
Confusion is my second part. There is no debate as to the
confusion this new law has created, not to mention
implementation. That said, we as businesses cannot operate on
unknowns. We cannot plan or budget on what we do not know or do
not understand, and as we work to understand the law, we now
see the confusion of those who are charged with its
implementation. The chaos of pricing, policy cancellations and
quality has caused instability. As business professionals,
instability and chaos are our enemies. We seek real numbers
that we can anticipate. A sweeping policy change like
healthcare reform should have been better planned and
implemented. The lives that are impacted by the instability of
the new law are not statistics, they are the lives of real
people.
Thank you for your time today. I applaud your attention to
our needs as citizens of this great nation and ask that you fix
this issue so that we can get back to the work of running our
businesses and providing for our families.
Thank you.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Falls.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Long follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT OF JASON FALLS

Mr. Falls. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Jason Falls and I am a licensed insurance
professional in North Carolina. My purpose for testifying
before you today is to share my understanding of how the
Affordable Care Act is impacting individuals in our
communities. In my role as an insurance professional, I discuss
this impact almost daily.
Residents of North Carolina have heard our President state
that Healthcare.gov and the Affordable Care Act will reduce
their premiums and improve their coverage. They have also seen
a failed rollout of the website and an administration making
changes to the law on a regular basis. These actions have
caused confusion and concern by many. I have met with some that
have opted to wait out 2014 and elect to pay the penalties,
leaving them uninsured and vulnerable to financial ruin if they
have medical needs.
While the President's words on November 14th gave a glimmer
of hope to some, those individuals covered under the state and
federal high risk pools, known as Inclusive Health in North
Carolina, received notification that their coverage would cease
on December 31st as planned. Under her current coverage with
Inclusive Health, Tina from Shelby pays a co-pay of $250 per
month for a medication. Without the medication, her quality of
life would be deeply diminished and could be life-threatening.
Under the new plans offered under ACA guidelines, she would pay
25 percent of the retail cost of that medication, which is
currently $28,000 a year, leaving her with a bill for one
prescription of nearly $600 a month. That is in addition to her
increased premiums.
In North Carolina, people making less than the poverty
level or more than four times the poverty level do not qualify
for the subsidies that are supposed to make premiums for the
new plans under Obamacare affordable. Lisa and Wayne have seen
first hand how Obamacare will impact them when they ran the
numbers. Wayne is covered under Medicare because of serious
medical issues, including organ transplants, and was being
checked for cancer at Duke Medical this past Wednesday. His
condition requires them to be at Duke often, so it's hard for
Lisa to have a full time job. They make things work on just
$9000 a year with the help of family, friends, and prayer. But
that income is lower than the minimum of $15,510 required for a
family of two to be eligible for subsidies. Without those
subsidies, she can't afford coverage and is not eligible for
Medicaid or any other coverage. She can't afford to cover
herself under the new ACA-compliant plans, which have a higher
premium than the plans offered in 2013.
Several restaurants I have met with have canceled their
employer-sponsored health insurance and will reduce the number
of hours of their workers to avoid mandates. The employees are
finding that coverage, even with subsidies, are higher than the
employer plan that they were covered on.
As an insurance professional, I am concerned with someone
who chooses to ride it out without coverage. Some will, because
of the higher premiums or confusion of the implementation of
the Affordable Care Act. Others may, out of disdain of a
government that forces individuals to purchase a product that
the government designs under threat of financial penalty. For
those that choose to ride it out, the real risk is the fact
that the ACA forces you to make a choice by the deadline, for
this year, March 31st. If you opt out, you cannot buy coverage
later in the year without a qualifying event. So if I choose no
coverage for me and I have a serious medical condition during
the year from an accident or disease, I run the risk of
financial ruin for my family. The potential is far worse than
the option the President touts--to just pay the penalty if you
don't want coverage.
As someone with intimate knowledge of my industry, and as
an American, I have serious concerns about Obamacare. What
happens when Congress decides to work on our national debt--
which they should--and the target is put on those subsidies.
My purpose here today was to tell the story of my friends
and neighbors. They are confused, concerned, mad and fed up. We
can't see the relationship between the value of the new plans
and the dollars it takes from our families' budget. For those
committee members that understand these challenges, I thank
you. For those that don't, I invite you to spend the day with
me as I visit with individuals and small businesses to see for
yourself their concerns.
I want to thank you for coming to our great state. I
especially want to thank Chairman Issa for his leadership on
the committee and our North Carolina Representatives that serve
on this important committee, Congressman Patrick McHenry and
Congressman Mark Meadows, as well as Congressman Pittenger, for
being here today. You are all strong advocates for the
residents of the state of North Carolina.
Thank you for your time.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Gauss.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Falls follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT OF TAV GAUSS

Mr. Gauss. Mr. Chairman, welcome to North Carolina,
distinguished members of the committee. I have been asked to
come here today to talk about the effects the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare,
has had on businesses and individuals in areas of my state.
I would like to make two comments to the people listening
to this. Please read my entire testimony, especially my updates
from my last testimony two years ago in Washington. And please
know that I am a non-affiliated voter. I have disdain for both
parties equally.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Gauss. As you can see below, I belong to three national
organizations that span North America. So I have asked some of
my colleagues of 32 years to give me their input as well. I
asked only for instances, good or bad, that they have firsthand
knowledge of, no conjecture, no speculation, no pontification.
I received multiple responses from Florida, California,
Connecticut, Louisiana, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Kentucky and Virginia and I have heard from others since my
deadline for the testimony. I will say that I was given a
deadline--we were all given a deadline of Wednesday, and I
asked your staffer could we make it longer because things are
apt to happen on a daily basis like they did this morning. So I
don't have that written in my testimony, we can talk about that
later.
There are two words that have been pervasive in everybody's
concerns--uncertainty and trust, or lack thereof. And our
employees have added the word ``fear.''
When a person or a business has money to spend, they
usually do not spend it without some degree of certainty as to
what they will get in return. If they do not know what they're
going to get in return, they will not spend it, will not spend
as much.
Across the country, especially in my area, businesses are
hesitant to invest in any people, plant, or equipment because
they cannot be certain of the ultimate costs and returns on
those investments. They are not hiring people because of the
unknown cost of Obamacare and other issues coming from federal
and state governments. North Carolina employers and employers
in 12 other states also have the added burden of employment tax
increases imposed on them to pay back money the states borrowed
from the federal government as their state unemployment funds
went dry during the last recession and its extended benefits
period.
There is one known fact. All of our costs for healthcare
have got to go up because the plan is adding heretofore non-
insured people, many of whom will not be making a significant
contribution, if any at all, to the premiums paid to health
insurers. As written now, the majority of that burden will be
on the business community. And please refer to my two positions
on two insurance companies. I do understand underwriting and
insurance products.
We've heard from others and these are direct quotes, either
made directly to me or to my colleagues:
``We're going to reduce head count below 50 people.''
``Because I pay 100 percent of my employees' health
insurance premiums, I will take whatever raises I was going to
give them and use them for their new health insurance
premiums.'' Note too, the health insurance is deductible
expense for a group plan. The bonuses would have been taxed as
income, so they're taking income taxes and turning them into
health insurance premiums.
``I am creating more part time positions that will be for
28 or 29 hours per week and making sure my seasonal or part
time help stays under 29 hours per week.''
``I plan to make some full time fully benefitted positions
part time and non-benefitted.''
``The rules for a variable hour employee are too confusing,
they are too subjective.
People, myself included, have been asked by their clients
to payroll people for their company, but for less than 30 hours
a week.
A company in southwest Florida has stopped paying for any
employee's share of health insurance until the numbers become
more quantifiable.
A staffing company in south Florida trying to do the right
thing, tried to offer a plan this October and had 160 people
eligible for the plan to begin October 1, 2013. Seventeen
signed up because they had to pay premiums.
And I will stop there, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gauss follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Issa. Thank you.
And I'll recognize myself for a first round of questions.
Mr. Waters, have you ever seen another form of insurance
that required that the pool, if you will, contain coverages
that people do not want? For example, have you ever seen where
somebody has life insurance and whether they are 18 or 80, they
pay the same amount for that term life insurance?
Mr. Waters. No, I have not.
Chairman Issa. Mr. Falls, have you ever seen insurance like
that?
Mr. Falls. No, sir, I have not.
Chairman Issa. Prior to the Affordable Care Act, did you do
healthcare insurance--and Mr. Long, obviously you have dealt
with this too--did you do insurance based on that or did you
evaluate your pool and your insurance carriers evaluate the
pool based on the unique characteristics of the pool? In other
words, all of your 160 employees, Mr. Long.
Mr. Long. We always pool, insurance is based on that pool,
people pooled together as a group, group coverage. And so it
would be approached in that manner.
Chairman Issa. But it was the actual pool that you had,
your 160 employees.
Mr. Long. The actual pool of employees that we had or that
were going to be participating in the plan; yes, sir.
Chairman Issa. And I would like to follow up a little bit.
Mr. Long, under the Affordable Care Act, if I understand your
catastrophic insurance, because you have a high deductible that
you and your company pay, is going to change.
Mr. Long. Yes.
Chairman Issa. Meaning you are going to pay more for an
insurance that you almost never use, because in fact your
company effectively pays apparently almost all of the coverage,
between you and your employees, with the exception of the
administrative cost of negotiating with hospitals for rates and
the like; is that correct?
Mr. Long. Our plan, we are told, will go from the $10,000
deductible to the $5000 deductible, that will be what we will
be focused on. And so, yes, we will have less choices and we
will be in a different situation with that going forward. But
we do pay--the way it works now, we do pay the majority of
those bills, because most of our co-workers do not go above
that $1000 deductible that we pay. And then on the rate side,
we also--our rates, we pay 50 percent when employees start with
us, up to covering it fully in a 10-year period. So even their
rates are covered.
Chairman Issa. The reason I asked it is there has been a
lot of discussion about these deductibles and co-pays. In your
case, your employees were essentially at or below that $5000
level; weren't they?
Mr. Long. Yes.
Chairman Issa. And the difference was what you chose to
pay. But under the Affordable Care Act, if I understand
correctly, they are taking away your, as an employer, your
ability to pay that. And they are saying that it does not
matter who pays it, the deductible has to be that amount, which
in most cases, most people are complaining because their
deductible went up in order to make it look more affordable.
Mr. Long. In our case----
Chairman Issa. I just want to understand how it is
affecting you and your choice to cover that on behalf of your
employees.
Mr. Long. They are changing our formula without our input,
and so now we will be in a--every employee in our company will
be in a situation where we pay more for a different coverage,
and we were already happy with our coverage. And so yes, our
employees paid $5500 maximum, we paid $4500, but almost no
employees ever got to that point.
Chairman Issa. Now Mr. Long, and I think for all the others
that are insurance experts, if you will, apparently you have
been working sort of best practices, same as Safeway and a lot
of other much larger companies, to try to work with your
employees to lower the cost of delivery of healthcare. Is that
correct? You mentioned the 85 percent generics and so on. Your
plan allows for people to get non-generics if they need them,
but encourages them to spend their money wisely; is that
correct?
Mr. Long. Yes, sir.
Chairman Issa. One question--and I am going to be
respectful of the limited time for each round. Is there
anything in the Affordable Care Act that does the kinds of
things that Mr. Long has been doing? In other words, what in
the Affordable Care Act encourages the individual and/or the
employer to drive down the cost of delivery of healthcare? Do
any of you have any examples?
Mr. Falls. All I know is if somebody holds himself out as
having one, then they do not know what they are talking about.
Chairman Issa. Well, that is an area that hopefully
Congress will address, is the cost drivers, the things that Mr.
Long has been working with his employees on.
I will close by mentioning a couple of facts. On the
Affordable Care Act, if you do not want insurance, as long as
you are willing to pay a $5000 individual fine, up to, and a
$12,500 family plan, up to; you can choose not to have
insurance. The amazing thing is if you can pay that fine, then
you can choose to pay your own healthcare over and above that.
I have not quite figured that out.
But I will note that every member of Congress, until next
year, and every federal employee and their families, that is
over eight million people, receive a program called FEHBP, the
Federal Employee Healthcare Benefit. It is in fact reimbursed
or paid for at 72 to 82 percent by the federal government,
depending upon whether you are a postal or non-postal worker.
It does not age discriminate the way the Affordable Care Act
is, and it has not changed to be, if you will, fully compliant
with the Affordable Care Act. Oddly enough, the deductibles
under the FEHBP are lower than under the new exchanges that the
three of us as members of Congress, by law, have to go into.
So I just want to put that into the record because you will
be hearing, at least from this member, and from Lacy Clay,
Congressman Clay of Missouri, that every American should have
access to that FEHBP, something that everyone from the
President down to your postal delivery man has, and that at a
minimum, what we have as federal workers should be available to
all Americans.
And with that, I go to Mr. McHenry.
Mr. McHenry. Well, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for mentioning
that. And I join you in supporting your legislation that
enables all Americans to have the same health insurance that
members of Congress and federal employees have. I think that
would be a useful and positive step. And in fact, this is not
some partisan idea. In fact, this is something you have long
supported and I have been very supportive as well.
Now, I want to address a question most folks--a lot of
folks--have. Preexisting condition, discrimination against
somebody who has a chronic condition. Mr. Waters, in the state
of North Carolina, let us rewind two or three years ago. If
someone came to you and they had a chronic condition, were you
able to get them health insurance as a result of a North
Carolina program?
Mr. Waters. There was a North Carolina program called
Inclusive Health that was able to do that. And so I thought we
were addressing the program pretty reasonably at that time. So,
yes, North Carolina did a good job with that.
Mr. McHenry. So Inclusive Health----
Mr. Waters. Yes.
Mr. McHenry. --which was a state-based initiative----
Mr. Waters. That is correct.
Mr. McHenry. --that helped individuals with chronic
conditions or preexisting conditions get health insurance.
Mr. Waters. That is correct.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. So we were able to do that prior to the
Affordable Care Act or Obamacare's passage.
Mr. Waters. That is correct.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. So are you able to offer Inclusive
Health for next year?
Mr. Waters. No. Inclusive Health has been terminated as of
the end of December, so you cannot write it any more starting
as of December 1st, it is over with.
Mr. McHenry. And unfortunately that is a result of----
Mr. Waters. Of Obamacare.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. I just wanted to be clear about that.
Mr. Waters. That is correct.
Mr. McHenry. So to say that someone with a preexisting
condition could not get health insurance in North Carolina that
is reasonably affordable is simply not the case.
Mr. Waters. Right. That is correct.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you.
Mrs. Overbey, I was taught by my mother to not ask a lady's
age, a woman's age. But let me ask you, your prior insurance
plan, did you have maternity coverage under that?
Mrs. Overbey. No.
Mr. McHenry. No. And you are required--your new plan
requires you to have this?
Mrs. Overbey. Yes.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Is that somewhat absurd?
Mrs. Overbey. Well, yes, it is. I am not planning to have
any more children and it is not possible.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Likewise, I heard from a constituent of
mine named Pauline, who told me that coverage for her four year
old daughter for maternity care, she did not find appropriate
either.
Mrs. Overbey. Yes.
Chairman Issa. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. McHenry. Sure.
Chairman Issa. Was the gentleman aware that the men at the
table also have to have maternity coverage under the law.
Mr. McHenry. Well, you beat me to the punch. I was going to
ask Mr. Long.
[Laughter.]
Mr. McHenry. I was going to ask Mr. Long if he intended to
have children.
Chairman Issa. Personally.
Mr. Long. Personally? Probably not.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. So this type of coverage that actually
increases your cost is not helpful.
Mrs. Overbey. No, it is not.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. All right, just trying to understand
this. And your premiums are currently?
Mrs. Overbey. I currently pay $395.60.
Mr. McHenry. Okay.
Mrs. Overbey. And it is going to go to $713.11. That is my
monthly premium. And of course my deductible and out-of-pocket
and all that is going up too.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Mr. Long, the economy in Gaston County
and Mr. Falls, the economy in Cleveland County, certainly hit a
rough spot. But Mr. Long, as a result of Obamacare, will you be
able to employ more people and pay higher wages than without
it?
Mr. Long. I think that is yet to be certain. However, I
know this will increase our cost. And so it can have nothing
but a negative impact on our future and what we will do next
year. There are other factors of course that come into hiring
more employees and more co-workers, but there is no way this
can help us. It is the exact opposite of the trend that we were
heading on our cost for insurance.
Mr. McHenry. Okay, so you would find that this would be a
hindrance rather than----
Mr. Long. This would stifle my ability to create more jobs,
yes.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Mr. Falls.
Mr. Falls. We are seeing in Cleveland County, with a lot of
our businesses there, are going to be scaling back, taking full
time employees and putting those to part time employees,
reducing the number of workers. So personally, I expect to see
a spike in our unemployment rate in Cleveland County because of
it.
Mr. McHenry. So it would be a hindrance rather than a help
to economic growth and more jobs.
Mr. Falls. That is correct.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Thank you all for your testimony. Thanks
for your time today and I yield back.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Pittenger.
Mr. Pittenger. Mr. Waters, thank you for your testimony.
You mentioned your issues related to compliance. Give us some
idea of the hours or manpower as it relates to the additional
compliance requirements of your business.
Mr. Waters. Virtually every day we start off with the
telephone ringing and obviously the questions are the normal
questions you ask, as I had mentioned before. And it is hard to
explain over the telephone, we try to get people into our
office to talk to them more about compliance and what is going
on.
I would say that there is--the time element that is
involved that we have to do as far as insurance agents are
concerned is that we had to pass a test--study for another four
or five hours and then pass a test in order to qualify for
PPACA, to sell the program and to understand it, which is okay,
but every person in my office had to do that also, which takes
a tremendous amount of time in order to do that.
And then the technology part is changing rapidly, as you
know. We have to have better equipment, better programs, in
order to even--we have to get into the system to make sure that
they are in compliance and they are meeting the numbers that
they are supposed to meet in order to qualify currently for
this program.
So it is an ongoing saga as to what is--and I do not know
how long this will go on, but it is an ongoing saga as to what
it takes.
Mr. Pittenger. Well, currently, what percentage increase in
compliance time is required, do you think, by your staff?
Mr. Waters. I would say it has increased 15 percent, 20
percent of my staff's time.
Mr. Pittenger. A substantial amount.
Mr. Waters. Yes.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you.
Mr. Gauss, you made reference to uncertainty. You made
reference to fear. These are major emotional words that bring
into light the challenges that you anticipate unfolding ahead
and what you do not anticipate, what you--the unknowns. Give us
some idea of what would bring some sense of resolve or comfort
to you. What would you like to see done, given where we are
today in the context of the current legislation that is in
front of us? If you were in our shoes, what would you like us
to do?
Mr. Gauss. I would stop and then fix it, but do not try to
fix it while it is still going. There is no doubt that there
are some good things for some people in the Act.
Underwriting, we are all going to share in the heavier
expenses, there is no doubt about that. But you cannot--I think
somebody from Congress said it is like trying to fix a flat
tire while the car is running. If we tried to do that in
business, our customers would go somewhere else. They would not
buy our product, they would go buy product from somebody who
knew what they were doing. Stop and fix it.
Mr. Pittenger. Okay. Mr. Long.
Mr. Long. Yes, sir.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you for your testimony. You referred
to yourself as a job creator.
Mr. Long. Uh-huh.
Mr. Pittenger. I understand that you have some 150 jobs
that you are in some measure responsible for in this region.
That is a significant amount.
Mr. Long. Uh-huh.
Mr. Pittenger. You alluded to some, but I am trying to get
a handle in terms of the ongoing effects of this healthcare
plan. How do you believe that is really going to impede your
growth of your business and that of other businesses that you
are involved in? Where do you see the shortfalls? What keeps
you up at night in terms of your ability to expand and your
ability to grow?
Mr. Long. Well, in the Charlotte region, we are focused
typically in a 50-mile radius of Gaston County, our work is,
and so we are very fortunate to have Charlotte, that
metropolitan area, that really drives our economy.
Mr. Pittenger. That is a great area.
Mr. Long. It is. It is a beautiful place, best place in the
world to live. However, I believe that everything we are seeing
from government, from a regulatory standpoint and this, the
Affordable Care Act, is dampening our growth every day. With
all the issues we face as a nation on our economic side with
our government growing faster than the private sector, we need
to grow out privately of our problems, so that we can have a
broader tax base instead of raising taxes and raising cost of
doing business. And this is just another way that our
government is not being a good partner at the right scale.
And so I think it will just negatively impact--and a lot of
times, these regulations, the impact is hard to see on the
surface, there are a lot of hidden costs and there is a lot of
hidden impact of slower growth. You are trying to prove a
negative and that is very difficult.
Mr. Pittenger. Mr. Falls, thank you for your testimony.
You know, we get calls every day in our office, ``what do I
do now?'' In your practice, can you shed some light on what you
tell your customers, what they can do in light of the
challenges that they face? What are the options, what advice
can you give us?
Mr. Falls. Well, it is very confusing for my clients as
well as the industry. Even as late as last week, when the
President spoke, he changed direction on the industry as well.
I have met with many people and talked to them about their
subsidy options, talked to them about coverage without
subsidies, the different plans that are out there, limited
plans, less plans than we had in 2013. And even after meeting
with them and talking to them about the direction to go, they
will hear something on the news, they will hear from the
President or they will hear something from the newsmen and they
will make a phone call to me and say ``I do not understand.
Everything sounds different today than it did yesterday, and is
there going to be any resolve to this.'' And my answer is ``I
do not know.''
Mr. Pittenger. It is tough.
I yield back.
Chairman Issa.  We are going to a quick second round if you
all can stay for that. I have just got a couple of questions.
Mr. Long, as an employer of 160 or 146-plus, I guess you,
your wife and a few others in the family, your brother. You
have had insurance for a long time.
Mr. Long. Uh-huh.
Chairman Issa. Did you have insurance when you were growing
up?
Mr. Long. Sure.
Chairman Issa. Did your family do it for the previous
generation?
Mr. Long. Yes.
Chairman Issa. Even the first generation, there was some
consideration?
Mr. Long. You know, I am not sure, but I would--I am not
sure we did, that first generation.
Chairman Issa. But for decades your family has provided it.
Mr. Long. Yes, decades definitely; yes, sir.
Chairman Issa. Now, I am going to ask an anecdotal question
that I know the answer to, but if you do not, just say you do
not, but in your experience, the companies that do not provide
health insurance, particularly in your industry, they tend to
be less than 50, do they not?
Mr. Long. Yes, sir.
Chairman Issa. So, one of the things that always bothered
me in the Affordable Care Act is we waived companies less than
50, when in fact, the vast majority of the companies in my
recognition and in studies that have been done, the vast
majority of companies that do not provide healthcare are these
small, sometimes fly-by-night companies, sometimes just
startup, well-intended. The Act waived providing it for the
companies who least likely provided it while mandating the
individual to have it.
So in a strange, perverse way, the changes you are seeing,
small competitors who are not providing healthcare and are not
mandated to provide healthcare, do not see. Do you see that as
anti-competitive if we are going to have a law and then we are
going to waive for people who least likely provided healthcare?
Mr. Long. Of course, if that is the case with employers
under 50. We believe insurance partnership with our employees
is something we must do to hire incredible co-workers and to
provide the services that we want--the level of service we want
to provide. But if it is not even across the board, there is
more and more chance of uneven competition.
Chairman Issa. Well, having been an electronics
manufacturer, I agree that covering your employees gets you a
better employee, to say the least.
Mr. Gauss, the other thing that is in this Act is this idea
that if you lower people to part time, particularly the
restaurant industry and so on, you do not have to cover them.
Does that make any sense to you, that the part time employee,
the one least able to afford to pay the healthcare all by
themselves is exempted no matter how large a company is?
Mr. Gauss. Not at all. In our industry as well as the
restaurant industry and other seasonal part time industries, it
may be very easy to take even someone who is making 32 hours or
34 hours down to 29 hours. You do not hear as much about it now
because some large companies made the mistake of making that
public about 18 months ago, so people have quit talking about
the fact that they have actually done this. But they are doing
it.
What I do not understand is my turnover is nine weeks in
the staffing industry, which is okay for the staffing industry.
And so the insurance underwriter underwrites my employee for
nine weeks and then he goes somewhere else, whether it is to a
permanent job, to another company, whatever, quits. All of a
sudden, the insurance company has underwritten this guy for
nine weeks and now he is gone. I cannot figure the accounting
on that and neither can the IRS, by the way. They came to us
and asked us.
Chairman Issa. One of the things about federal mandates is
that we often pass them and then begin correcting them as soon
as they are implemented.
I guess my last question is a comment. I was in business
for many years and as a member of the Chamber, we would have
speakers. It has been about 15 years since the founder of
Starbucks came to us and I might note that Starbucks is a part
time employer. Most of the people that you see working at
Starbucks are all part time. But they have provided
proportional healthcare benefits. In other words, they pay a
certain amount into a healthcare benefit for every employee, no
matter how few hours, throughout their years. And I have got to
be honest, that behavior is behavior I would like to have seen
in the Affordable Care Act and I still would like to see. The
idea that if people, someone has two part time jobs, their
employer would be encouraged to pay in a portion to what
ultimately would end up being combined.
One of the things that I found in the Affordable Care Act
that I do not understand is for the most part, individuals
cannot--do not have a system where they can go to the exchange
and have their employers each pay in a portion to it, if they
are, for example, in your staffing situation. Do you want to
address that? Because you have obviously looked at the fact
that you have people that are going to be in individual
accounts on the exchange, they are going to come to you for
nine weeks and then going to go somewhere else. Is that right?
Mr. Gauss. Yeah. And I am going to step out on a limb and
act like I know the answer to a question, but if I am not
mistaken, proportionate contributions is forbidden under the
Act.
Chairman Issa. That is my understanding too.
Mr. Gauss. I am probably wrong.
Chairman Issa. But again, Starbucks had a program that made
sense long before there was a law.
My time is expiring, but I--or expired. I just want you to
understand that part of the listening session today is every
one of us as members of Congress hopefully in a bipartisan
House/Senate bicameral, will have an opportunity to see if we
cannot make some of those fixes. One of the challenges, and I
would ask you all, and for that matter, actuarials that may be
listening to this, to weigh in on how it affects it. Because we
realize that these changes also would have consequences for
cost. But these are areas that I personally am concerned, that
well-meaning employers, such as Starbucks over these many
years, should be encouraged to continue doing what they are
doing, not prohibited from it.
Mr. McHenry.
Mr. McHenry. Well, let me begin, you know, Mr. Long, your
business is a competitive one, it is a service and the quality
of what you do matters a lot. But can you go out to the
marketplace and just set your price?
Mr. Long. No, sir.
Mr. McHenry. I asked this--you know, this is Congress we
are talking to.
Mr. Long. Sure.
Mr. McHenry. I just wanted to make sure.
Chairman Issa. You can set the price. The question is will
the customer come.
Mr. McHenry. Right.
Mr. Long. We can set any price we want, but that does not
mean that we will get it.
Mr. McHenry. Why?
Mr. Long. Because of open competition.
Mr. McHenry. Competition.
Mr. Long. Competition is an incredibly wonderful thing. It
makes us better.
Mr. McHenry. So competition will set price.
Mr. Long. It makes us better, yes.
Mr. McHenry. So if you have less competition--well, let us
say you have more competition, right? Prices come down.
Mr. Long. Yes.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Well, Mr. Waters, you are in the health
insurance business, right? How long you been in the health
insurance business?
Mr. Waters. Thirty-three years.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. So let us walk through this. I come to
you, a small employer, and I say I would like to buy a health
insurance plan--this is a couple of years ago. How many options
do I have?
Mr. Waters. What we do is that we would run this through--
we have about four or five carriers in our office, as it
relates to how many we get in North Carolina, so we take four
or five of the biggest carriers, we run that through the
formula, our computer system, to try to find out which one of
those gives you the best rate for what you are looking for. And
then we go with that.
Mr. McHenry. So let us say instead of four or five
carriers, you have two.
Mr. Waters. Then that breaks down the competition to where
the two carriers----
Mr. McHenry. Let me ask another question. We are sitting in
North Carolina, but South Carolina is just a short, you know,
10 minute drive from where we sit.
Mr. Waters. Sure.
Mr. McHenry. Can I get a healthcare plan from South
Carolina?
Mr. Waters. No, I would love to have South Carolina because
there is some good competition there.
Mr. McHenry. Right. So competition--and the reason why I
talk about it is competition matters.
So we go in the individual market in North Carolina, prior
to Obamacare, we had 12 carriers.
Mr. Waters. Right.
Mr. McHenry. Now, after Obamacare, going into next year, we
have two--two. We have some counties, 61 out of 100 counties in
North Carolina, we only have one provider in the exchange. What
does that do for competition?
Mr. Waters. No competition.
Mr. McHenry. Does not pull down the price.
Mr. Waters. No.
Mr. McHenry. Does not make things more competitive. And I
say this because this is an important ingredient when we talk
about healthcare reform, health insurance reform, more
competition. So employers and individuals have more options.
Right?
I ask this because that competition matters. Mr. Waters,
what is the main reason why people do not buy health insurance?
Mr. Waters. Primarily price drives the item. And then some
people are looking for specific coverages, regardless of price.
Mr. McHenry. Okay.
Mr. Waters. But price normally drives the item.
Mr. McHenry. Price drives--I am sorry?
Mr. Waters. Drives the item that we are looking for.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. So price drives--so this question about
competition relates right back.
Mr. Waters. Right.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Now this is something, in this whole
discussion, instead of simply me as a member of Congress saying
I did not vote for the Affordable Care Act or Obamacare. Well,
you have to be for something instead, right? And I support a
comprehensive plan that would address this, would allow
competition across state lines. Would you find that beneficial
in your offerings?
Mr. Waters. I would find that beneficial, yes.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Now, so Mr. Long, in terms of your
employees, now what are they looking for for their health
insurance? I mean, you currently have a plan that you like, but
unfortunately, in order to keep it, you are going to have to
pay a whole lot more; is that right?
Mr. Long. Yes. We are not going to be able to keep it. It
is going to change, our plan will change.
Mr. McHenry. So you are not able to keep your current----
Mr. Long. No, our plan will change next year. We just
deferred that decision until December of next year.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. So what does this mean for your
employees?
Mr. Long. Our employees want the best coverage they can get
for the dollars that they are willing to pay to protect their
families in case of a healthcare problem. They do not want
anything for free, but they do want good coverage at a
reasonable cost and they want input into what they are
receiving. They want choices. We need more choices instead of
less choices. And I think all of us do.
Mr. McHenry. Mrs. Overbey, would you like to have more
choices in terms of your health insurance? Would you like to be
able to make the choice on whether or not you purchase a policy
that covers a procedure you are morally opposed to?
Mrs. Overbey. Of course. I think that is what Americans
want. We do not want to have to be forced to buy something that
we do not have any choice in the matter.
When I woke up this morning, I live in a capitalistic
society, not a socialism society and I want to be able to make
those choices, I want to be able to have that competition. I
want to be able to go and look because as an American citizen I
have the freedom and hopefully the right to do that. And I want
those rights to continue, to be able to do that.
Mr. McHenry. So, you know, when I look at this, there are a
lot of pledges made about this law. I think people have various
opinions about it, but disappointment is the greatest word I
hear from--most consistent word I hear from my constituents.
And so I thank you for taking the time to testify today. I
know it is a challenge to take time out of all of your busy
schedules, but it means a lot that you would take the time to
tell your stories. And I appreciate those in the crowd that
have their statements that they want to share and place in the
Congressional Record. We will--the Chairman has made that
possible and I appreciate your willingness to tell your
stories. What we want is greater coverage and care at a lower
price. We want more competition and choice, not fewer or less.
And so I think we are unified in that.
And the fact is that the higher insurance prices under this
law are not Republican increases or Democrat increases, they
are increases that American families are bearing or trying to
bear. So it is not a partisan question, it is just a practical
question about the cost for families.
And so, Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing
and I yield back.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Pittenger.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mrs. Overbey, your points related to coverage that is not
needed, the Cadillac plans, everybody buys the same, inside the
same box, we hear that. In fact, I co-sponsor a bill with
Congresswoman Ellmers, as I believe my colleagues do, that
would restrict the coverage to those items that you need and
that you would want. So hopefully, clearer minds will prevail
and we will have a better policy come through that.
I would direct my last comments or questions to Mr. Waters
and Mr. Falls.
From your experience in your insurance business, as you
look at the required actuaries and the pool risk, what do you
anticipate will occur as those who sign up through the
exchanges, what will we have in terms of a risk pool? Will it
be adequate, will it be balanced? Will it only embrace those
who have a preexisting condition?
As you look at the motivation for people who buy
insurance--you know, the Congressional Budget Office said that
the healthcare plan is unsustainable. Max Baucus, the Democrat
Chairman in the Senate Banking Committee, said it is a train
wreck. Well, this has some major implications, and so I think I
would just like to know from your personal experience, what you
would anticipate down the road as these pools are being
assembled.
Mr. Falls. I would like to answer that question and also
reference Congressman McHenry's prior question on Inclusive
Health, to give an example on how I think from experience this
will happen.
Inclusive Health had a state option as well as had a
federal option that was canceled earlier this year. It was no
longer--you no longer can sign up on federal option. When that
plan was first introduced, there was an influx of federal
monies that was put into that plan, along with premiums being
paid in by the people that elected to get on those plans. The
premiums that were being paid in were not enough to cover the
expenses of the plan and eventually those rates had to increase
and that is the understanding that we--as insurance agents,
that is what we were told the reason why they canceled that
federal plan earlier this year rather than stopping it December
31st, along with the state plan.
The other reason why this plan is being canceled, both the
federal option and the state options, the requirement--one of
the requirements to be eligible for those plans is you cannot
be eligible for coverage anywhere else. Because the Affordable
Care Act--essentially there are no health insurance questions
on the applications for health insurance now--there are no
health questions other than if you use tobacco or if you are
pregnant. And that is just to determine--the question on
pregnancy is to determine how many people you are going to
count in your household. Because there are no health questions
on that now, everything is based on income.
The subsidies are out there, the lack of underwriting, as
Mr. Gauss spoke to earlier, this is going to go--I believe this
is going to go the way that most insurance policies that are
not well thought out will go. And they will eventually either
have to increase the premiums drastically or those plans will
just have to go away.
Mr. Pittenger. This business model was based on the
presupposition that those who are younger would also buy into
it. Is it your experience that that age group buys into
insurance at this time, will they fulfill their role in terms
of the risk pool requirement?
Mr. Falls. The premise that the young people are going to
be the salvation of this plan, I find is hard to believe.
Whenever you have someone that is 30 years old or younger and
they elect to take a plan, most 30 year olds or younger that I
know just come out of college, in our area, make less than
$45,960. That is the upper limit where you qualify for
subsidies. So those premiums they are going to be paying in are
not really going to be that significant in most cases and are
not going to help the pool.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you.
Mr. Waters.
Mr. Waters. I would agree everything he said. I just
recently saw a program that came out of Kentucky and the 4600
people that signed up, 25 percent--and they used zero to 30, I
think it was 25 percent of the people had signed up of that
4000. And then from 30 to about 55, there was only 34 percent
that had signed up, and from 35 to 64, I think it was 39
percent of the people had signed up. Obviously the older people
need it, the younger people do not.
Mr. Pittenger. Well taken.
That ends my questions.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for coming here. It is a huge
statement by you from our Congress to come to our region and I
just really applaud the effort that you have made.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
I want to thank all our witnesses today. I want to thank
the audience for being an extremely good audience.
I am going to close with a question for the record, for all
of our witnesses, and this is also a question for anyone that
may want to submit their comments. I did not vote for the
Affordable Care Act for a number of reasons, but my own state,
California, was working on a similar piece of legislation under
then Governor Swarzenegger and I participated in it. So I have
looked at employer and individual mandates which were
considered in my state by a Republican governor.
I ask only one question for our witnesses and anyone else
who wants to comment. Had the federal government enacted the
Affordable Care Act requirements, but made them only linked to
the aid given by the federal government, either through
Medicaid or through the subsidies, such that the states would
have retained their entire right, and employers like Mr. Long,
to have the healthcare they already had pursuant to their state
commissioner and pursuant to the Tenth Amendment, would we be
here today? Or would we have gold plans, platinum plans,
whatever you want to call them, determined by the federal
government under the system and they would be the only plans
eligible for subsidies. And those needing or wanting subsidies
would choose from those plans and they would be essentially, if
you want the federal dollars you play by the federal rules,
which we do in Washington all the time. We do it with highway
funds and so on.
But if we had not touched the state insurance commissioner
here in North Carolina or any other state, so that plans like
Mr. Long and plans like Mr. Falls and Mr. Waters sell would
still be available to everyone who wanted to buy them, but
perhaps not eligible for the subsidies, would we be here today?
You can comment on that and other things because as
Congress looks at how to perhaps make changes in the Affordable
Care Act so that all Americans can have the promise of the
President that if you like your healthcare, you can keep it, we
can begin looking at the question of did we overreach and is
that distortion of the market the reason we are seeing so many
costs go up, rather than the outreach of government with a
large chunk of money--it clearly was a large chunk of money for
these subsidies--which in fact, I never found a subsidy per se
to be the driver of healthcare costs going up. But I have found
the rules under the Affordable Care Act perhaps be part of it
here today and in other hearings.
So I leave that as an open question for everyone and I
appreciate the audience's willingness to add to the dialogue
today in writing. I thank our witnesses and we stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:35 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


