- IMPROVING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE FEDERAL SURFACE TRANSPORTATION SAFETY GRANT PROGRAMS

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IMPROVING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE FEDERAL SURFACE TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY GRANT PROGRAMS

=======================================================================

(113-50)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
HIGHWAYS AND TRANSIT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 28, 2014

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
86-439                     WASHINGTON : 2014
____________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL, II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee,      Columbia
Vice Chair                         JERROLD NADLER, New York
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                CORRINE BROWN, Florida
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
GARY G. MILLER, California           ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 RICK LARSEN, Washington
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           JOHN GARAMENDI, California
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
STEVE SOUTHERLAND, II, Florida       JANICE HAHN, California
JEFF DENHAM, California              RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              DINA TITUS, Nevada
STEVE DAINES, Montana                SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
TOM RICE, South Carolina             ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina
VACANCY

(ii)

?

Subcommittee on Highways and Transit

THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         Columbia
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                JERROLD NADLER, New York
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
GARY G. MILLER, California           MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JANICE HAHN, California
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
STEVE SOUTHERLAND, II, Florida       DINA TITUS, Nevada
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin, Vice      SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
Chair                                ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
STEVE DAINES, Montana                LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
TOM RICE, South Carolina             CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           NICK J. RAHALL, II, West Virginia
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                  (Ex Officio)
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania (Ex
Officio)

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................   vii

TESTIMONY

Hon. Christopher A. Hart, Vice Chairman, National Transportation
Safety Board...................................................     5
Douglas B. Danko, chairman, American Traffic Safety Services
Association....................................................     5
Thomas Fuller, sergeant, New York State Police, and president,
Commercial Vehicle Safety Alliance.............................     5
Kendell Poole, director, Tennessee Governor's Highway Safety
Office, and chairman, Governors Highway Safety Association.....     5
Peter F. Sweatman, Ph.D., director, University of Michigan
Transportation Research Institute, and chairman, Intelligent
Transportation Society of America..............................     5

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Hon. Thomas E. Petri, of Wisconsin...............................    39
Hon. Nick J. Rahall, II, of West Virginia........................    46
Hon. Elizabeth H. Esty, of Connecticut...........................    49

PREPARED STATEMENTS AND ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD SUBMITTED
BY WITNESSES

Hon. Christopher A. Hart:

Prepared statement...........................................    50
Answers to questions for the record from the following
Delegate and Representatives:

Hon. Eleanor Holmes Norton, of the District of Columbia..    64
Hon. Jerrold Nadler, of New York.........................    65
Hon. Elizabeth H. Esty, of Connecticut...................    66
Douglas B. Danko:

Prepared statement...........................................    78
Answers to questions for the record from Hon. Tom Rice, a
Representative in Congress from the State of South Carolina    83
Thomas Fuller:

Prepared statement...........................................    85
Answers to questions for the record from the following
Representatives:

Hon. Duncan Hunter, of California........................    98
Hon. Reid J. Ribble, of Wisconsin........................    99
Hon. Jerrold Nadler, of New York.........................   102
Kendell Poole, prepared statement................................   105
Peter F. Sweatman, Ph.D., prepared statement.....................   113

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Hon. Eleanor Holmes Norton, a Delegate in Congress from the
District of Columbia, request to submit to the record the
following organizations' safety priorities and recommendations
to Congress:

Owner-Operator Independent Drivers Association (OOIDA), Small
Business Trucking's Top Priorities for Reauthorization's
Motor Carrier Title........................................   118
Advocates for Highway and Auto Safety (Advocates):

Advocates letter from Jacqueline Gillan, president, and
Joan Claybrook, consumer cochair, to Hon. Bill Shuster,
a Representative in Congress from the State of
Pennsylvania, and Hon. Nick J. Rahall, II, a
Representative in Congress from the State of West
Virginia, January 27, 2014.............................   120
Comments submitted in response to the Federal Highway
Administration notice requesting comments on the
materials related to the Comprehensive Truck Size and
Weight Limits Study, 78 Federal Register 76889,
December 19, 2013......................................   123
``2014 Roadmap of State Highway Safety Laws''............   152
Jan Withers, president, Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD),
written testimony..........................................   208
Stephen Owings, president and cofounder, Road Safe America,
written testimony..........................................   211
Truck Safety Coalition, 2014 Truck Safety Issues Summary.....   215
Hon. Christopher A. Hart, Vice Chairman, National Transportation
Safety Board, responses to requests for information from the
following Delegate and Representative:

Hon. Eleanor Holmes Norton, of the District of Columbia,
regarding distracted driving and graduated driver licensing
(GDL) in MAP-21............................................    16
Hon. Janice Hahn, of California, regarding aging
infrastructure recommendations.............................    30
Hon. Thomas E. Petri, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Wisconsin, request to submit the following into the record:

Peter J. Pantuso, president and chief executive officer,
American Bus Association, written testimony................    34
Wayne Allard, vice president, Government Relations, American
Motorcyclist Association, letter to Hon. Thomas E. Petri, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Wisconsin, and
Hon. Eleanor Holmes Norton, a Delegate in Congress from the
District of Columbia, January 27, 2014.....................    36

ADDITIONS TO THE RECORD

The American Trucking Associations, Inc., written statement......   218
Letter to Hon. Bill Shuster, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Pennsylvania, and Hon. Nick J. Rahall, II, a
Representative in Congress from the State of West Virginia,
from the following members of the Truck Safety Coalition and
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration's Motor Carrier
Safety Advisory Committee: Jane Mathis, board member, Parents
Against Tired Truckers; Jennifer Tierney, board member,
Citizens for Reliable and Safe Highways; and John Lannen,
executive director, Truck Safety Coalition; February 10, 2014..   224

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6439.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6439.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6439.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6439.004

IMPROVING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE FEDERAL SURFACE TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY GRANT PROGRAMS

----------

TUESDAY, JANUARY 28, 2014

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Highways and Transit,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m. in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Thomas E. Petri
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Petri. The subcommittee will come to order. Today's
hearing will focus on how Congress can improve the
effectiveness of the surface transportation safety grant
programs.
The current Federal surface transportation authorization,
MAP-21, expires on September 30th of this year. As Congress
begins work on drafting the successor to MAP-21, we must
understand what the most effective and innovative safety
projects and activities are, in order to improve the safety of
the traveling public.
In 2012, 33,561 fatalities occurred on our Nation's
highways, according to the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration. Highway fatalities in 2012 remain at historic
lows, and match levels not seen since 1950. While these safety
trends are encouraging, much more can be done to further reduce
highway fatalities and crashes.
Federal surface transportation safety grant program
provides States with resources to target their specific safety
issues. Each State faces unique safety challenges that demand a
data-driven, performance-based safety approach. It is important
to give States the flexibility they need to address their
unique highway safety challenges. But at the same time, States
must be held accountable for how they are spending their
limited Federal resources. And that is why MAP-21 requires
States to include safety performance targets into their annual
highway safety plans.
One of the largest Federal safety programs is the Highway
Safety Improvement Program, which apportions over $2 billion
among the States to address highway safety infrastructure
challenges. Each State is required to have a strategic highway
safety plan that identifies safety problems through data
analysis and determine the appropriate safety countermeasures.
Examples of how this funding can be used include improving a
dangerous section of highway by installing guardrails and
rumble strips, or improving highway design to make an
intersection safer for motorists and pedestrians.
States also receive Federal-aid funding to address highway
driver behavior issues through the State and community highways
safety grants, otherwise known as section 402 grants. Each
State is required to have an annual highway safety plan that
identifies their unique driver behavior issues, and determine
the appropriate safety countermeasures. Example of how this
funding can be used include drunk driving and seatbelt
enforcement, or community outreach and education activities.
Commercial motor vehicle enforcement is another important
Federal safety priority. States receive funding from the motor
carrier safety assistance program, which provides resources for
States to enforce Federal commercial motor vehicle regulations.
Funding is targeted on investments that promote safe commercial
vehicle transportation of property, passengers, and hazardous
materials. Through motor carrier and driver data systems,
States are able to target the most unsafe carriers and drivers
for enforcement. States must set program goals and meet
performance benchmarks in order to be eligible for program
funding.
Technology is one area that can help States improve the
effectiveness of their Federal surface transportation safety
grants. States can further adopt and deploy innovative
technologies that reduce highway fatalities and crashes, and
help enforcement officials target the most unsafe drivers.
As vehicles become more autonomous and connected,
intelligent transportation infrastructure assistance will give
States more ways to create a safer traveling experience for
Americans. Such systems could warn drivers of dangerous road
conditions ahead, or assist the driver in making safer driving
decisions.
So, I trust today's hearing will provide our subcommittee
members with insight into the Federal surface transportation
safety grant programs, and how we can better leverage our
limited Federal resources to reduce fatalities and injuries on
our Nation's roads.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses this morning,
and now would recognize our senior Democrat, Eleanor Holmes
Norton, for any statement she would like to make.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Chairman Petri, for
holding this very important hearing, and making it a hearing on
safety, as the second hearing in our effort to move toward a
reauthorization of the surface transportation bill. I think
this shows just the right focus, as we seek to reauthorize MAP-
21.
Last year, more than 3,000 people were killed, and over--
and more than 2.3 million people were injured in accidents on
our roads. Automobile crashes remain one of the leading causes
of death for Americans between the ages of 5 and 34. Every one
of these lives lost is a tragic reminder that we can and must
do more to enhance safety on our roads.
For the past decade, the Federal Government has made
significant investments in highway safety, and has directed
Federal funds into those activities that, when implemented by
the States, result in maximum accident prevention and
reduction. Since 2005, we have witnessed an impressive 23-
percent drop in highway fatalities.
Unfortunately, in 2012, fatalities were higher than 2011,
reversing this trend of safety improvement. I am curious to
discover what accounts for that, if it is just a blip or some
other reason. The next reauthorization provides an opportunity
to boost our investment in safety, to target those activities
that save lives and prevent injuries, and to promote safety in
innovative ways, such as through the assistance of exciting new
technologies.
Truck safety is another area where more can and must be
done to improve safety, both for travelers who share highways
with trucks, and for the men and women who drive trucks. These
individuals work in unimaginably difficult operating
environments with highway congestion, heavy demands from
shippers and receivers, and with incredibly tight economic
margins in which to try to earn a living. I recently became
aware of many--that many of the drivers new to the industry do
not receive sufficient training before they are expected to
drive. I am very interested in the ways the Federal Government
might improve safety through the setting of standards, or
addressing basic working conditions in the industry, which I
believe will result in significant safety gains. And we can
achieve this without expending many more Federal dollars.
Highway safety is not the only responsibility of this
subcommittee. Americans took more than 10 billion--that is with
a B--trips on transit last year alone. While public
transportation is a relatively safe mode of travel, when
accidents occur the results are often tragic. Delays or
suspensions of service as a result of an accident affect all
riders in the system.
Right now, in the District of Columbia--right here, in the
District of Columbia, excuse me--the 2009 Metro crash at the
Fort Totten rail station killed 9 people, and 52 others were
transported to local hospitals. More recently, accidents on
transit systems in Chicago and San Francisco, and the Metro-
North Railroad in Connecticut and New York are stark reminders
that we must remain vigilant about safety in all our transit
rail systems--including our rail systems.
MAP-21 provided the Federal Government with a long overdue
authority and responsibility to oversee the safety of transit
systems that receive Federal grants. This is perhaps the most
important safety regulation passed by the Federal Government in
decades, and it occurred only after the Metro crash in 2009,
when we learned that, of the modes of transportation, only
Metrorail was without any Federal regulations whatsoever.
And we will hear testimony this morning from the National
Transportation Safety Board first recommended--that first
recommended that the Federal Government be given authority to
regulate the safety of transit systems way back in 1981. I look
forward to hearing from Vice Chairman Hart on recent progress
that has been made on transit safety at WMATA and other systems
across the United States.
Let me close by saying that safety is not only about lives
lost, as important as that is. And that should always be at the
front of our minds. Improving safety also affects mobility.
According to the AAA, in urban areas the total cost of traffic
crashes, nearly $300 billion--that is another B--per year, is
over three times the cost of congestion. The investments we
make to save lives also ensure that we truly keep America
moving forward.
I look forward to hearing testimony from today's witnesses.
I would like to note that, unfortunately, there are many
key stakeholders who were not invited to testify today. I asked
for their input and would like to ask unanimous consent that
their safety priorities and recommendations to Congress be a
part of the record. The OOIDA, Teamsters Advocates for Highway
and Auto Safety, MADD--Mothers Against Drunk Driving, and Road
Safe America would like statements of their safety priorities
submitted for the record, Mr. Chairman.
[No response.]
Mr. Petri. Without objection, so ordered.
[Please refer to pages 118-217 for the information
submitted for the record by Hon. Norton.]
Mr. Petri. And the ranking member of the full committee,
Mr. Rahall from West Virginia, is recognized.
Mr. Rahall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your
holding this important hearing. Ensuring the safety of users of
the transportation network is a core function of the Committee
on Transportation and Infrastructure. Further preventing the
tragic loss of life and injuries that occur every day on our
roads will be a top priority of the committee in the next
surface transportation authorization bill.
One area that has been a priority for me is addressing the
unique challenges with railway-highway grade crossings. Last
year there were nearly 2,000 incidents at grade crossings,
resulting in 233 deaths and 921 injuries. While the number of
crashes at grade crossings is down 82 percent since 1980,
nearly all crashes at grade crossings are preventable.
The primary means of Federal investment in grade crossing
safety is the Section 130 Railway-Highway Crossings Program.
This program provides Federal funds to States to make grade
crossing safety enhancements. According to the Federal Railroad
Administration, the section 130 program--and I quote--``has
helped prevent over 10,500 fatalities and 51,000 nonfatal
injuries.'' MAP-21 preserved the budgetary set-aside for this
important safety program, which provides States $221 million
annually to assist in making grade crossing safety
improvements. Without this dedicated funding, grade crossing
needs would fare poorly in competition with other highway
investment needs.
So, I am pleased to report that, in recent years, States
have been obligating significantly more funds towards safety
improvements at grade crossings. Since the dedicated set-aside
was created under the Highway Safety Improvement Program,
States have obligated nearly 75 percent of their available
funding. This is up from only 26 percent in fiscal year 2006.
Continuing to provide dedicated funding towards this important
safety program will mean more injuries averted and more lives
saved at the Nation's more than 212,000 grade crossings.
Once again, Mr. Chairman, I thank you and Ranking Member
Eleanor Norton, for holding this important hearing, and I look
forward to working with you to reauthorize the surface
transportation programs and to improve--continue to improve the
safety of our Nation's highways. Thank you.
Mr. Petri. Thank you. And statements by other Members will
be made a part of this record.
Welcome to the witnesses today. The panel consists of the
Honorable Christopher A. Hart, Vice Chairman of the National
Transportation Safety Board; Douglas B. Danko, chairman,
American Traffic Safety Services Association; Sergeant Thomas
Fuller, New York State Police, on behalf of the Commercial
Vehicle Safety Alliance; Mr. Kendell Poole, director, Tennessee
Governor's Highway Safety Office on behalf of the Governors
Highway Safety Association; and Dr. Peter Sweatman, who is the
director, University of Michigan Transportation Research
Institute, on behalf of the Intelligent Transportation Society
of America.
Welcome to all of you. Thank you for the effort that went
into the prepared statement by you and your organizations. And
we would invite you to make your best effort to summarize those
statements in about 5 minutes, beginning with Mr. Hart.

TESTIMONY OF HON. CHRISTOPHER A. HART, VICE CHAIRMAN, NATIONAL
TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD; DOUGLAS B. DANKO, CHAIRMAN,
AMERICAN TRAFFIC SAFETY SERVICES ASSOCIATION; THOMAS FULLER,
SERGEANT, NEW YORK STATE POLICE, AND PRESIDENT, COMMERCIAL
VEHICLE SAFETY ALLIANCE; KENDELL POOLE, DIRECTOR, TENNESSEE
GOVERNOR'S HIGHWAY SAFETY OFFICE, AND CHAIRMAN, GOVERNORS
HIGHWAY SAFETY ASSOCIATION; AND PETER F. SWEATMAN, PH.D.,
DIRECTOR, UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH
INSTITUTE, AND CHAIRMAN, INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SOCIETY OF
AMERICA

Mr. Hart. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Petri and
Ranking Member Norton, and members of the subcommittee. I am
Christopher Hart, Vice Chairman of the National Transportation
Safety Board. Thank you for inviting the NTSB to testify today
to help inform this process with lessons we have learned from
investigating crashes.
During the past year, the NTSB's highway and rail divisions
have been busy investigating several accidents across the
country. On our highways we investigated several truck and
motorcoach accidents, resulting in 25 deaths and more than 85
injuries. Our teams continue to investigate the Skagit River
Bridge collapse on Interstate 5 in Washington State, and the
highway rail grade crossing accident in Baltimore County,
Maryland, that resulted in a train derailment followed by a
major explosion.
In rail, Metro-North had four major accidents since May of
2013. These events resulted in 5 fatalities and 135 injuries.
Also, the Chicago Transit Authority and Bay Area Rapid Transit
had accidents this past fall, and we continue to investigate
those accidents.
We also continue to monitor Washington Metro's
implementation of its recommendations from the 2009 Fort Totten
accident that was mentioned previously. Just last week, WMATA
completed another recommendation so that 8 of those
recommendations out of 18 remain open. WMATA indicates that it
will implement those remaining eight recommendations.
The vast majority of transportation fatalities, however,
occur on our Nation's highways, with more than 30,000
fatalities every year. Much more can be done to improve safety
in areas of impaired driving, distracted driving, fatigued
driving, and motor carrier oversight. Fortunately, the
technologies to help drivers avoid crashes are improving every
day. For example, NHTSA estimates that connected vehicle
technology can reduce the number of nonimpaired multivehicle
collisions by as much as 80 percent.
To limit the effects of alcohol impairment and fatigue,
systems are being developed to prevent alcohol-impaired drivers
from starting their vehicles, and to detect if a driver is
becoming too drowsy to drive. Although some of these
technologies are still in development, technology such as
forward collision warning and avoidance systems are available
now, but need to be more widely deployed in the motor vehicle
fleet, as standard equipment, rather than as an option only for
those who can afford it.
Unfortunately, the crash scenes that we see usually are not
new to us. The same contributing factors present themselves
over and over again. Our job is to help improve safety, and we
make recommendations from each accident to help accomplish this
goal. Many times our recommendations are challenging and take
time, effort, and will to implement. But, as we have seen,
safety can be significantly improved with advancements such as
airbags and seatbelts. Years ago, these were hard-fought
accomplishments. But today, they are standard equipment on
every new car we buy.
The traveling public demands safety, and policymakers have
made important strides in promoting it. You can continue to do
so through your work on the next surface reauthorization bill.
I encourage you to keep the bar high regarding safety, to
ensure that together we can further reduce the numbers of
transportation fatalities and injuries.
The NTSB does not need to investigate another accident to
relearn the same lessons. We have the facts and we have the
knowledge. What is needed now is the will.
This concludes my testimony, and I am prepared to answer
your questions. Thanks again for having the NTSB testify today.
Mr. Petri. Thank you. Mr. Danko.
Mr. Danko. Chairman Petri, Ranking Member Norton, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on behalf of the American Traffic Safety Services
Association, or ATSSA. My name is Douglas Danko, and I am
ATSSA's chairman and recently retired president of Protection
Services, Inc. ATSSA is an international trade association
which represents 1,600 members who manufacture, distribute, or
install roadway safety infrastructure devices.
We all recognize the current condition of the Federal
Highway Trust Fund. In order to make progress on reducing
roadway fatalities, the fiscal situation of the Highway Trust
Fund must be addressed and made sustainable. ATSSA is committed
to working with Congress to find additional revenue options
that will invest in our infrastructure, save lives, and create
jobs. And all funding options should be on the table.
MAP-21 made great strides in making roads safer. However,
more must be accomplished. The Highway Safety Improvement
Program, or HSIP, was increased to $2.4 billion annually, which
represents a commitment by Congress to safety. Tragically, in
2012, more than 33,000 people still died on America's roads.
Even though the loss of a loved one cannot be truly captured in
dollar figures, the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration does value a statistical life at $9.1 million.
The good news is that since the HSIP was created, there has
been a dramatic decrease in roadway deaths, and we must
continue this focus on safety.
Projects that are eligible under HSIP generally have been
very high return on investment. States are finding that a small
infrastructure investment can yield large reduction in crashes.
According to a June 2010 study conducted by SAIC, the HSIP
yields a benefit cost ratio of 42-to-1. The study notes that
for every $1 million increase in safety obligations, roadway
fatalities were annually reduced by seven. ATSSA recommends
that the HSIP be continued as a core program, and that the
investment in that program be increased to $3 billion annually,
or 10 percent of the overall Federal-aid highway program,
whichever is greater.
In the next reauthorization, Congress should eliminate the
States' ability to transfer funds from the HSIP to other core
highway programs. It is true that States need degrees of
flexibility when focusing on the individual project needs.
However, with more than 33,000 fatalities occurring each and
every year, taking funds away from the core safety
infrastructure program seems counterproductive.
Also, when MAP-21 was crafted, the legislative language--
but is not limited to--was added before the list of eligible
HSIP activities. Unfortunately, this language has been
interpreted to mean that any safety project, infrastructure or
not, may be eligible under the HSIP, thus diluting the core
purpose of the program.
In the next reauthorization, ATSSA recommends focusing the
language to reflect more on additional safety infrastructure
devices, instead of the open-ended interpretation currently
used by the Federal Highway Administration. Currently, local
agencies often do not have the resources necessary to address
their safety concerns. According to the FHWA, the fatality rate
on rural roads is two-and-a-half times greater than on urban
roads. The next reauthorization should include language to help
streamline the process to allow local governments to utilize
the HSIP funds and the technical expertise that State DOTs have
in order to make local and rural roads as safe as possible.
In addition, older drivers are an important aspect of
roadway safety. Because there is a clear need for older driver
safety infrastructure solutions into the future, the next
reauthorization should include language that assists States and
local transportation departments in planning for and
implementing cost-effective safety infrastructure solutions.
Finally, work zone safety should continue to be an area of
focus. And the next reauthorization should continue to fund the
Work Zone Safety Grant and expand its eligible activities. We
must protect our workers who are exposed to dangerous roadway
conditions, such as heavy traffic and speeding, while ensuring
that road users, including pedestrians, have safe passage
through those work zones.
On behalf of ATSSA, I thank you for this opportunity to
testify about America's safety infrastructure needs, and how we
all can move our Nation towards zero deaths on our roads. Thank
you.
Mr. Petri. Thank you. Sergeant Fuller.
Mr. Fuller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member,
members of the subcommittee. Thank you for holding this
important hearing, and for inviting the Commercial Vehicle
Safety Alliance to testify. My name is Tom Fuller. I am a
sergeant with the New York State Police, and the current
president of the Commercial Vehicle Safety Alliance.
The Alliance represents State, provincial, and Federal
commercial vehicle safety officials responsible for enforcing
the safety regulations in the United States, Canada, and
Mexico. We work to improve commercial vehicle safety and
security by bringing safety enforcement agencies together,
along with industry representatives, to solve problems and,
more importantly, to save lives. I oversee the commercial
vehicle enforcement unit for the New York State Police, and I
am responsible for administrating the State's grant funds under
the Motor Carrier Safety Assistance Program.
Effective Federal grant programs like MCSAP are critical to
ensuring safety on our Nation's highways. The Federal
Government provides funds through the MCSAP to the States for
the enforcement of this country's motor carrier safety
regulations. The States use these funds for training,
enforcement activities, purchase equipment specific to this
idea, update software, and, more important, to conduct
educational campaigns about commercial motor vehicle safety.
The MCSAP is effective in reducing crashes and saving
lives. However, there are a number of improvements that could
be made to streamline the program, improve efficiency, and make
better use of limited resources. MCSAP is plagued by
inconsistencies and red tape. To address these challenges, CVSA
has developed a series of recommendations, which are more fully
outlined in our written testimony.
There are several administrative changes that, if made,
would dramatically improve MCSAP efficiency. First, provide
States with additional flexibility, so we can fully leverage
resources and improve program efficiency. Rather than provide a
prescriptive requirement, FMCSA should focus on outlining
program parameters and goals, and then allow the States to
develop solutions that are unique to our States that fit the
program.
We recommend streamlining the commercial vehicle safety
plan process to eliminate unnecessary administrative burdens on
States, while improving the effectiveness of these plans. There
are programs by the Federal Highway Administration and the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration from which FMCSA
can borrow.
In addition, moving to a longer term CVSP process--let's
say 3 to 5 years--will reduce administrative burdens on the
States and FMCSA, freeing up resources on both the States and
the Federal Government. States also need more consistency,
funding needs to be predictable and steady, and the grant
application review process should be standard from State to
State and year to year. FMCSA should have clear deadlines for
when they have to meet their obligations to States, just like
the States must do for the Federal Government.
In addition to the process changes, there are policy
changes that are necessary to maximize effectiveness and
efficiency within MCSAP. We need to eliminate, as much as
possible, the inconsistencies within the program, which only
lead to confusion and draw much-needed resources away from the
program activities.
Enforcement and industry alike must be able to understand
the regulations. Unfortunately, however, over time, additional
regulatory authority, coupled with changes to the industry and
technology advancements, results in inconsistent, outdated, and
redundant regulatory language. To address this, CVSA supports
requiring FMCSA, in collaboration with stakeholders, conduct a
full review of the regulations every 5 years, geared towards
reducing, enhancing, and streamlining the regulations,
eliminating outdated and duplicative regulations, and
clarifying those that need adjustment.
This requirement would also help reduce some of the
disconnects that exist between the regulations and the
regulatory guidance interpretations and policy memos issued by
FMCSA. Furthermore, requiring that FMCSA publish all petitions
for changes to regulations in the Federal Register, as they do
for exemptions, would help provide clarity for both industry
and enforcement, and promote greater collaboration.
Next, I would like to address the legislative exemptions.
First and foremost, safety regulations exist to protect those
on our Nation's roadways, and exemptions undermine safety.
Furthermore, every new exemption is an opportunity for
confusion and inconsistency in enforcement, diverting scarce
resources from our other activities and undermining program
effectiveness. CVSA opposes any and all legislative exemptions
or, at the very least, when being considered exemptions should
be required to include a safety clause which would provide for
monitoring and a mechanism to eliminate the exemption, should
it negatively impact safety.
Further, CVSA supports removing crashes involving exempted
industries from the criteria used to determine grant awards to
States. Simply put, we should not be punished for segments of
the industry that we do not have authority over.
Finally, while the focus of this hearing is on improving
efficiencies, I believe it is necessary to say a word about the
need for adequate and reliable funding. New and expanded
responsibilities mean improvements in safety, but only in as
much as the States are able to effectively implement those
policies. It is critical that Congress and FMCSA ensure that
all new programs are created with funding that is provided to
the States, avoiding any unfunded mandates. Otherwise,
effectiveness suffers.
We recognize that the issue of funding for the Federal
transportation program is a complicated one with no easy
solutions. CVSA strongly supports the ongoing efforts to
identify sustainable, long-term revenue sources to address the
Highway Trust Fund solvency in order to ensure stability for
MCSAP.
In closing, I would like to reiterate that, despite the
challenges, MCSAP works well. We have seen a steady reduction
in commercial motor vehicle crashes and fatalities since
inception. CVSA has a good working relationship with FMCSA and
we work together as much as possible to address this issue. The
unfortunate fact is that there are still significant challenges
that are hampering program efficiency and effectiveness. There
are a number of options available for improving efficiency and
reducing redundancy in the system that will allow for better
leveraging of Federal funds.
We look forward to working with this committee and FMCSA
develop and implement creative solutions to continue to improve
our Nation's motor vehicle safety program. Thank you.
Mr. Petri. Thank you. Mr. Poole.
Mr. Poole. I am Kendell Poole, chairman of the Governors
Highway Safety Association. I would like to thank the
subcommittee for the opportunity to testify here today. GHSA
represents State highway safety offices in all 50 States, the
District of Columbia, and United States territories. GHSA
members administer the behavioral highway safety grant programs
under MAP-21.
Although we have made some significant progress, there were
still more than 33,000 traffic-related fatalities and more than
2 million injuries in 2012. In addition to the mental and
emotional toll on families, crashes also cost the Nation an
estimated $230 billion annually to address this problem. The
Federal Government must make the reduction of highway
fatalities and injuries a national priority, and play a strong
role in developing highway safety policies and programs.
As Congress considers reauthorization for highway safety
programs, GHSA recommends enacting a long-term reauthorization
to help States develop comprehensive strategic plans and
undertake needed multiyear projects such as data and traffic
record systems improvements. This reauthorization should also
contain provisions to reduce the administrative burden placed
on States required to prepare the grant application and manage
the program and alter the current maintenance of effort
requirements to provide relief to economically distressed
States. States should not be required to use outdated data in
developing their highway safety plans. They should have the
option of using the most recent State or Federal data, rather
than being required to use FARS data, which is often a year or
more behind other sources.
Congress should restructure the Section 405 National
Priority Safety Program to make significant changes to tiers
addressing impaired driving, motorcyclist safety, distracted
driving, and teen driving. These include allowing States that
grant rare exemptions to ignition interlock requirements to
qualify for impaired driving funds, simplifying the distracted
driving program to reward States that enforce primary texting
bans for all drivers and complete cell phone bans for novice
drivers. The teen driving incentive needs to be restructured to
reward States with strong teen driving laws.
States are in need of additional section 402 money to
address issues such as excessive speeding, drugged driving,
distracted driving, and other emerging safety challenges. To
increase the support of the section 402 program, Congress
should allow NHTSA to transfer a portion of the unobligated
section 405 money into section 402.
MAP-21 authorizes a cooperative research and evaluation
program of $2.5 million annually. Utilizing 402 funds, the
program is administered by NHTSA, but managed jointly by NHTSA
and GHSA. Despite previous efforts, only a small portion of
behavioral highway safety countermeasures have been adequately
researched. Without sufficient research to indicate what works
and what doesn't, States may be forced to implement programs
without an appropriate research basis. To address this, GHSA
recommends that funding for behavioral research be supported,
and the cooperative NHTSA-GHSA program continue.
Finally, GHSA does not support sanctions, as we believe
they are untargeted and counterproductive. States are already
subject to seven safety-related sanctions, and evidence on
their effectiveness is mixed. GHSA recommends an incentive-
based approach to encourage changes in State policies and
programs.
And finally, I would like to thank you for the opportunity
to testify, and I will be happy to answer any questions.
Mr. Petri. Thank you. Dr. Sweatman.
Dr. Sweatman. Chairman Petri, Ranking Member Norton,
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify about Federal transportation safety grant programs, and
how we can improve their effectiveness. I am honored to share
my views, both as a recipient of Federal safety grants through
the University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute,
and on behalf of the Intelligent Transportation Society of
America, which brings together the transportation and
technology communities.
We are looking forward to working with members of this
subcommittee to pass a reauthorization bill that builds on the
reforms in MAP-21, and that deploys innovative technologies for
improving safety and for providing greater mobility to
America's transportation users.
Through Federal safety grant funding, vehicles,
infrastructure, and driver behavior come together under
powerful enabling technologies. The whole is much greater than
the sum of the parts, serving the national interest.
Several megatrends currently affect the way the safety
systems are developed. The auto industry is increasing the pace
of deployment of sensors. The burgeoning consumer electronics
industry reduces costs for key enabling technologies. And
advances in wireless communication revolutionize sensing
between vehicles and infrastructure. These trends mean that a
wider range of industry sectors need to be collaborating, and
research needs to be carried out on a very large scale, under
real-world operating conditions.
The true goal is no less than crash prevention. Despite a
long and meritorious history of vehicle and driver safety
measures, we still bear the national burden of 33,000
fatalities every year.
Working collaboratively with stakeholders, the U.S.
Department of Transportation is developing vehicle-to-vehicle
and vehicle-to-infrastructure communications, known as
Connected Vehicle Technology, to prevent vehicles from
crashing. This innovative technology relies on the
interference-free use of dedicated spectrum in the 5.9
gigahertz band, which was set aside by the Federal
Communications Commission. The National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration estimates that a fully deployed Connected
Vehicle Network could address 80 percent of all nonimpaired
crash scenarios, an astounding figure representing thousands of
lives saved.
And it is not just cars talking to cars, but also trucks
talking to cars and motorcycles, and even buses talking to
pedestrians. At UMTRI, we are conducting the largest
naturalistic test of Connected Vehicle Technology in the world
in Ann Arbor, Michigan, the federally funded safety pilot model
deployment. The data from the safety pilot are being used by
NHTSA to determine the most effective path toward full-scale
deployment of this life-saving technology. This is a truly
revolutionary partnership, and a great example of what can
happen when the Government works with private-sector
innovators, researchers, and State and local agencies who
manage the infrastructure to accomplish big things.
This could not happen without Federal leadership shaping
how such a system could operate, and establishing certain parts
of its architecture. The safety pilot is an example of how
Federal safety grants can be used to leverage State and local
dollars and private-sector investment. The model deployment has
had sufficient impact on Michigan institutions that plans were
developed and funding identified to create a full regional
deployment of connected vehicles in southeast Michigan.
Recognizing connected, automated vehicles as a critical
driver of economic growth, the State partnered with the
University of Michigan to develop a new center devoted to the
deployment of connected and automated systems, including a
unique off-roadway test facility for automated vehicles.
Manufacturers from all over the world are expected to use this
facility to evaluate their technologies for on-road use.
These and other innovations will be showcased from
September 7 to 11 of this year in Detroit, during the 21st
World Congress on Intelligent Transportation Systems. ITS
America is proud to be staging this must-attend event for
experiencing an unprecedented wave of innovation and mobility.
Please come.
Finally, today as ITS technologies reach far beyond safety,
there are equally significant benefits for mobility,
accessibility, energy efficiency, and the environment.
Stronger, more timely coordination between Federal agencies is
needed to recognize the transformational nature of the
technology, and to protect essential enablers such as high-
performance wireless spectrum.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to answering your questions.
Mr. Petri. Thank you. Thank you all for your testimony. I
have a couple questions, and I am sure other members of the
panel do, as well.
I think the first area that I wondered if, Mr. Poole, you
could expand on a little bit, you indicated that--kind of
speaking on behalf of the States, that you felt that more
sanctions in terms of trying to force States to promote safety
would not be as effective as focusing more on incentives.
And this is--several of us have been active in aviation
over the years, and this has been a debate, as to how to get
highway safety and their--I mean aviation safety. And most of
the experts in the field, as much communication--as open,
analyzing problems, are much better than whenever there is a
mistake punishing people, because no one really wants an
accident, whether it is in the air or on land. But if you get
punished when it occurs or you could be blamed for it, there is
an effort to kind of cover up or there are incentives that are
counterproductive, in terms of the bigger picture.
And I don't know if that is what your thinking is on that,
or if you could expand on why we shouldn't, you know, lean on
the States harder, rather than encouraging them to use their
own imagination and innovative instincts.
Mr. Poole. All right, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will
be glad to try to answer that.
You know, we represent so many different States across the
country that we have seen incentives and sanctions before in
behavioral highway safety. And, historically, incentives have
worked much better for the States. We have been able to save
more lives, which is what we are about, with incentives. It
gives the States more--a more broad range of creativity in how
they implement those programs with incentives. So we support
incentives over sanctions.
Mr. Petri. Thank you. The--question for Dr. Sweatman. Do
you have any particular suggestions that Congress might
consider to make the intelligent transportation deployment
program more effective in our next reauthorization bill? Or is
legislative tweaking not the issue here?
Dr. Sweatman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think my message
would be all about deployment, real deployment. So we have had
many demonstrations, we have had a lot of research. We need
deployment. And I think we will be considering that in terms of
either city deployments or regional deployments of ITS.
One of the exciting things about ITS is the ability to, for
performance management of the transportation system, we haven't
really been able to roll that out nationally in the past. But
as we get ITS deployment, real deployment, we have the ability
to collect the data we need to evaluate the benefits of various
transportation projects. And we think there is a lot of cross-
cutting benefit for many different types of ITS technologies
being deployed in the same environment, whether that is a city
or whether that is a regional deployment. And that would
include innovative pricing schemes along with integrated
corridor management schemes and the sort of connected vehicle
technologies that I already talked about.
So, as we bring all of those technologies together, and we
use the data that is being generated to manage the system
better and understand the benefits, I think that is when we
start to see real improvements. And we need more deployment.
Mr. Petri. Thank you. Ms. Norton?
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I
appreciate all of the testimony. I found it, your written
testimony and the testimony I was able to hear, very
informative.
Could I first go to truck safety standards? And, Sgt.
Fuller, you indicated that States were being penalized for
fatalities that occur, and parts of the industry, really, are
exempt from regulation. Are you saying that industries exempt
from regulation--the primary one that comes to mind is
agriculture--are involved in a significant number of crashes?
How significant is that number?
Mr. Fuller. As you mention, the agriculture industry is
exempt from a lot of the regulations. Is it a large amount of
crashes? No. But as we all know, the Federal Government works
off of consistent data. And no matter what happens, those
crashes goes into the FARS data, it goes into the large truck
causation study data. And that negatively affects the States,
because our grant money is based upon a lot of that data that
the Federal Government----
Ms. Norton. So are you saying that since they are exempt,
their accident rate should not be in the database?
Mr. Fuller. Yes, I am.
Ms. Norton. Could I ask Mr. Hart whether NTSB supports
behind-the-wheel driving for entry-level drivers--training, I
am sorry, behind-the-wheel training for entry-level truck
drivers. Or do you feel that the current regulations are
sufficient?
Mr. Hart. Thank you for the question. We have made
recommendations regarding training over the years. For a
commercial driver's license, all you needed to do is pass the
test. There is no regulated training requirement.
For example, in an accident in which a schoolbus rear-ended
another schoolbus, we recommended training regarding safe
following distances.
Ms. Norton. So, even then, even with those schoolbuses----
Mr. Hart. Correct.
Ms. Norton [continuing]. Behind-the-wheel training does not
occur.
Mr. Hart. Correct. In some school districts, adequate
behind-the-wheel training does not occur.
Ms. Norton. Even though they are trusted with the lives of
children.
Mr. Hart. Correct. We have made numerous recommendations
regarding training over the years.
Ms. Norton. Yes. I don't see how we can continue to put the
data from agriculture into the State base and deny them funds,
or impose other sanctions, while exempting--especially
considering how sweeping is the exemption, for example, for
agriculture.
Let me go on to the testimony of Mr. Poole, who wants no
additional safety-related sanctions. And your question, Mr.
Poole, the effectiveness of the sanctions--now, of course, one
can understand that, with respect to weak, or so-called soft
sanctions. But not--but, of course, that doesn't involve the
kind of sanctions such as withholding program funding that
tends to get State attention.
What evidence is there that in the case of strong or hard
standards, where, for example, highway construction funds could
be withheld, that when those funds are taken away, that they
would not help a State to remain in compliance, or the very
threat of those funds taken away?
Mr. Poole. Thank you. There are many evidences across the
country where we feel like, as members of GHSA, that incentives
simply work better than the sanctions. And the numbers are
there to bear that out.
When we get the money from NHTSA to implement these
programs, the States use a lot of creativity in being able to
implement those programs within the bounds of the law. When
there are sanctions available and money is withheld, it simply
doesn't work, and it doesn't create a good environment----
Ms. Norton. Well, let me ask you this, Mr. Poole. Are you
familiar with the States who have enacted 21-age limits,
drinking-age limits with .08 percent alcohol content? Are you
familiar with the number of States who have done that?
Mr. Poole. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Norton. How many?
Mr. Poole. I believe .08, the number of States--I will get
back to you on the exact number.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Poole, it is every State.
Mr. Poole. Right.
Ms. Norton. It is every State.
Mr. Poole. Right.
Ms. Norton. Nobody wants to lose his funding. You have the
incentive, of course, of losing lives. And so every State has
done it.
We are not even suggesting that funds would be taken away.
The Government is reluctant to take away funds.
Mr. Poole. Right.
Ms. Norton. And usually engages in a great deal of back-
and-forth before any funds are ever taken away.
But there is an instance where every State, given that
possible sanction, did what the Congress wanted it to do. And I
compare that with the weak sanctions here for distracted
driving, including teen driving. Very, very worrisome.
Are you aware of how many States had funds withheld as a
result of this strong sanction?
Mr. Poole. Are you talking about teen driving and
distracted driving?
Ms. Norton. Yes.
Mr. Poole. We are very, very disappointed in the ability to
get money out to the States in teen driving and distracted
driving, because many States----
Ms. Norton. No, I am talking about--I am simply--I am doing
a kind of syllogism here. Every State enacted .08 for 21 and
under.
Mr. Poole. Correct.
Ms. Norton. As a 21-year drinking age. My question--and it
is a rhetorical one--is that no State, in order to get there,
had its funds withheld. I am trying to make the case that if
the Federal Government shows it means it, the sanction works.
It doesn't have to withhold funds. If we engage in soft
funding, we think we mean that, too. And they simply do not
comply.
And so, what you want us to do is, I take it, reduce the
standards on this--under this soft--because they haven't
complied. Although, the evidence we have is they comply when
they are staring in the face of a harder sanction. Now, we can
talk about how hard it should be. But the evidence seems to be
the reverse of what you are suggesting, that soft sanctions
don't exactly encourage compliance, hard sanctions do, and they
do so without taking one red cent from the State.
Given what is at stake--here, it is teen driving--why
should we not tell the States, ``Hey, we mean what we said in
MAP-21, and your funds are at stake''?
Mr. Poole. Your point is very well taken, and GHSA will re-
examine those positions.
Ms. Norton. I would appreciate that. I would just ask you
to re-examine it in light of--I don't know if you opposed, for
example, the blood alcohol sanction. All I can say is it was
effective.
And I do want to ask Mr. Hart. Do you support--does the
NTSB support the present MAP-21 approach?
Mr. Hart. With respect to the blood alcohol in particular,
and specifically, we have recommended a reduction from .08 to
.05.
Ms. Norton. Would you support changing the standards to
allow more States to qualify, as Mr. Poole, as least initially,
believes? Or do you believe the standards that we set for
distracted driving in MAP-21 under these programs are the
targets that we should continue to have States meet?
Mr. Hart. I will provide information for the record
regarding NTSB views on the specific distracted driving
standards within MAP-21. As a general matter, our
recommendations are not prescriptive as to how to accomplish
them.
Ms. Norton. I wish you would get back to us on whether you
support what was in MAP-21 on the standards.
Mr. Hart. I will provide that information to the committee.
Ms. Norton. For distracted driving.
Mr. Hart. Yes.
[The information follows:]

Distracted Driving and Graduated Drivers Licenses (GDL) in
MAP-21

The NTSB has seen numerous highway crashes and accidents in all
modes involving distraction. Because of this continuing
epidemic, the NTSB has taken a strong stance on distraction
behind the wheel. The NTSB supports the program established by
Congress in Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century (MAP-
21) Act, to reduce the dangers of distracted driving associated
with the use of personal communication devices. The requirement
that States have primary laws that address texting and youth
cell phone prohibitions is in line with NTSB recommendations.
The NTSB has also called for a complete ban on the use of
personal electronic devices that are not germane to the driving
task, and we hope that States will enact this recommendation as
well. Further, removing the exemption for States that allow
commercial vehicle drivers to use their devices for business
purposes would further improve State laws and support NTSB
findings and recommendations from commercial vehicle accidents
involving distraction.

Graduated drivers' licenses (GDL) refer to multistage licensing
systems requiring novice drivers younger than 21 years of age
to comply with a set of minimum requirements before being
eligible to receive an unrestricted driver's license. GDL
requirements help ensure our youngest drivers receive proper
training, and the NTSB has recommended these types of licenses
for over 10 years. The NTSB has called for a learner's permit
stage and an intermediate stage, and MAP-21 reflects these
recommendations. MAP-21 also provides that driver training
should be part of the licensing process, and the NTSB has
recommended that National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
(NHTSA) and the Department of Education determine the most
effective instructional tools, training methods, curricula, and
sequencing in providing this class. One area not addressed is
that NHTSA should evaluate this grant program to ensure that
States are using the grants effectively to improve their GDL
program. Performance-based measures can provide valuable
information for other States considering such programs.

Monitoring the implementation of these laws and how these
grants are used can produce valuable data as we work together
to reduce the injuries and fatalities on our roads. The NTSB
believes that a data-driven approach that incorporates
specific, ambitious, and measurable goals, as well as
continuous monitoring of the effectiveness of countermeasures,
can provide the best information for policymakers as you review
these programs.

Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Petri. Thank you. Mr. Coble?
Mr. Coble. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good to have the panel
with us. Mr. Chairman, I had a judiciary hearing earlier, and I
apologize for my delay here.
Let me plow new ground, gentlemen, regarding safety. Now,
DUI violations have plagued us for years and years, and
continue to plague us. Do you anticipate any impediments or
difficulty in detecting influence of marijuana? It is more and
more--it increased, I am told. Will that pose a problem, as
far--an additional problem, as far as safety on the highways
are concerned?
Mr. Poole. I will be glad to answer that. Thank you, Mr.
Coble. Drugged driving is actually a huge part of our platform
in GHSA. Impaired driving used to just mean alcohol, and that
is not the case any more. Whether it is simply prescription
drugs or whether it is illegal narcotics, many of our States
across the country have utilized Federal funding to train drug
recognition experts who are able to assist police officers.
They receive 2-week training, very extensive training, to make
sure that we get those impaired drivers off the roads as well.
Because, as you well know, 33 percent of our total fatalities
are alcohol-related, nationwide. And impaired is inclusive of
drugged driving.
Mr. Coble. I thank you for that. Anybody want to add
further to that?
[No response.]
Mr. Coble. I have never enrolled in the marijuana
consumption school, so I bring no personal experience to the
table, but I can see that that may open another door directly
relating to highway safety. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Petri. Thank you. Mr. Sires?
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing, and thank you, all of you, for being here today.
I want to bring it down to a little different--something
that is all around me. In 2012, bicyclists, pedestrians, and
motorcyclists made up about 30 percent of all traffic deaths.
That, to me, extremely high. As I drive around Washington, I
see everybody with the bicycles. I see kids--well, I call them
kids; they are young people--with babies sometimes sitting in
the back of their--slipping through.
I think that this is only going to increase. I mean 30
percent of all traffic deaths are related to this. How can we
improve those numbers without--there is a trend now for
everybody to use bicycles or walking, and so forth. We need to
focus more money on training people to be more careful. Yes, we
only, I think, allocated one percent of the money for safety.
Can you give me some idea as to what we can do? Because I--
this is a trend that, I think, is going nationwide. Most people
are using bicycles or most people are walking. I would just
like to start with you, Dr. Sweatman.
Dr. Sweatman. Thank you very much. Certainly. I mentioned
in my testimony that in our connected vehicle environment,
which is aimed squarely at safety in Ann Arbor, we already have
motorcycles involved in that. We have bicycles involved in
that. And the exciting breakthrough that we see coming is that
through the use of smartphone technology, pedestrians can be
brought into that picture, as well. So vehicles are going to
know where pedestrians are, because of the signals that are
coming from their smartphones.
So, we believe that that kind of communication and that
kind of information being exchanged will have a major impact.
And certainly in a place like Ann Arbor, a college town where
we have a lot of pedestrian problems, that is something that
the university and the city of Ann Arbor is very excited about.
So our connected vehicle technology is not just about cars, and
we really want to emphasize that. So our vision is to include
the motorcyclists, the bicyclists, and the pedestrians, so that
every actor out on the roadway is connected.
Mr. Sires. And I also think it is where there are no hands
on the handle and they are texting as they--I have seen that,
also. So that scares me, also.
Mr. Hart, you delivered in 1994 the national bicycle and
the walking study to Congress. If you--you did that, where you
set some guidelines for safety.
Mr. Hart. I will review our safety reports on whether we
have examined pedestrian and cyclist accidents.
Mr. Sires. Because I have seen that, you know, it was
reducing bicycling and walking fatalities by 10 percent, some
of the guidelines that you put forth. I was just wondering if
you were to put out some more guidelines, or you are going to
continue to promote those guidelines for safety of bicyclists
and pedestrians.
Mr. Hart. I would say in the broader sense that we are
addressing the multifaceted approaches that try to reduce
accidents in general, impaired driving, distracted driving,
fatigue, some technologies--as you have heard, we are pursuing
all of the above that would also have, hopefully, a positive
impact regarding bicycle and pedestrian fatalities.
Mr. Sires. What can we do, as--would you like--oh, OK. What
can we do, as congresspeople, to enhance safety for pedestrians
and bicyclists and people who--you know, who have different
modes of moving around?
Mr. Hart. Let me review the NTSB's reports to determine if
we have made recommendations on that topic.
Mr. Sires. It is a good report. My staff told me that.
Mr. Hart. I will provide information to the committee on
any NTSB report on that topic.
Mr. Sires. I am sorry. Mr. Danko?
Mr. Danko. I would just like to say that our association,
the American Traffic Safety Services Association, has published
guidelines on bicyclists and motorcycle safety, and we would
like to get that to you in the near future.
Mr. Sires. I also see now those two-wheelers that people
have, you know, Washington, DC, people moving around. I don't
know. What do they call those? I see police officers in the----
Mr. Danko. Segways?
Mr. Sires. Segways, yes. OK. Thank you very much.
Mr. Petri. Mr. Ribble?
Mr. Ribble. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Danko, I come from
northern Wisconsin, where we have a lot of rural roads. And
when you look at the data, safety on rural roadways, it seems
like fatalities occur at a higher rate. Can you talk to us a
little bit about what some of the main contributors are for
that? It would seem to me that would be the opposite, that we
have high traffic volume and high urban areas would be more
dangerous. Can you talk a little bit about that?
Mr. Danko. Yes, sir. We have seen the statistic that rural
roads have two-and-a-half times the fatality rate as a urban
road. And a lot of the factors are--a number of them. One is
speed on a rural road. There tends to be more speeding on that
type of a highway. There is less lighting on rural roads. There
is less ambient lighting on rural roads. There are more--
tending to be hilly, curvy, narrower. Now I am not talking
about the travel lanes narrow itself, but the shoulder tends to
be narrower, and sometimes substandard, so if you get off the
roadway it will--it--there is less forgiveness. And the EMS
response time is typically longer.
Mr. Ribble. It seems that some of the things you mentioned
are really out of control. Hills, curves, things like that, you
are often going through woods or over--or through very hilly
terrain or farm terrain. But there are some things that could
be done on infrastructure. You mentioned lighting, the
narrowness of roads, things like that. Do you have any comments
in regard to that?
Mr. Danko. Yes. We would say that maybe more edge lines
that would alert the driver that they are now getting out of
the travel land. A center line rumble strip can do the same
kind of thing. Wider lines so you can see them a little bit
more. Chevrons in the curves can help you--direct you to where
the curve is actually going at the time, so that it kind of
leads you through the curve. You can get into pavement markers
that help, you know, delineate the same kind of a situation.
And then you can go to a high-friction surface on curves that
will then hold the tires a little bit better as they go around.
Mr. Ribble. OK. Thank you very much. Sgt. Fuller--I am over
here, way to your left--by means of full disclosure, I am a
motorcycle rider, and actually, I would even define myself as a
motorcycle enthusiast. I have a motorcycle here, in town, and I
also have one back in Wisconsin. And I enjoy riding. And I
understand that New York State uses section 402 funds to pay
for motorcycle-only checkpoints. Is that accurate?
Mr. Fuller. I believe so, but I am not sure. That does not
fall under my program.
Mr. Ribble. OK. Just along the lines--since you are a State
patrolman, and we talk about motorcycle safety, do you think
that safety funds could be better spent towards strategies that
would prevent motorcycle crashes, as opposed to maybe doing
checkpoints?
Mr. Fuller. I am always for less accidents, because less
accidents save lives, injuries. How the money is spent, again,
does not fall underneath my program. There is a separate
section of the New York State Police traffic section that
handles motorcycle safety, and it would fall underneath their
jurisdiction, not mine.
Mr. Ribble. Yes, and I would agree. I can tell you, as a
motorcycle rider, I have always viewed motorcycle riding as a
relatively safe activity. Motorcycle crashing is another thing.
And so I have a tendency to pay really close attention to crash
avoidance, and being aware of what is around me. And I am not
sure that an arbitrary checkpoint does much to enhance that
training, or make me a safer driver. So I was just curious on
your opinion, as a police officer. And, by the way, I
appreciate your service in the State patrol.
Mr. Fuller. Thank you very much.
Mr. Ribble. Thank you. And, Mr. Danko, I want to come back
just to you on an infrastructure issue again. We talked a
little bit earlier here in the testimony on distracted driving.
Are there infrastructure things that can be done to mitigate or
minimize distracted driving, or is that just solely in the
purview of the driver himself?
Mr. Danko. There are those things that we--I mentioned
earlier. Again, if you are distracted and you are leaving your
lane of travel, an edge line rumble strip, a center line rumble
strip, they have audible lines, thermoplastic-type lines that
can be installed. That gives you the verbal sound of hitting
the rumble strip, catches your attention, and you also feel the
vibration in your vehicle. Those are probably trying to get
your attention back when it is--you are, you know, dealing with
people trying to text and whatever else they do.
I don't do it, myself. I am not--I am of that age that I
kind of missed that. But the kids today, that is normal,
everyday. How you do it? That is going to be a real challenge
for all of us, going forward.
Mr. Ribble. Right. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Petri. Thank you. Mr. Nolan?
[No response.]
Mr. Petri. No questions? Then Ms. Hahn?
Ms. Hahn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have too enjoyed the
testimony today. I have learned a lot. Of course, we all know
that women are the best drivers in the country. So, short of
barring all men from the road, we are looking at how we make
our roads safer and this committee is trying to look at how our
safety grants are allocated to achieve that goal.
It has been interesting to listen to the testimony about
distracted drivers, impaired drivers, and the move towards more
technology, as Dr. Sweatman talked about. I am wondering. It is
such an interesting concept, but I would like to hear some of
your views on whether or not we should focus more on funding
emerging technology to remove that human element from driving.
Particularly, I didn't hear anybody talk about the concept
of driverless vehicles. Is that a direction that we ought to be
taking seriously? Is that really a concept that we could see in
our lifetime? And is that where Congress should look to start
spending our dollars to really get to a place, whether it is
the connecting highways, where trucks and cars are speaking to
each other, versus just, frankly, taking the human element all
together out of driving and focusing on the driverless cars? I
would like to hear Honorable Hart, Mr. Poole, Dr. Sweatman, and
others on that concept.
Dr. Sweatman. I would be happy to start off. Absolutely. We
have various levels of automation with us already. And we are
going to be stepping through various levels of taking the
driver out of the loop. That is an interesting process to
contemplate, because we are going to have partially or fully
automated vehicles out there mixing in with conventionally
driven vehicles. We are going to have issues to do with
recalling drivers' attention. So if they are in a partially
automated vehicle, and then some situation arises where they
have to take over control, it is almost the opposite of the
distraction problem we have at the moment, where drivers are
supposed to be driving, but in fact, a lot of the time they are
doing something else.
In the future, we are going to be--they are not supposed to
be driving, but occasionally they are going to have to do
something. So we are very involved in all of that research, in
terms of how the human factors of that plays in. But, at the
end of the day, the technology will prove to be a lot more
reliable than the human driver. And, really, that is the big
hope for solving a lot of these problems.
We have been doing what we call naturalistic driving
studies for many years, where we put a lot of--among other
things, we put video cameras in vehicles for a period of a
year, or something like that. And it is amazing what people do
in vehicles. And, when it comes to distraction, there are
various phases that people go through.
So, 5 or 10 years ago, we would see a lot of people making
cell phone calls, handheld cell phone calls, in vehicles. We
hardly see that at all now; they are mainly texting. So, as the
personal devices change, so the distraction changes, the source
of distraction, and that is going to keep happening until we
have enough automation in the system to take--to reduce the
risk back down again. That is the way we would view it.
Ms. Hahn. I used to drive from my home in San Pedro to
downtown Los Angeles, where I went to--I worked at the City
Hall, 26 miles. I one time, in the fast lane, followed a car
where the driver was a guy, and he completely got dressed. It
was a--I tried to get closer for a better look, but I was
trying to keep my distance to be a safe driver. But, literally,
put his shirt on, put his tie on, and then pulled out a razor
and shaved.
So, you are right. It is amazing what people do in their
cars. Does anybody else want to comment on the driverless
vehicle idea?
Mr. Hart. We have not investigated driverless vehicle
crashes. We do investigate many accidents involving automation
and the failure of the human-machine interface. The Washington
Metro accident here in 2009 was partly an automation accident.
Automation can be wonderful and can improve safety, and
efficiency, and reliability. But problems arise when it fails.
It must be designed in a manner that does not lead to
accidents.
Ms. Hahn. You know, I am glad you brought up the Metrolink
tragedy, because that--you know, that was such a tragedy. It
happened not too far from my district. And so, we have talked
about enacting positive train control. And I do know that
Metrolink is on track to complete that in time.
However, there have been some other organizations in this
country that have kind of fought that a little bit, and have
been asking for some extensions. What do you think--and I will
end with this question--what do you think are the major
impediments to us enacting positive train control? And is that
something we should extend the deadline on, or should we really
force those deadlines for a safer train experience for
everyone?
Mr. Hart. The Metro accident I referenced was in
Washington, DC, but the NTSB did investigate the 2008 Metrolink
accident too.
Ms. Hahn. OK. I was thinking--I am thinking about
Metrolink.
Mr. Hart. That was certainly a tragic event. We have been
recommending positive train control since at least the 1970s,
and it has been on our Most Wanted List for most of that time.
PTC makes up for human frailty. Redundancy is what it is all
about. Humans make mistakes. Humans can be impaired; they can
be distracted, and they can be fatigued. We are solidly behind
positive train control.
Ms. Hahn. OK, thanks.
Mr. Petri. Mr. Barletta?
Mr. Barletta. Thank you. And just for the record, Ms. Hahn,
I am the father of four daughters, and my car insurance was
$18,000 a year before the insurance company dropped us.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Hahn. They didn't even give them a chance.
Mr. Barletta. My daughters hit people everywhere,
everywhere.
Mr. Nolan. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Barletta. I would.
Mr. Nolan. As the father of four, I will never forget when
my daughter called and said, ``Dad, I got in an accident.'' And
of course, I said, ``Are you OK, honey?'' And she said, ``No, I
am fine.'' She said, ``I just wrecked the front end. Not the
side that John wrecked, but the side that Leah wrecked.''
[Laughter.]
Mr. Barletta. Well, my daughter, Hurricane Grace, one time
called me and said, ``Dad, I have bad news for you. I just
rear-ended some lady at the mall. But don't worry, nobody is
hurt, nobody is mad.'' I said, ``Really, Grace? I happen to be
a little mad right now, but I am glad everyone there is OK with
it.''
[Laughter.]
Mr. Barletta. Thank you for this very important hearing. I
have two questions.
One, Sgt. Fuller, during the consideration of H.R. 7, my
amendment required the Department of Transportation to evaluate
the safety of heavier and longer trucks. And this provision was
included in the version that was signed into law. In their
project plan and in public presentations, DOT has mentioned a
joint data collection effort between The Commercial Vehicle
Safety Alliance and The Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Association that compares the out-of-state service violations
for overweight trucks with trucks operating within the normal
legal weight limits.
Can you tell us what this effort has found so far?
Mr. Fuller. The Size and Weight Committee of The Commercial
Vehicle Safety Alliance has been gathering information over the
last year or so. And I am not really sure of what the
statistics are, as of right now.
I have been informed that we can get you all that data you
requested.
Mr. Barletta. If you would, thank you very much, I would
appreciate that.
Mr. Fuller. My pleasure, sir.
Mr. Barletta. Mr. Danko, I grew up in the road construction
business, and I started a line-painting company, so I come from
your industry. And I know firsthand the benefits of
infrastructure safety. We will never know the number of lives
that we save; we never read the names in the paper the next day
of the lives that were saved because of highly reflective
markings, especially on a foggy day or a wintry day around the
country. So I am very proud of the industry and the lives that
have been saved.
But I believe the Highway Safety Improvement Program, HSIP,
is vital to the safety of our roadways. Could you elaborate on
how HSIP can help prevent our Nation--prevent fatalities on our
roadways?
Mr. Danko. Yes, Congressman. We all recognize that there
has been a significant decrease in crashes since 2006, about a
22-percent reduction in fatalities. And so, we think the HSIP
funding has gone a long way. But there is still a long way to
go. There is still 33,000-plus people dying annually on the
roadway. So there are a lot of areas that need to be reviewed.
There are dangerous stretches of highway. Most of the States
have identified those areas. And they are in need of funds to
correct them.
There is a lot of interesting new technologies that have
come out. One is a cable median barrier as being--catching on.
And it helps eliminate crossover crashes on interstates and
divided highways. And it is relatively inexpensive, compared to
some of the other solutions that are out there.
So there is a long way to go. We feel that there is--one of
the other things that we would like to see is the private
infrastructure people have a seat at the table when the next
strategic highway safety plan is being done, because I think we
can give a different perspective. And we have seen some States
that have been reluctant to include our input.
Mr. Barletta. Should we be considering not only extending
the program, but increasing funding and ensuring that these
funds are dedicated to saving lives on our roadways?
Mr. Danko. Yes. That is what we have asked for. And that is
in our report, is that we think it is critical. There is too
much to go. We have always said that a penalty for making a
mistake shouldn't be death.
Mr. Barletta. I agree. I believe this program has a
relatively low cost to the cost of a life. Thank you.
Mr. Petri. Thank you. Mr. Michaud?
Mr. Michaud. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Yes, this
question for Mr. Danko. I appreciate your testimony and ATSSA's
work on the Toward Zero Deaths campaign. Can you tell us why
focusing on local and rural road safety is so important?
Mr. Danko. Yes. A couple of things. We have talked about
the fatality rate being higher on the rural roads. A lot of
them are in, you know, local jurisdiction that don't have
access to a dedicated highway engineer to be able to go out and
do a roadway safety audit and find the deficiencies. You know,
we ask that the local people, the municipalities, be--get
assistance from the States and be able to draw from the States'
engineers to help do those audits and identify areas that can
be improved.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you. This question is for Dr. Sweatman.
The--as you probably know, ITS America has given its Smart
Solution Spotlight award to the Texas Permitting and Routing
Optimizing System for oversized and overweight trucks. The
system allows drivers of oversized loads to apply for a permit
online and receive a customized route for the size and weight
of the load. The routes avoid obstacles or bridges and pavement
that could be damaged by the load, allowing truckers to operate
in the safest and more efficient manner.
My question is, if Congress allowed for changes in the size
and weight limits to the extent necessary, do you see other
States adopting systems similar to Texas, limiting heavier
vehicles to specific road bridges or routes that are designed
to handle those vehicles?
Dr. Sweatman. Thank you, Congressman. Yes. So ITS America
was very pleased to recognize this program maybe a year ago now
with an award. And we followed up yesterday to see how things
are going. Things are going extremely well with the program.
And, in fact, it was launched this week in Kansas, as well. So
it is already--other States are already starting to pick this
up.
So, just so everyone is clear, this is about oversized and
overweight vehicles, permits for those vehicles. But the point
of your question is, if it was considered that we would
increase the productivity of heavy trucks, and particularly
increase weight limits right across the board, across the
country, how useful would this technology be. It would
certainly be useful.
The proposal, I believe, is for--to go to six-axle
combinations, instead of predominantly five-axle. There are
always some bridge considerations, bridge strength
considerations that need to be taken into account. So this kind
of online system, or this automated way of using technology to
figure out where these vehicles could not go or should not go
would be extremely useful.
I would add that I believe this is part of the package of
technology that we are overdue for deploying in the heavy truck
industry. There are many beneficial safety technologies. You
know, we have tested a few at UMTRI over the past few years
where we see tremendous benefit. So--whether it is stability
control systems, crash imminent braking systems.
And so, what we need to do is, if we are going to have more
productivity on all trucks, we need to raise the bar on safety
at the same time, and make sure that that arrangement--that we
get a good deal out of this. And so, the use of these online
systems would certainly be part of that, as well as new
technologies in the vehicles.
Mr. Michaud. And part of that safety would be, like, going
from a five-axle to a six-axle to deal with stoppage of the
vehicle and distribution of the weight load on the tractor
trailer. Is that correct?
Dr. Sweatman. Well, I mean, the way it works out, when you
go to a six-axle vehicle, the braking is actually greater
because you end up with less load per axle. You have got more
brakes and less load per axle, I should have said. So, all of
those issues are taken into account.
Mr. Michaud. Well, great. Thank you very much.
Dr. Sweatman. Thank you.
Mr. Michaud. And thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back the balance of my time.
Mr. Petri. Thank you. Mr. Williams?
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
all's testimony today, and I always like to hear about Texas, I
am from Texas. So we like to hear the good things that we are
doing there.
My first question would be to you, Chairman Hart. Vehicle
maintenance violations account for more than 70 percent of
total violations with the compliance safety and accountability
program. Yet, according to Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration's own large truck and bus crash facts of 2011,
fewer than 5 percent of all truck-involved fatality crashes saw
a vehicle-related factor assigned to the truck in the crash. Is
this focus on vehicle maintenance by law enforcement the best
use, do you feel, of motor carrier safety assistance program
funds, especially based on these figures, and the limitations
of the trust funding that we have?
Mr. Hart. Thank you for the question. Vehicle maintenance
has been an issue for commercial motor vehicles, and we have
made recommendations about it. Recently, for example, we
investigated four commercial vehicle accidents in which the
carriers passed a compliance review, and then had an accident.
In the post-accident safety compliance review, they failed, and
part of the failure related to maintenance. Maintenance has
been a big issue for us, and we are pursuing it vigorously,
because we think that vehicle maintenance continues to be a
safety problem.
Mr. Williams. Thank you. And I guess, Dr. Sweatman, I have
got two questions for you. What role will technology play in
increasing safety of our Nation's traveling public over the
next 20 years? I am in the automobile business; I would like to
hear that.
Dr. Sweatman. Well, my answer to that would be a
transformational role. We believe that we can get to a
situation--I already mentioned that the connected vehicle
programs we are working on have the potential for an 80-percent
reduction in nonimpaired multivehicle crashes. That is
tremendous. That is a tremendous benefit. When we mix in with
that increasing automation at the same time--so those two are
coming together--we have created a lot of excitement with the
connected vehicles, now there is even more excitement about
automated vehicles in the industry.
What the automotive industry is doing with--I talked about
the sensors being deployed in vehicles now, the intelligence
that is being deployed in vehicles at a very reasonable cost.
And we should bear in mind that the connected vehicle program
was really predicated on being highly affordable, that this
form of communication is affordable. And the sensors that we
were adding to vehicles, the prices on those are coming down
because we are getting the volume up.
So, we are in a very exciting time. We are going to see a
rapid rate of change. We have to be sure that the level of
automation, as it increases, that it interacts well with human
operators. And that issue has come up on the panel a couple of
times, so we think that is important. But we think the future
is very bright, especially--you mentioned a 20-year timeframe.
We are going to be in a completely different world with our
mobility system by then.
Mr. Williams. Keeping those prices down is important. My
next question to you--I am a private sector guy. We talked
about the private sector today and the importance of it. How
can Federal grant funding be better leveraged, in your mind,
with the private sector funds to deploy what--these
technologies we are talking about and intelligent
transportation systems that go with it?
Dr. Sweatman. I think this is critically important, and we
are seeing, in the connected vehicle program, that this can be
done very effectively. So the investment that the USDOT has
made mainly with the industry, the automotive industry in
Michigan, all working together--so we have had automakers
working together for 10 years to develop this connected vehicle
technology.
So, by the time--the role for the Federal Government is to
provide the funding to develop the overall system. What is the
architecture? What are the basic standards that need to be
applied? And once we have that, and once we have that certainty
so that General Motors know that if they get a signal from a
Toyota, they can rely--they know what that signal means. That
signal is standardized. And that is what we call a basic safety
message. That work is being done. It is being done under
Federal funding. And now we are in a position where we will see
rapid deployment, I believe, of this technology.
Mr. Williams. Private-public is a good partnership.
Dr. Sweatman. Absolutely.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Petri. Thank you. Mr. Davis?
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to this
committee, too. Thank you for all who have gone through this
hearing. This committee, I believe, is a committee that has
showed true bipartisanship in addressing many issues that are
important to the infrastructure of this Nation. I think you are
going to see wide agreement on many of the proposals that we
hope to come out of this committee room in the near future,
like we have in the past, in regards to WRDA and others.
I too agree with many on the panel and many in this room
that we do need a longer term infrastructure bill that is going
to address many of our infrastructure programs and safety
programs in the long term, rather than a short term. And with
that--I don't want to rehash much of what has already been
asked. So I will go straight to some issues that I don't think
have been addressed.
You know, when I was a kid, it was always great to be able
to get my mom and dad's permission to ride my bike to school
the few days that they would let me. Obviously, they wouldn't
have let me today in Illinois, with - 16 wind chill. But I know
that in Illinois the Safe Routes to School program is helping
to make those instances safer. Many of my urban areas in
Champaign, Urbana, and Edwardsville, and other parts of central
Illinois, they have implemented some of these safety measures
by partnering with the State of Illinois to create safer routes
to school.
And I was wondering, Mr. Danko, if I could start with you.
Can you comment on the usefulness of this Safe Routes to School
program, and whether or not you have seen a decrease in traffic
fatalities near schools since its implementation?
Mr. Danko. I cannot speak to the fact of the decrease in
fatalities and accidents. I can get you some information and
come back for the record on that. But I don't have that
available.
But as an association, we do have a program that, you know,
talks to that. And we think we have seen a couple of instances
where we have done teen school kids doing assessments on safe
routes to schools, and trying to get a sense of what they see,
you know, from a user standpoint, versus a engineer or a DOT
person. So--and we have seen some success in that. We have done
a couple of pilot programs on that in a few of the places that
we have been.
Mr. Davis. Well, thank you. Mr. Hart, do you have any
comments on maybe a decrease? Any statistics on decreasing
traffic fatalities after projects have been implemented around
schools nationwide?
Mr. Hart. We don't have much experience with student
transportation except as it relates to schoolbuses.
Mr. Davis. OK. OK. Mr. Poole, thank you for what you do.
Always enjoy working with our State department of
transportation, and most of the time with our Governor's
office.
You know, this program was changed in MAP-21 somewhat. And
I wanted to ask you. Do you see any more recommendations that
you would have coming from the State to help us help you even
more to implement more safety measures around schools?
Mr. Poole. Around schools, and that is great. You know, we
have been--if you recall, in MAP-21 we worked with NHTSA in
codifying 15 different performance measures. And bicyclists
were not one of them. And we are looking and working with NHTSA
to codify one of those additional performance measures in a
reauthorization.
And I will give you an example. In Tennessee, the Safe
Routes to Schools program is not implemented by my office, but
we work very closely with the DOT, where they have a Safe
Routes to Schools coordinator. It has been exceptionally
successful in the State of Tennessee. I know that there are
many communities that have benefitted from additional safety
measures in and around schools, and it may not have even
resulted in a fatality, but maybe a crash, or maybe an injury.
And we have seen, in Tennessee, a growth in that program, and a
reduction in injuries and fatalities.
Mr. Davis. Great. Illinois seems to be working well, too.
If any of the panelists have suggestions to this committee to
make it easier for kids walking and riding to school, that is
something that I think I am very--I know I am very interested
in, in working with each of you to continue to make it easier
for especially States like Tennessee and Illinois and others to
actually access these safety programs as we move forward.
So, thank you again for your testimony today. And, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time, which is over.
Mr. Petri. Six seconds. Mr. Mica?
Mr. Mica. Thank you. And thank you for conducting this
important hearing on highway safety, and seeing how effective
the money that the Federal Government spends for safety. Staff
is telling me we doubled safety money in MAP-21, and very
pleased how--people go off the charts when you lose lives in
different types of scenarios, and we were losing about 43,000
people, I think, a year on the highways. That went down to
33,000, I believe.
Some of the improvements and some of this money can be used
for simple things like--I found installing the medians, the
guardrails, and keeping traffic separated especially--head-on
collisions, that was an effective use of money.
I got--I have got--a couple people got my attention
recently. One truck executive in Florida got me aside and says,
``You all got to stop doing that crap you are doing, pulling
those people over and looking at those logs and all that. That
is such a waste of money.'' He says, ``There is technology now.
What are you guys doing in Washington? There is technology
now''--they got some sort of technology he described to me that
they--you can look at their eyes, just like a DUI test, and see
if people are fatigued. He says we do--I think in the private
sector he said, ``We have been doing this. We can do that. And
you should get those drivers off. They are cooking the logs and
that stuff can be thwarted by a 15-year-old.'' Who wants to
respond?
[No response.]
Mr. Mica. How about the New York commercial guy? What do
you think? Is there something out there we can do? Have you
seen--is anyone aware of the technology I am talking about?
Mr. Fuller. No, I am not.
Mr. Mica. Well, we sure as hell need to find out, staff and
others. But he is telling me that you can access, through the
pupils, I guess, how fatigued they are.
So, I just raise that to staff and others. I would like to
find out. And if nobody here knows about it, I guess we are in
big trouble. But he sure as hell did.
Mr. Hart. May I comment on that, momentarily?
Mr. Mica. Yes, very briefly.
Mr. Hart. Yes. There are----
Mr. Mica. Don't take too much of my time----
Mr. Hart [continuing]. Some technologies aimed at detecting
fatigue. One detects whether steering wheel motions are normal
or indicative of fatigue.
Mr. Mica. No, but this is, you know, stop them or--the
sites, and--if we aren't giving money for research to do
something like that, and that technology is available, shame on
us. If you have ever seen a large commercial vehicle in a
crash, and the results, it is something you don't even want to
think about. And unfortunately, we have a lot of those.
Someone else got my ear and said, ``What the hell are you
people doing in Washington?'' Of course, you know, this
administration is renowned for its pumping out rules. And they
said, ``They just pumped out a rule that you only need the
safety glass in the front windshield,'' and showed me the
statistics: 1,000 people went out the side windows because you
don't have the proper safety glass. A rule could be--I mean it
could be set by rule or by a law. Anyone familiar with that?
That's just 1,000 people killed with that.
[No response.]
Mr. Mica. No? OK. Well, I think you have to look at where
we are losing people on the road. I mean life is--I am talking
about lives. And you have got tens of thousands who are
injured. What is the biggest thing we should be attacking in
highway safety to save lives? Start right there, and each of
you finish and tell me in 30 seconds or less. Well, you got 29.
Go ahead.
Mr. Hart. If someone is ejected out the window, that means
that person was not wearing a seatbelt.
Mr. Mica. Well, I thought of that, too, but they said--and
I don't know how--you know, I didn't analyze all those cases,
but they--the people who hit the windshield survived. That kept
them in the car.
But, again, my question was what safety improvement could
we do to save the most lives. Quick. Mr. Hart?
Mr. Hart. Yes. Again, the biggest single one has been
seatbelts, followed closely by airbags.
Mr. Mica. OK.
Mr. Hart. Keep people restrained in the car.
Mr. Mica. OK. Quick. Mr. Danko, what do you think?
Mr. Danko. Brighter signs.
Mr. Mica. Brighter signs?
Mr. Danko. Bigger font, easier-to-read signs.
Mr. Mica. Especially with the aging population
demographics.
Mr. Danko. Correct.
Mr. Mica. Mr. Fuller?
Mr. Fuller. Inspections on the motor carrier trucks going
down the roads.
Mr. Mica. More inspections?
Mr. Fuller. More inspections.
Mr. Mica. OK. Poole?
Mr. Poole. Focusing on behavioral highway safety: impaired
driving, seatbelts, speed, distracted driving.
Mr. Mica. OK. And, finally, Mr.----
Dr. Sweatman. Technologies that avoid crashes. May I
reflect a little on the comment you made about fatigued truck
drivers? We have seen that. We have done major studies of some
of these technologies. And whether or not they are fatigued,
whether or not the test would tell you they are fatigued, the
next thing that happens is they start to run out of the lane.
But if they have a lane departure warning system in that
vehicle, that driver wakes up and corrects and goes back into
the lane. So----
Mr. Mica. Well, some of those things we have started to do
in repaving and things of that sort.
Dr. Sweatman. Yes. But it can be in the vehicle, or it
could be on the highway, as well.
Mr. Mica. Right, yes.
Dr. Sweatman. But those things are very effective in
dealing with that problem.
Mr. Mica. OK.
Dr. Sweatman. But the problem of figuring out whether
someone is fatigued or sleepy, or whatever, is a little more
complicated.
Mr. Mica. Well, finally--and I am over my time--just ask
the staff--Dan, and some of the others--check on that
technology, and let's see if that merits further consideration.
He was pretty adamant about it. Thank you.
Mr. Petri. Thank you. Ms. Hahn, one more question.
Ms. Hahn. Yes, thank you. One more. So this is for the
Honorable Hart. So, at the average age of 43 years old, the
typical U.S. bridge is nearing the end of its 50-year design
life, and thousands are far older than that. Structurally
deficient bridges are more than 20 years older, on an average.
And although we have nearly 70,000 structurally deficient
bridges, and almost half of our highways are rated below good
condition, MAP-21 eliminated the former highway bridge program
which distributed Federal money specifically for bridge repair.
I introduced a bill earlier in Congress that would
authorize DOT to provide grants to States to repair or replace
bridges the Federal Highway Administration has found to be
structurally deficient. So, with the I-5 bridge being the
second collapse of an interstate bridge in 6 years, I think we
should be devoting even more dedicated funding towards
maintaining our roads and bridges, not less. And while MAP-21
requires that States develop performance standards for the
bridges, it does not make the determination as to which bridges
should benefit from Federal funding.
So, as this committee is focusing on developing a new
highway reauthorization bill, how can we ensure that we are
allocating resources in a way that targets our Nation's most
vulnerable bridges? I don't care what mode of transportation
you are talking about, there--our bridges are really in
disrepair. And it worries me a lot that--the kinds of lives
that would be lost and the disruption of everything from cargo
movement to just regular commuter traffic that would be
disrupted if our--if a bridge collapsed.
So, how can we do a better job in that respect, Mr. Hart?
Mr. Hart. Aging infrastructure has been a concern for us.
Not only bridges but also other infrastructure can be
problematic without the prescribed inspections and maintenance.
Ms. Hahn. You have any suggestions on how we might do
better as this--I mean this is what this hearing is about, is,
you know, how do we improve our allocation of these safety
grants.
Mr. Hart. I will submit the NTSB's recommendations on
infrastructure to the committee for the record.
[The information follows:]

Aging Infrastructure Recommendations

Accident Date:    07/10/2006
Accident No.:      HWY08MH024
Boston, MA, Accident Synopsis:
About 11:01 p.m. eastern daylight time on Monday, July 10,
2006, a 1991 Buick passenger car occupied by a 46-year-old
driver and his 38-year-old wife was traveling eastbound in the
Interstate 90 (I-90) connector tunnel in Boston, Massachusetts,
en route to Logan International Airport. As the car approached
the end of the I-90 connector tunnel, a section of the tunnel's
suspended concrete ceiling became detached from the tunnel roof
and fell onto the vehicle. Concrete panels from the ceiling
crushed the right side of the vehicle roof as the car came to
rest against the north wall of the tunnel. A total of about 26
tons of concrete and associated suspension hardware fell onto
the vehicle and the roadway. The driver's wife, occupying the
right-front seat, was fatally injured; the driver was able to
escape with minor injuries.

Recommendations:

Rec #: H-07-017
NTSB Status: Open--Acceptable Response
TO THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION: Seek legislation
authorizing the Federal Highway Administration to establish a
mandatory tunnel inspection program similar to the National
Bridge Inspection Program.

Rec #: H-07-018
NTSB Status: Open--Acceptable Response
TO THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION: Once provided with
legislative authority to establish a mandatory tunnel
inspection program as indicated in Safety Recommendation H-07-
17, develop and implement a tunnel inspection program that will
identity critical inspection elements and specify an
appropriate inspection frequency.

Rec #: H-07-015
NTSB Status: Closed--Acceptable Action
TO THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION: In cooperation with the
American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials, develop standards and protocols for the testing of
adhesive anchors to be used in sustained tensile-load overhead
highway applications. These standards and protocols should
consider site-specific ultimate strength values as well as the
creep characteristics of the adhesive over the expected life of
the structure.
The companion recommendation to AASHTO is H-07-020 which is
also Closed--Acceptable Action.

Accident Date:    08/01/2007
Accident No.:      HWY07MH024
Minneapolis, MN, Accident Synopsis:
About 6:05 p.m. central daylight time on Wednesday, August 1,
2007, the eight-lane, 1,907-foot-long I-35W highway bridge over
the Mississippi River in Minneapolis, Minnesota, experienced a
catastrophic failure in the main span of the deck truss. As a
result, 1,000 feet of the deck truss collapsed, with about 456
feet of the main span falling 108 feet into the 15-foot-deep
river. A total of 111 vehicles were on the portion of the
bridge that collapsed. Of these, 17 were recovered from the
water. As a result of the bridge collapse, 13 people died, and
145 people were injured.

Recommendations:

Rec #: H-08-001
NTSB Status: Closed--Acceptable Alternate Action
Issue date: 1/15/2008
TO THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION: For all non-load-path-
redundant steel truss bridges within the National Bridge
Inventory, require that bridge owners conduct load capacity
calculations to verify that the stress levels in all structural
elements, including gusset plates, remain within applicable
requirements whenever planned modifications or operational
changes may significantly increase stresses.

Rec #: H-08-018
NTSB Status: Closed--Acceptable Action
TO THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION: Require that bridge
owners assess the truss bridges in their inventories to
identify locations where visual inspections may not detect
gusset plate corrosion and where, therefore, appropriate
nondestructive evaluation technologies should be used to assess
gusset plate condition.

Rec #: H-08-019
NTSB Status: Closed--Acceptable Action
TO THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION: Modify the approved
bridge inspector training as follows: (1) update the National
Highway Institute training courses to address inspection
techniques and conditions specific to gusset plates,
emphasizing issues associated with gusset plate distortion as
well as the use of nondestructive evaluation at locations where
visual inspections may be inadequate to assess and quantify
such conditions as section loss due to corrosion; and, (2) at a
minimum, include revisions to reference material, such as the
Bridge Inspector's Reference Manual, and address any newly
developed gusset plate condition ratings in the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
commonly recognized (CoRe) structural elements.

Rec #: H-08-022
NTSB Status: Closed--Acceptable Action
TO THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF STATE HIGHWAY AND TRANSPORTATION
OFFICIALS: Modify the guidance and procedures in your Manual
for Bridge Evaluation to include evaluating the capacity of
gusset plates as part of the load rating calculations performed
for non-load-path-redundant steel truss bridges.

Rec #: H-08-024
NTSB Status: Closed--Acceptable Action
TO THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF STATE HIGHWAY AND TRANSPORTATION
OFFICIALS: Develop specifications and guidelines for use by
bridge owners to ensure that construction loads and stockpiled
raw materials placed on a structure during construction or
maintenance projects do not overload the structural members or
their connections.

Rec #: H-08-025
NTSB Status: Closed--Acceptable Action
TO THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF STATE HIGHWAY AND TRANSPORTATION
OFFICIALS: Include gusset plates as a commonly recognized
structural element (CoRe) and develop guidance for bridge
owners in tracking and responding to potentially damaging
conditions in gusset plates, such as corrosion and distortion;
and revise the AASHTO Guide for Commonly Recognized (CoRe)
Structural Elements to incorporate this new information.

Accident Date:    08/10/2008
Accident No.:      HWY08FH023
Annapolis, MD, Accident Synopsis:
On August 10, 2008, at 3:55 a.m., the driver of a tractor-
trailer took evasive action to avoid a Chevrolet Camaro
passenger vehicle that had departed its travel lane on the
William Preston Lane, Jr., Memorial Bridge (Chesapeake Bay
Bridge) near Annapolis, Maryland. The Camaro struck the
tractor-trailer and rotated 180 degrees but remained on the
bridge; the tractor-trailer, traveling at a police-reported
speed of more than 40 mph, crossed to the opposite side of the
bridge, striking the bridge barrier at a 40-degree angle and
departing the bridge. The tractor-trailer's impact to the
bridge railing caused an approximately 24-foot length of the
barrier to dislodge and a 12-foot length of the displaced
barrier to completely separate and fall into the Chesapeake
Bay. The driver of the commercial vehicle was killed; the
driver of the Camaro sustained serious injuries and the
Camaro's passenger sustained minor injuries; and the driver and
passenger of a third vehicle, a Toyota Prius that was struck by
the trailer, were uninjured.

Recommendations:

Rec #: H-10-017
NTSB Status: Closed--Acceptable Action
TO THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION: Inform State departments
of transportation of the risks of steel reinforcement corrosion
and voids in concrete barriers and barrier attachment points
and of the nondestructive evaluation methods used by the
Maryland Transportation Authority to identify internal
corrosion problems.

Rec #: H-10-018
NTSB Status: Closed--Acceptable Action
TO THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION: Expand the research and
development of nondestructive evaluation technologies to
develop bridge inspection methods that augment visual
inspections; offer reliable measurement techniques; and are
practical, both in terms of time and cost, for field inspection
work; and promote the use of these technologies by bridge
owners.

Ms. Hahn. Thank you. Thank you for allowing me another
question.
Mr. Petri. Thank you. Thank you all for your testimony and
response to questions. It has been a very interesting hearing.
I would ask unanimous consent that letters or statements
from the American Bus Association and the American Motorcyclist
Association be incorporated in the record of this hearing, and
ask unanimous consent that the record of today's hearing remain
open until such time as our witnesses have provided answers to
any questions that may be submitted to them in writing, and
unanimous consent that the record remain open for 15 days for
additional comments and information submitted by Members or
witnesses to be included in the record of today's hearing.
Is there any objection to any of those requests?
[No response.]
Mr. Petri. Hearing none, without objection, so ordered.
[The information submitted by Mr. Petri for the record
follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6439.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6439.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6439.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6439.008

Mr. Petri. And this subcommittee hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:46 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

