- IMPLEMENTING U.S. POLICY IN THE ARCTIC

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IMPLEMENTING U.S. POLICY IN THE ARCTIC

=======================================================================

(113-78)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 23, 2014

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
88-818                    WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL, II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee,          Columbia
Vice Chair                         JERROLD NADLER, New York
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                CORRINE BROWN, Florida
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
GARY G. MILLER, California           ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 RICK LARSEN, Washington
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           JOHN GARAMENDI, California
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              ANDREE CARSON, Indiana
STEVE SOUTHERLAND, II, Florida       JANICE HAHN, California
JEFF DENHAM, California              RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              DINA TITUS, Nevada
STEVE DAINES, Montana                SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
TOM RICE, South Carolina             ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina
DAVID W. JOLLY, Florida
------                                7

Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation

DUNCAN HUNTER, California, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    JOHN GARAMENDI, California
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        RICK LARSEN, Washington
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
STEVE SOUTHERLAND, II, Florida,      LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
Vice Chair                         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
TOM RICE, South Carolina             JANICE HAHN, California
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         NICK J. RAHALL, II, West Virginia
DAVID W. JOLLY, Florida                (Ex Officio)
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania (Ex
Officio)
CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................     v

TESTIMONY
Panel 1

Vice Admiral Peter V. Neffenger, Vice Commandant, U.S. Coast
Guard..........................................................     3
Rear Admiral Jonathan W. White, Oceanographer and Navigator of
the Navy, and Director, Space and Maritime Domain Awareness,
U.S. Navy......................................................     3
Ambassador David A. Balton, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Oceans
and Fisheries, Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental
and Scientific Affairs, Department of State....................     3

Panel 2

Captain David Westerholm, USCG, Retired, and Director, Office of
Response and Restoration, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.................................................    27
Kelly Kenison Falkner, Ph.D., Division Director, Division of
Polar Programs, National Science Foundation....................    27
Edmund Fogels, Deputy Commissioner, Department of Natural
Resources, State of Alaska.....................................    27

PREPARED STATEMENTS AND ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD SUBMITTED
BY WITNESSES

Vice Admiral Peter V. Neffenger:

Prepared statement...........................................    41
Answers to questions for the record issued by the following
Representatives:

Hon. Duncan Hunter, of California........................    46
Hon. John Garamendi, of California.......................    57
Hon. Rick Larsen, of Washington..........................    61
Rear Admiral Jonathan W. White:

Prepared statement...........................................    62
Answers to questions for the record issued by the following
Representatives:

Hon. Duncan Hunter, of California........................    66
Hon. Rick Larsen, of Washington..........................    68
Hon. John Garamendi, of California.......................    68
Ambassador David A. Balton:

Prepared statement...........................................    73
Answers to questions for the record issued by the following
Representatives:

Hon. Duncan Hunter, of California........................    81
Hon. John Garamendi, of California.......................    83
Hon. Rick Larsen, of Washington..........................    92
Captain David Westerholm:

Prepared statement...........................................    96
Answers to questions for the record issued by the following
Representatives:

Majority-side Representatives............................   104
Hon. John Garamendi, of California, and Hon. Rick Larsen,
of Washington..........................................   108
Kelly Kenison Falkner, Ph.D.:

Prepared statement...........................................   111
Answers to questions for the record issued by the following
Representatives:

Hon. Duncan Hunter, of California........................   119
Hon. John Garamendi, of California, and Hon. Rick Larsen,
of Washington..........................................   121
Edmund Fogels, prepared statement................................   124

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Vice Admiral Peter V. Neffenger, Vice Commandant, U.S. Coast
Guard, inserts for the record regarding:

The number of Northern Sea Route transits in 2013............    12
Request from Hon. Rick Larsen of Washington to clarify the
dollar amount to preserve and drydock the Polar Sea........    14
Request from Hon. Don Young of Alaska for the Coast Guard's
perspective on leasing polar icebreakers...................    18
Request from Hon. Rick Larsen of Washington for information
about the Coast Guard's Arctic policy......................    24

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

IMPLEMENTING U.S. POLICY IN THE ARCTIC

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 2014

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime
Transportation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m. in
Room 2253, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Duncan Hunter
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Hunter. Good morning. The subcommittee will come to
order. Sorry about the room size, small. There are more of us.
Anybody who wants to can sit on the front row.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Hunter. The subcommittee is meeting this morning to
review how the agencies that will play the largest roles in the
Arctic intend to implement the National Strategy for the Arctic
Region, as well as enhance their presence, understanding, and
mission effectiveness in the area.
As we all know, the ice caps are shrinking in the Arctic,
effectively creating new coastline and navigable waters. This
opening is already providing significant economic opportunities
for the energy and maritime transportation sectors. However, as
human presence increases and as other nations continue to make
claims in the Arctic, it has also exposed a new set of risks
and challenges to our sovereignty and national security.
The national strategy calls for a strong U.S presence in
the Arctic, but the Implementation Plan that accompanies it
fails to identify what specific infrastructure or capabilities
are required to meet those goals, or how or when they will be
funded. For instance, there is no discussion of requirements
for icebreakers, but each of the agencies here today requires
one to carry out its missions in the Arctic.
While Russia maintains a fleet of nearly 40 icebreakers,
and China, a non-Arctic nation, is building new icebreakers,
the U.S. fleet of heavy icebreakers is in a dismal state. I
wouldn't even call it a fleet, frankly. One has been rusting
away in Seattle for 3 years with a busted engine, while the
Coast Guard fails to make a decision about its future. The
other is operational, thanks to an infusion of $60 million from
Congress, but that only gets it 7 years longer.
The Coast Guard has been working with 10 other Federal
agencies to develop requirements for a new polar icebreaker,
but has yet to identify where in its acquisition budget it will
find the $1.2 billion to construct it. I share the concerns
raised by Admiral Papp at our budget hearing in March, that
forcing the Coast Guard to pay for a new icebreaker will
significantly delay the acquisition of other new assets that
the Service critically needs. And I agree with him that the
cost should be shared across all agencies that have
requirements for an icebreaker. I look forward to hearing from
our witnesses on whether they plan on contributing money, as
opposed to just missions and requirements, to this whole-of-
Government effort.
I am also interested in hearing the status of negotiations
on the Polar Code. As vessel traffic increases, the
implementation of the Polar Code should go a long way toward
ensuring the safety of maritime transportation and protection
of the Arctic environment. Establishing vessel construction and
operating standards upfront will create a predictable operating
environment for industry.
Finally, the United States is set to take the chairmanship
of the Arctic Council next year. I applaud, obviously, the
recent appointment of Admiral Papp as the Nation's first
Special Representative for the Arctic. I am interested in
hearing more about what role Admiral Papp will play in the
chairmanship, as well as the agenda that the State Department
intends to put forward.
We need to be protecting our national interests in the
Arctic. I hope today's hearing will draw light on how the
administration intends to accomplish that.
I thank the witnesses for appearing today, and look forward
to their testimony. With that, I yield to Ranking Member
Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Chairman Hunter, thank you so very much for
scheduling this meeting. We have talked about this issue, you
and I and our staffs, for some time. And here we are, on an
extraordinarily important hearing.
As distant and remote as the Arctic and Antarctic regions
may appear to most Americans, the reality is that they are two
regions that are especially important to this Nation, the
Arctic ranking at the top. We are likely to become more--and
likely to become exceedingly important in the years ahead, both
geopolitically, as well as strategically.
As our Nation's primary Federal maritime agency, the Coast
Guard has played, and will continue to play, a significant role
in Arctic policy, implementation, and enforcement, while also
fulfilling its other mission responsibilities of search and
rescue operations, maritime safety, scientific research, and
environmental protection.
But is the Coast Guard up to the challenge? What about
other Federal agencies that have key responsibilities in the
Arctic and the Antarctic, for that matter? Are we in Congress
fulfilling our responsibilities to provide the Coast Guard with
the resources it needs to be semper paratus, always prepared
and ready for the rigors of operating in these most
inhospitable regions?
I am heartened that, by the administration's release of its
2013 National Strategy for the Arctic Region, and the release
earlier this year of the Implementation Plan for this strategy.
These two documents provide overarching guidance and agency-
specific Arctic strategies developed by the Coast Guard, the
Navy, NOAA, each providing greater detail for their respective
agencies' missions and objectives.
But I am compelled to say that I remain disappointed that
these planning initiatives have not yet taken root in the
administration's budget. And if you look at certain programs,
especially the Coast Guard icebreaking missions--and here I
echo you, Mr. Chairman--the gap between what is needed to
effectively implement the Arctic strategy and what is requested
and funded is huge, growing, and, frankly, doesn't work.
Whether or not you believe in the science underlying the
projections of warming the--of the Arctic climate, that is
immaterial. Well, it is not. It is really central to this
issue. The stark reality is that, with each passing year, the
Arctic is becoming more accessible, more open, more warmer, and
more compelling economic and security priority to the United
States.
Other nations have grasped this reality. We should, too. It
is well past the time when we can afford to ignore the imminent
challenge. Next year, when the United States assumes the chair
of the Arctic Council for 2 years, we might finally take up
this challenge.
No, we are going to do that today.
I yield back.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the ranking member. On our first panel of
witnesses today are Vice Admiral Peter Neffenger, Vice
Commandant of the United States Coast Guard; Rear Admiral
Jonathan White, Oceanographer and Navigator of the Navy--I
didn't know that that was an actual title, it is good to go;
and Ambassador David Balton, Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Oceans and Fisheries at the Department of State.
Admiral Neffenger, you are recognized for your statement.

TESTIMONY OF VICE ADMIRAL PETER V. NEFFENGER, VICE COMMANDANT,
U.S. COAST GUARD; REAR ADMIRAL JONATHAN W. WHITE, OCEANOGRAPHER
AND NAVIGATOR OF THE NAVY, AND DIRECTOR, SPACE AND MARITIME
DOMAIN AWARENESS, U.S. NAVY; AND AMBASSADOR DAVID A. BALTON,
DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR OCEANS AND FISHERIES, BUREAU OF
OCEANS AND INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS,
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Admiral Neffenger. Thank you, sir. Good morning, Chairman
Hunter, Ranking Member Garamendi. I am pleased to appear before
you today to discuss Coast Guard operations in the Arctic, the
Coast Guard's Arctic strategy, and Coast Guard efforts to
ensure safe, secure, and environmentally responsible maritime
activity in this region.
With your permission, Mr. Chairman, I have written
testimony for the record, and I will make a brief opening
statement.
In my previous role as Deputy Commandant for Operations, I
spent a significant amount of time focusing on Arctic and polar
issues for the Coast Guard. I have traveled extensively
throughout the Arctic and the Antarctic regions to understand
the challenges of operating in these extreme environments, the
range of national and international priorities and initiatives,
and the impacts of increasing human activity.
In the spring of 2013 I represented the United States on an
Arctic Council trip to the Russian Far North, which included an
overview of Arctic oil and gas exploration, infrastructure
development, and culminated in travel to the North Pole. I also
recently visited the Antarctic, with the National Science
Foundation, as well as to the South Pole to observe operations
there and our icebreaker contributions to the U.S. Antarctic
Program.
The primary lesson from these travels is that these regions
are remote, they are hostile, they are unforgiving, but they
nonetheless present the potential for substantial economic and
scientific gains for our Nation. Operations in the polar
regions demand detailed and deliberate planning, supported by
specialized, reliable, and unique equipment.
I mentioned that human activity is increasing in the
Arctic. It is doing so because the region has become more
accessible. There really is a new ocean opening, and Coast
Guard authorities require our presence wherever people operate
in U.S. waters.
The activity we see falls into three general categories:
resource development, primarily oil, gas, and mineral;
opportunities for new trade routes; and ecotourism. To address
these, the Coast Guard recently published its Arctic strategy
to outline the Service's near-term approach to meeting the
mission demands generated by these activities.
Our strategy complements the National Strategy for the
Arctic, and envisions a mobile, seasonal Coast Guard
operational presence to meet mission demands over the next
decade, and sets forth three key objectives: to improve
awareness, we need a better understanding of what the
operations are up there; to modernize governance, that has to
do with managing the various activities that are doing so
across international lines; and then, to broaden partnerships,
we need to know who else has capability up there that we can
call upon.
We have recently completed an implementation plan for our
strategy, and it outlines 12 initiatives in support of our
objectives. These involve Federal, State, local, tribal, and
international partners, and they focus on operations, maritime
domain awareness, environmental protection, communications,
strategic partnerships, academic and scientific research,
contingency planning, and international cooperation and
coordination.
One such initiative is the establishment of an Arctic Coast
Guard Forum for the eight Arctic Council nations to coordinate
exercises, strengthen relationships, and implement the recent
Arctic oil spill response and search and rescue agreements.
Today Coast Guard aircraft and vessels patrol nearly 1
million square miles of ocean off the Alaskan coast to enforce
U.S. laws, conduct search and rescue, assist in scientific
research, advance navigation safety, and foster environmental
stewardship. We use polar-class icebreakers, National Security
Cutters, and ice-strengthened buoy tenders, in additional to
seasonal air and communication assets to execute these
missions. We work with the Department of Defense, specifically
the Navy, to advance maritime domain awareness by testing
Arctic technologies and capabilities, including communications
equipment, unmanned aerial vehicles, and ice radars. We have
conducted ice rescue training, exercised pollution response
capability, and collected scientific data that will be used to
further the understanding of this Arctic ecosystem.
And just as we do elsewhere, we respond to emergencies.
Healy recently diverted from scientific research to respond to
a 36-foot sailing vessel beset in the ice 30 nautical miles
north of Barrow. It was about a 6-mile transit in to rescue
that individual.
Current and future operations in the Arctic and Antarctic
will continue to be informed by the availability of polar
icebreakers and ice-strengthened vessels. Polar Star's recent
reactivation will provide the U.S. with heavy icebreaker
capability for about another 7 to 10 years. We believe that
Polar Star, along with the medium icebreaker, Healy, provide a
minimum capability necessary to address the Nation's near-term
icebreaking needs in the Arctic and Antarctic, and will give us
the time we need to assess longer term national needs and
requirements.
Mr. Chairman, the increasingly accessible Arctic region and
the opening of Arctic waters present unique opportunities and
significant challenges for our Nation. We look forward to
working with the administration and Congress to ensure that the
Coast Guard, with its unique authorities, missions, and
partnerships, can continue to support U.S. national priorities
in the Arctic and Antarctic regions, and to remain always ready
to meet the demands of emerging maritime frontiers.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to your questions.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Admiral.
Admiral White?
Admiral White. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. First of all,
good morning, Chairman Hunter; good morning, Ranking Member
Garamendi; good morning, other subcommittee members. My name is
Rear Admiral Jonathan White, and I currently serve, as
mentioned, as the Oceanographer and Navigator of the Navy, and
as the lead of the Navy's Task Force Climate Change. I have
submitted my full written statement to the committee. I ask
that it be made part of the hearing record. And, with your
permission, I will give a brief opening statement.
I join my colleagues in supporting the President's National
Strategy for the Arctic Region, and appreciate the opportunity
to discuss the Navy's preparations in implementing U.S. policy
in the Arctic. The Arctic Ocean is experiencing significant
change in its seasonal ice coverage, which is making it more
accessible to maritime activity. The diminishing sea ice is
slowly opening the region to increased commercial activity and
shipping.
As the maritime domain, the Navy has responsibilities in
the Arctic. In support of the U.S. National Strategy for the
Arctic Region and the Department of the Defense Arctic
Strategy, the Navy has identified four strategy objectives:
ensure U.S. Arctic sovereignty; provide ready naval forces; to
preserve freedom of the seas; and promote partnerships.
We acknowledge that the risk of conflict in the region is
currently low. The Arctic Council and other diplomatic venues
provide effective means to resolve disputes between nations.
However, the U.S. Navy must be ready to operate in this
challenging environment, just as it does routinely on, under,
and above every other ocean.
History shows us that the presence of navies on the world's
oceans provides security and stability that promote economic
development and commerce. As President Theodore Roosevelt
stated over 110 years ago, ``A good Navy is not a provocation
to war, it is the surest guaranty of peace.''
The Navy's existing posture is appropriate to address the
near-term defense requirements in the Arctic, primarily through
undersea assets. For the Navy to develop the full range of
capabilities it has in other oceans will take time.
This past February, the chief of naval operations, Admiral
Jonathan Greenert, signed the U.S. Navy Arctic Road Map 2014-
2030, which aligns with the National Arctic Strategy and the
U.S. Coast Guard Arctic Strategy. It includes a detailed
Implementation Plan to develop Arctic capabilities and capacity
in step with the changing environment.
Over the next decade, the Navy will continue to develop
capabilities and experience, largely through personal exchanges
and exercises in the high latitudes, and primarily in the open
water during the summer season. We will also continue to
conduct research to better understand and predict the complex
Arctic environment and how it relates to safe and effective
naval operations.
Our challenge over the coming decade will be to balance the
resource demands of current requirements with investments in
the development of future capabilities. To accomplish this, the
Navy will emphasis low-cost, long lead-time activities, and use
partnerships to ensure we do this in cost-effective and smart
ways. Over the course of the next few years, the Navy will
continue to leverage strong partnerships with the U.S. Coast
Guard and other national and international Arctic partners and
stakeholders to cooperatively address the challenges of Arctic
operation.
These challenges are substantial, the Arctic Ocean is a
vast and remote frontier with little shore infrastructure to
support operations, frequent extreme hazardous wind and sea
conditions, very limited navigation aids, dated and unreliable
navigation charts, and limited communications. By the mid-
2020s, we predict the summer sea ice will diminish to the point
of opening a near-polar deepwater transit route across the
Arctic for at least several days during the late summer.
As commercial enterprise in the Arctic slowly increase
during this period, new mission requirements for the Navy will
likely be to assist the Coast Guard and other nations with
search and rescue or disaster response. But we may also be
called upon to ensure freedom of navigation in Arctic waters.
We will continue to transition toward the capability to operate
on and above the sea for sustained periods, as required.
By 2030, the Navy looks to have the necessary trained and
equipped personnel, along with surface, subsurface, and air
capabilities to respond to contingencies and emergencies
affecting national security in the Arctic. The U.S. Navy must
be prepared to sail on to distant and remote waters to protect
national interests and freedom of the seas.
We are confronted today by the prospect of a newly
accessible ocean, one that presents significantly more
challenges than other maritime regions. Fortunately, we have
time to prepare. We have made significant progress in
understanding those challenges, and preparing the Navy for
success. The key, again, will be to balance potential
investments with other service priorities. But we are moving
forward with a flexible approach, and we know we can keep pace
with the evolving Arctic region, as we protect our national
security interests.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Garamendi and
committee members, for the opportunity to appear before you
today. This concludes my oral statement, and I look forward to
your questions.
Mr. Hunter. Thanks, Admiral. They have a nickname in the
Navy for the Navigator of the Navy? I mean, do you have a
nickname? They call you ``Nav'' or anything?
Admiral White. The best job and title for a flag officer in
the Navy, sir, in my opinion.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Hunter. That is great. ``The Navigator.''
Admiral White. The Navigator would be better.
Mr. Hunter. Ambassador Balton, you are recognized.
Mr. Balton. Good morning, Chairman Hunter, Ranking Member
Garamendi, other members of the subcommittee. I appreciate the
opportunity to be before you today. I also have a written
statement and I ask that it be included as part of the record.
The United States and other Arctic nations now face new
challenges and opportunities in the Arctic region. I will try
to summarize our approach to these issues, with a particular
focus on our upcoming chairmanship of the Arctic Council.
As we have already heard, the Arctic region is experiencing
very significant change, much of which results from a warming
climate. Sea ice, glaciers, ice sheets are diminishing,
permafrost is thawing, coasts are eroding. These and related
phenomena are causing very serious problems for the roughly 4
million people who live north of the Arctic Circle and for the
governments of the Arctic nations.
But, at the same time, these very changes are presenting
new opportunities, including increased shipping, offshore
hydrocarbon development, tourism, other activities. Our
Government and others are seeking ways to take advantage of the
opportunities in a safe, responsible, and sustainable way.
In promoting our Nation's interests in the Arctic region
and strengthening international cooperation, we use the Arctic
Council as the primary mechanism for multilateral engagement.
The Council was created in 1996. It is a high-level
intergovernmental forum of the eight Arctic States and the
Arctic indigenous peoples, as well. The challenges and
opportunities of the Arctic have grown. And, so too, the
Council has evolved. It now has six standing working groups, a
permanent secretariat, and has taken on some new and impressive
tasks, including serving as the venue for the negotiation of
the first two binding agreements among the eight Arctic
governments.
The United States is a leader of the Arctic Council. We
have led or co-led many of its most important initiatives. And,
yes, we will assume the chairmanship of the Arctic Council next
April for 2 years.
The Department of State is currently in the process of
developing a robust program for our chairmanship through
regular meetings with our Federal interagency counterparts, the
State of Alaska, the Alaska congressional delegation, others in
Congress who care about this, Alaska Native groups, industry
groups, environmental groups, other interested stakeholders. We
have not finalized our proposed program yet, but I can tell you
it will be in line with the National Strategy for the Arctic
Region issued in May 2013, and the subsequent implementation
plan.
Current areas we are thinking of highlighting include
climate change in the Arctic, improving economic and living
conditions for Arctic residents, and responsible stewardship of
the Arctic Ocean. Examples of projects in these areas might
include improving access and availability to clean energy in
remote Arctic communities, improving water sanitation,
improving black carbon regulation, and pursuing an
international management framework for living resources of the
Arctic Ocean.
We are still consulting with stakeholders in the United
States on these ideas and others. We then must present them to
the seven other Arctic governments; the Council operates by
consensus, we will have to negotiate our proposed program with
our partners in the Council.
As noted, and recognizing the importance of the Arctic,
Secretary Kerry has appointed Admiral Robert Papp to lead our
efforts to protect and advance U.S. interests in the Arctic as
the State Department's Special Representative for the Arctic
Region. We anticipate that Admiral Papp will soon travel to
Alaska to consult with those on the front lines of our Arctic
State.
Please allow me to say just a word about the importance to
U.S. Arctic interests of our joining the 1982 Law of the Sea
Convention. The Convention provides the basic legal framework
applicable to all the oceans, including the Arctic. Its
provisions are highly favorable to U.S. national security and
economic interests. As we speak, the United States and other
nations with coastlines on the Arctic are working to determine
the outer limit of their respective continental shelves.
Unlike the other Arctic nations, however, the United States
is not a party to this Convention. And this places us at a very
serious disadvantage in securing legal certainty and
international recognition of the outer limits of our outer
continental shelf in the Arctic and elsewhere. What is at stake
is the exclusive right to resources on and under the
continental shelf. More broadly, U.S. succession to this
Convention is a matter of geostrategic importance in the Arctic
and elsewhere. We need to be a party to fully claim our
rightful place as an Arctic nation.
In conclusion, the Arctic presents enormous and growing
geostrategic, economic, environmental, and national security
implications for the United States. We are endeavoring to meet
those challenges in the Arctic, and to seize the opportunities
within our grasp. I very much appreciate the opportunity to
appear before you today. Happy to answer any questions you may
have. Thank you.
Mr. Hunter. OK, thank you, gentlemen. I am going to start
the questions now, starting with myself. So here is my
question. It is pretty basic.
There is a lot of talk about how important the Arctic is,
but I don't believe it. I don't believe it is worthwhile at
all, because there is no money allocated towards it, the Navy
is not putting any money towards it, Homeland Security is not
putting any money towards it. You have a chart in front of you
that I would have liked to have made big, but it is not. This
shows all the icebreakers that other countries have. We have
one that can't even go in the thick ice right now at all.
So, my question is, why is it a national security--why is
it important, national security-wise, and why do we really need
icebreakers? Can't we just use Russia's? Can't we use
Finland's? Canada's? Sweden's? Argentina's? Australia's?
Chile's? Estonia? Germany? Japan? Why can't we use theirs? And,
if it is so important, why aren't we doing anything, except
talking about it and making sure we have groups planning for it
and meeting with each other to talk more about it, but not
really caring to put money in? So it must not be that
important.
Admiral Neffenger. Well, Mr. Chairman, I can answer from
the Coast Guard's perspective. What I would say is that the
Nation--we are an Arctic nation, not simply a nation with an
Arctic State. And I speak purely from the physical fact, that
we, as a nation, touch Arctic waters. And those Arctic waters
are U.S. waters, and U.S. laws and regulations apply in those
waters, just as they do elsewhere.
And so, from our perspective, we know that it--the region,
when it was ice-covered all the time, was a region you could
choose to go to, and we did, as a nation, for many purposes.
Some were exploratory in nature and some were defense-related
in nature, specifically the establishment of the DEW line back
in the fifties. But now it is a region where the accessibility
is allowing it to be open to human activity. And, as I said,
that human activity is taking the form of extractive resource
mining, the potential for development of ecotourism, and, of
course, new trade routes.
So, from our perspective, we now have a requirement to be
present. The Nation expects us to be present to extend its
sovereign responsibilities over its waters, wherever there is
activity in those U.S. waters that demand U.S. Coast Guard
presence. And we see that in the form of concerns over the
amount of--potential amount of traffic that is going through.
The good news is it is a relatively limited development right
now, and we have--it is a measured evolution of change in the
Arctic. But, nonetheless, we are seeing increasing traffic and
we are seeing increasing activity, and we expect that Shell Oil
will return to the northwest coast of Alaska to attempt to
continue its drilling operations that it started back in the
summer of 2012.
So, it is purely from an operational standpoint that we see
the importance of it, and we articulated that. That is why we
put out an Arctic Strategy. We really wanted to make it clear
that, despite the challenges associated with the resourcing of
Arctic needs, the demand for presence won't go away. And, as I
said, as other nations--whether we ultimately develop much off
of our own Arctic coast, the development that is existing
elsewhere in the Arctic, and the stuff that I have seen going
on through my travels, tells me that we are going to want to
pay attention to it.
Mr. Hunter. Thanks. Admiral White, when is the Navy going
to put forward funds for an icebreaker, if it is so important?
Admiral White. Sir, we view--and since the mid-1960s,
icebreaking has been a Coast Guard mission. We support the
Coast Guard's strategy and their requirements for icebreaking
for the Arctic and anywhere else that it may be needed. We rely
on them, we support them. We are working very closely with them
in an integrated planning team----
Mr. Hunter. You support them with money?
Admiral White [continuing]. Requirements.
Mr. Hunter. You support them with money?
Admiral White. We do not support them with part of our
budget, sir. They were given the mission, we are a mission-
funded organization. And so, we rely on them. But we support
them totally with the requirements. We work hand in hand,
whether it is icebreakers or maybe aircraft carriers or landing
ships. It is a team approach that we do to all the operations
that we are involved in together. But icebreaking was given to
the Coast Guard, and we are in full support of them.
Mr. Balton. So, unlike my colleagues, the mission of my
agency is a little bit different. The Department of State has
as its mission to carry out U.S. foreign policy. We don't break
ice, we don't operate at sea.
That said, I agree with you, that--with respect to the
importance of having icebreaking capability in the Arctic and
Antarctic, including for our foreign policy and our presence.
But I would not agree that is the only measure of the
importance of the Arctic to our Nation. There is a lot going on
in the Arctic. The icebreaking issue is only one facet of many.
Mr. Hunter. As I have got 13 seconds left, let me ask this.
Does the Navy have a national security requirement for a heavy
icebreaker in the Arctic? Yes or no?
Admiral White. The Navy has a requirement for icebreaking
to support assured access in the Arctic, as--under the Coast
Guard--agreement with the Coast Guard, that they will do the
icebreaking for us. Right now we have no requirement to build--
for the U.S. Navy to build an icebreaker for the Arctic, and we
rely on the Coast Guard's capability to break ice. They are
meeting the requirements that we have in the near term, and we
fully support that, sir.
Mr. Hunter. All right, thank you. Mr. Garamendi is
recognized.
Mr. Garamendi. Just very quickly on this, the number that I
have heard for a new icebreaker is somewhere in the half-a-
billion dollar range. And I would just tell all of us that are
on the Armed Services Committee that we expect to spend, in the
next 10 years, some $15 billion rebuilding the B61 bomb that
nobody knows what to do with.
So, we have choices, and we ought to look to ourselves
about the choices we make. We are committed to that $15
billion. We could take a half dozen of those unnecessary,
unused bombs, and build a icebreaker. These are our choices.
Responsibility really does lie here.
Enough of that. I want to hit the Law of the Sea. Mr.
Ambassador, you spoke quickly to that issue. I would like you
to expand upon it, and really why it is important. And also,
why, in your view, it has not yet passed the Senate, so we can
blame them, rather than us, on this one.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Balton. Thank you, sir. The Law of the Sea Convention
is important for many reasons, including in the Arctic. What I
touched on in my oral statement has to do with the extended
continental shelf. If you know about this, under international
law, the Law of the Sea, the country with the coastline gets
the first 200 miles off its coast as its continental shelf,
regardless of what it looks like down there, what it is made
out of. And then----
Mr. Garamendi. Exclusive Economic Zone.
Mr. Balton. No, we are talking about the sea floor under--
--
Mr. Garamendi. OK.
Mr. Balton [continuing]. The Exclusive Economic Zone, the
continental shelf.
Mr. Garamendi. Got it.
Mr. Balton. So you get the first 200 miles as a given. But
then, if you can demonstrate that the area beyond 200 miles
meets certain tests set out in the Law of the Sea Convention,
you can claim that, too. And there is a process set out in the
Law of the Sea Convention to guarantee recognition by other
countries to this area of sea floor.
The area of the U.S. continental shelf beyond 200 miles in
the Arctic and elsewhere may be two to four times the size of
California, may have trillions of dollars of resources under
there. But as a nonparty to the Convention, we don't have the
process to go through to get the international recognition of
our continental shelf beyond 200 miles. That is a serious
disadvantage for the U.S. There are others, as well, but I
think it is one of the most compelling reasons why----
Mr. Garamendi. What are the issues why it has not passed
over the last, what, 15 years or more?
Mr. Balton. You probably should ask some of your
counterparts in the Senate. This administration----
Mr. Garamendi. No, I am asking you for your opinion.
Mr. Balton. Well, I am saying this administration----
Mr. Garamendi. Don't be diplomatic, just tell us.
Mr. Balton [continuing]. The last administration, the
administration before that have all supported it.
Some of the complaints we have heard have to do with
worries about dispute settlement under the Convention. There is
compulsory and binding dispute settlement over most disputes
that might arise under that. We think that is actually a good
thing. We are likely to be the plaintiff in most cases, and use
the dispute settlement mechanism to enforce the rules of the
Convention, which are favorable to the United States.
There are also some concerns about the sharing of resources
under the Convention.
Mr. Garamendi. OK. I want to--better move on here.
We have not really had a discussion about the two sea
routes, and specifically the Northern Sea Route, which is
adjacent to Russia. Just quickly, let's get that on the table
so we understand what the implications are for the U.S. Coast
Guard, the Navy, and then the diplomat issues.
Admiral Neffenger. Yes, sir, thank you. As you know, the
Northern Sea Route is a route that was--is proposed and
developed by the Russian Federation, which travels along their
northern Arctic coast, and it allows for, under some
circumstances, significantly shorter route times from Europe to
Asia for certain types of cargo. That sea route--the Russians,
2 years ago, established the Northern Sea Route Administration,
and established a series of regulatory requirements that have
to be met in order for vessels to use that. They really are
developing this as a potential trade route.
It has largely been used intra-Russia right now. They are
moving from port to port within Russia. There have been a
couple of transits across that. We are seeing still in the
double-digit numbers, not much more than that. I think some 47
vessels transited the Northern Sea Route last year. I can get
the exact number for the record.
[The information follows:]

Seventy-one (71) vessels transited the Northern Sea Route in
2013.

Admiral Neffenger. But the implications for us are that all
of those vessels will travel--if they are making the full
transit, will travel through the Bering Strait, which, as you
know, in its narrowest point, is within about 20 miles or so of
the Russian Federation. That means that if there were to be a
maritime casualty in those straits, it would directly affect
U.S. interests, and could potentially do significant damage to
U.S. environmental concerns in Alaska.
The other concern is simply the management of that traffic
through there, understanding, you know, how to do so safely.
So, I would say that the--as we--it will be interesting to
watch the development of the Northern Sea Route. I know that
the Russian Federation has--sees that as one of their key
economic development issues with respect to their Arctic
coastline. What we are mostly seeing is gas and oil moving
across there. That poses probably the concern that, if you had
a casualty, it could be one that would be significantly worse
than, say, a cargo vessel moving through there.
Mr. Garamendi. I will come back. I will take up the issue
second round.
Mr. Hunter. Mr. Rice would be recognized right now, but we
are going to recognize Mr. Coble because of his seniority and
Coast Guard service. And he hates waiting.
Mr. Coble. I apologize for my delayed arrival. Admiral
Neffenger, at the subcommittee fiscal year 2015 budget hearing
in March Admiral Papp expressed his concern that the Coast
Guard could not afford to acquire a new polar-class icebreaker
on its own without significantly delaying its current program
to replace its aging fleet cutters and aircraft. I think the
chairman touched on this, at least indirectly. What say you in
response to that? Do you embrace Admiral Papp's conclusion?
Admiral Neffenger. Yes, sir. I would agree with Admiral
Papp. I mean he is absolutely right, that under our current
fiscal constraints it would be very challenging to insert the
cost of a polar icebreaker into our capital acquisition budget.
We--it would displace other existing high priorities, such as
the recapitalization of our Medium Endurance Cutter fleet,
which is one of our most critical pressing needs.
So, over the next 2 to 3 years we are going to be looking
at the--getting a better fidelity on the actual cost to
replace, as we look at the requirements and some initial design
possibilities, as well as assess the state of the U.S.
shipbuilding industry, to actually build an icebreaker,
something they haven't done, and a heavy icebreaker is
something they haven't done in over 40 years. And that will
give us a better idea.
But ultimately, we were going to have to face the question
as to how you put additional monies into a budget to pay for
what will be a very expensive acquisition.
Mr. Coble. I realize, Admiral, this is not your shop. But
when I was in the Coast Guard, we referred to the Navy as the
``Big Outfit.'' So what does the Big Outfit say in response to
my question?
Admiral White. And I hope the Big Outfit doesn't mean we
are the fatted calf to pay for icebreakers, sir, but thank you
for the opportunity.
We are larger. We certainly have large force structure. But
our force structure is designed to meet the mission
requirements for national security and defense, as outlined.
These are very austere budget times. We are faced with
challenges, in terms of replacing our SSBN force in the future:
aircraft carriers, an aging fleet of other surface combatants,
submarines and aircraft. We have no plan to build an
icebreaker. We have no mission for icebreaking. Therefore, we
see the great partnership that I know you are aware between
Navy and Coast Guard, sir, as the means by which we will rely
on the Coast Guard for that mission, as it stands right now. We
are happy with that, and we are happy with the Coast Guard's
assessment on how they are going to meet those mission
requirements in the future, sir.
Mr. Coble. Ambassador, you mentioned that there are other
issues in the Arctic, in addition to the Coast Guard icebreaker
issue. Are any of those other issues as pressing for resolution
as is the icebreaker issue? That may be subject to personal
interpretation.
Mr. Balton. Yes, that is kind of an open-ended question.
Here is my best answer for you, sir. Yes, there are other
compelling issues in the Arctic beyond those that have direct
concern to the Coast Guard and the Navy.
Ways of life in the Arctic are changing very rapidly, as
the conditions in that part of the world change, for the
indigenous and subsistence populations, particularly in the
northern part of Alaska, Canada, and Greenland. The role of our
Government must be to help adapt to the changes that are
coming. This includes failing infrastructure, because of
permafrost thawing; coastal erosion; health issues that are
arising. Those are some of the other compelling issues that I
see there, sir.
Mr. Coble. Gentlemen, thank you for being with us.
Appreciate it.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your courtesy. I yield back.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
Washington is recognized.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Apparently I have got
the little kid's chair from Thanksgiving, so I will try to sit
up higher.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Larsen. So I was wondering, Admiral Neffenger, could
you tell us more about the preservation work the Coast Guard is
doing on the Polar Sea, and then tell us how that work affects
decisions about its future? And third, let us know when the
Coast Guard will come to a final decision on what to do with
the Polar Sea.
Admiral Neffenger. Yes, sir. As you know, the Polar Sea has
sat dockside for the past 2\1/2\ years in an unmaintained
status. The current--it has not had preservation work done to
preserve it for a long period of time. And what I mean by that
is we put her into a dockside status, but still in commission.
There is $8 million currently in the Senate mark of our
appropriations bill, which will provide the funding necessary
to do preservation work, to dry dock the vessel, to blank off
all the overboard discharges, and to arrest the current
condition of the vessel. Once that is done, then we will have
to take a detailed look at it to determine what the true work
list and cost would be to reactivate the vessel.
So, the reactivation remains an option for us, but we don't
currently have plans to reactivate it. The current plans are to
do the preservation work necessary to put it in an arrested
status, and then conduct the detailed engineering review to
determine what systems would have to be upgraded and renewed in
order to bring it back into service.
Mr. Larsen. So the business case analysis the Coast Guard
did at the direction of this subcommittee and the full
committee that resulted in an approximate $100 million cost to
reactivate and begin to use Polar Sea, did that $100 million
include this approximate $8 million to preserve it, or was
that--is that a dollar amount beyond the $8 million?
Admiral Neffenger. That would be a dollar amount beyond, as
I understand it, and I will make sure I get that correct for
the record. But, as I understand it, the--that $100 million was
a snapshot in time, if we were to have begun at that point to
reactive the vessel. We believe that there has been some
additional deterioration in the 2\1/2\ years it has been
sitting. And it is not as if it is--we are actively not
concerned about that. But----
[The information follows:]

The $8 million for a preservation drydocking of Polar Sea is in
addition to the $100 million reactivation estimate provided in
the Coast Guard's Business Case Analysis.

Mr. Larsen. Well, it doesn't rain a lot in the Northwest,
so it is probably not----
[Laughter.]
Admiral Neffenger. But I suspect it will be something more
than $100 million, once we do the assessment. We learned a lot
in the reactivation of the Polar Star, and we have discovered
some things with respect to the systems on the Polar Star that
we would have to upgrade on the Polar Sea, were we to bring her
back in service, as an additional bridging strategy, what we
consider longer term needs.
Mr. Larsen. Right. You are right, sure.
So, Admiral White, I came in at the end here, and--of your
answer to your question. I got the gist of it. But can you
tell--give me a sense, and the subcommittee a sense of how the
Navy was engaged in the construction of our last icebreaker,
the Healy? About 1990-ish.
Admiral White. Yes, sir. In the 1980s, Congress provided
the funding that had been set aside to build Healy to the Navy
to run the acquisition program. Then, in the building of Healy,
it was a team effort. So the program management and the actual
building, outfitting, transition of operations, was a Coast
Guard/Navy partnership approach. But it was purely because the
funding was put into our shipbuilding coffers, not out of hide,
as it were, to do that, sir.
Mr. Larsen. So it was a separate dollar amount, and it was
part of the overall shipbuilding account, set aside within the
Navy shipbuilding account?
Admiral White. Yes, sir.
Mr. Larsen. Is that how that worked? OK, yes. Admiral
Neffenger, any comment on that?
Admiral Neffenger. I think he is accurate on that score. I
don't--I wasn't involved in that----
Mr. Larsen. Sure.
Admiral Neffenger [continuing]. At that time, with the
details on that. But I do know that the money was given to the
Navy shipbuilding account at the time, and we leveraged the
capabilities of NAVSEA and Navy acquisition professionals to
help us with that acquisition.
Mr. Larsen. Yes. And I will just finish with Ambassador
Balton, but with a preface. I met with the Ambassador to
Singapore 2 weeks ago, and they are getting observer status
with the Arctic Council.
Can I rephrase? I will just say that again. Singapore is
getting observer status with the Arctic Council. There is a
good reason for that, and that is because of Singapore's long
interest in providing support services in the natural resource
space, and they see that as important. And if Singapore is
doing that, there are many other countries doing that. And I
think the U.S. is perhaps falling a little bit behind on Arctic
Council.
So, I want to know what is the administration doing to
respond to the GAO findings that have come out regarding the
U.S. policy towards the Arctic Council?
Mr. Balton. Thank you, Congressman. Yes, you are absolutely
right. Singapore has already obtained observer status in the
Arctic Council, along with, at the last meeting, Japan, South
Korea, China, India, and Italy. Plus, there were others granted
observer status before that. Clearly, interest in the Arctic
region is rising, including among States very far from the
Arctic indeed.
Yes, we participated in the GAO audit. We very much
appreciated their attention to the issue. We have embraced
their recommendations. We are going to do better to make sure
that the work of agencies within the Arctic Council and
pursuing Arctic Council projects are properly tracked. We
accept those suggestions from GAO.
Mr. Larsen. All right. Well, I appreciate the indulgence
for a little extra time. And we will help you track those
findings, as well.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Balton. OK.
Mr. Larsen. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Jolly is recognized.
Mr. Jolly. No questions.
Mr. Hunter. No questions?
Mr. Sanford, any questions?
Mr. Sanford. Yes, sir. This may or may not be the case, but
I have heard it suggested, and that is there is a yearly run
down each--so I am going to the opposite side of the world, but
it ties to sort of asset utilization and, therefore, service
life of what is obviously a rare resource, Navy or Coast Guard
or--in this case, obviously, only Coast Guard--in the world of
icebreaking, and that is that there is a yearly run down to
McMurdo Station during their summer to open up the channel into
McMurdo. It is used, essentially, for one ship, as I understand
it. And then the ship heads back up to the Northwest.
But it is apparently a month down and a month back, sort of
a 2-month voyage. A, is that correct? And what someone
suggested in the brief conversation I had in this matter was
that there might be cheaper alternatives to doing that, that in
some ways taking 2 months to run an icebreaker down to the
Antarctica and back is a very expensive way of doing business.
And I would be curious to hear you all's thoughts on that,
because, you know, if we didn't use it that way, it would
obviously open up some other alternatives, in terms of sea
routes in the North.
Admiral Neffenger. Well, and on your second panel you have
got the National Science Foundation, Dr. Kelly Falkner, and she
can speak directly to the impact of that operation on U.S.
national interests.
The Coast Guard support to that is, indeed, to break out
the channel in McMurdo. And although it is for a couple of
ships that come in, those ships are very critically important
to the--all the operations that we have going down there.
And during my recent visit down there this past February, I
had a chance to spend some amount of time looking at not only
the scientific research that is going on, but the day-to-day
real-time data that is being pushed out of there. So I would
tell you that it gave me an appreciation for how important----
Mr. Sanford. No, no, I wouldn't question National Science
Foundation's work in Antarctica. But what I would question is
is there a--I mean does any cheaper alternative jump out to you
all, as a taxpayer, other than running an icebreaker a month
down and a month back.
Admiral Neffenger. Yes, sir, and I think that is a fair
question. But the--I think it goes back to maybe the point that
I made earlier, and that is that, you know, these are remote
regions by definition. So it is going to--there is a certain
amount of cost just associated with getting to that region, if
we decide that there are interests in being there.
And what we found is that there is very little--despite the
numbers of icebreakers that other nations are operating, there
are very few actual heavy polar-class icebreakers in the world
that are capable of conducting that mission in a safe and
responsible and efficient way. And so----
Mr. Sanford. If I might interrupt, what was suggested--and
again, I would be curious to get your professional opinion--was
that contracting with some of those other governments could
take care of the McMurdo station without the 2-month lift down
and back, and reserve our activity for further north. True or
false?
Admiral Neffenger. Well, they--and I know the National
Science Foundation did, indeed, contract during--from 2006 to
this past--until just before this past year, when the Coast
Guard did not have a heavy icebreaker in operation.
And my only answer to that would be that contracting is
attractive until the contract vessel is not available any more.
And I think what we found is that other countries have pulled
back their icebreakers at times when they needed them, and it
has left the U.S. Antarctic Program in a challenging situation.
So, if we want assured access as a nation, then I think the
Nation needs to decide whether or not it wants to continue to
field icebreaker capability, despite what is arguably a very
substantial transit time to get down there and back. So I am
not sure if that answers your--if that is responsive to your
question, sir, but that is----
Mr. Sanford. Last question. Is it essentially a month down
and a month back? Is that correct?
Admiral Neffenger. Roughly speaking. Yes, sir.
Mr. Sanford. Right. I would yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentleman. I got one little quick
question. I am going to pass it to Mr. Garamendi here.
Could you answer Mr. Larsen's question on whether--why the
determination hasn't been made to--whether you are going to
move forward with the Polar Sea or not? Because that is what
your--you were going to make a determination. You did an
analysis, but no determination was made. The determination was,
``We have now made an analysis.''
Admiral Neffenger. Yes, sir. Actually, it is not that we
have been avoiding the determination, it is just the timing
hasn't yet come forward.
We have got the Polar Star in operation for the next 7 to
10 years. That buys us some time to do this requirements
analysis and assessment that I described as part of the initial
acquisition stages of a new icebreaker. That doesn't say we are
going to buy a new icebreaker, it just says, ``Let's see what
one would look like. What are the requirements we have to build
into it? How do we strip those requirements down, and make this
as affordable as possible, given the challenging fiscal
environment?''
And then----
Mr. Hunter. It was Polar Sea that he asked about,
specifically.
Admiral Neffenger. Yes, sir. So when you look at Polar Sea,
we say, ``There may be a need to extend this interim heavy
icebreaker capability as a bridging strategy beyond 10 years.
If we need to do so, then this--the money that we have
requested and that is currently in the Senate mark would give
us the ability to begin the process of assessing the true cost
to now bring it back into service, and when we might want to
bring that back into service,'' because the challenge would be
not to bring it into service sooner than you need it--otherwise
you have got overlapping capability, and you may not extend to
the point where you could have a new icebreaker in the water.
So, it takes about 3 to 4 years, once you decide to begin
reactivating to actually do that. And we think that the--over
the next 2 years we will be able to make a determination as to
when you want to begin that activation process. Again, I don't
know if that is as responsive as you need it to be.
Mr. Hunter. No.
Admiral Neffenger. But the decision is that it is an
option. We have a rough idea of what the costs are going to be
to do it. We know what it is going to take to preserve that
vessel, to hold it in stasis until we can get the monies, if we
decide to do so, and then to begin to make the case as to
whether or not we think we need that, going forward.
Mr. Hunter. And I am glad Mr. Young got here. I think this
might be our last Arctic hearing that we have on this, because
I don't think anybody really wants an icebreaker.
Mr. Young is recognized.
Mr. Young. Mr. Chairman, again, thank you. I have problems,
you know, with the Coast Guard and icebreakers. You are talking
about repairing an old, old ship. And when you get done, you
got a ship that is out of style, out of--it doesn't compete.
And you know, I have talked to every Commandant I have had, and
I don't know if the Coast Guard is--I guess we are going to
pass the law on the last study we had.
I still believe leasing is the option we should take place,
not foreign vessels. Have you gone to any of the shipyards and
said, ``What could you build for us?'' Not your--``What could
you build for us that could do this mission?'' Have you done
that?
Admiral Neffenger. Yes, sir. There has been a lot of look
at the lease. And, as you know, some of the initial evaluations
and the detailed analyses don't show a competitive advantage or
a cost advantage to leasing. And I can provide those, again,
for the record.
But let me give you my general thoughts on that----
Mr. Young. Let me interrupt you one moment. When was the
last study done by the Coast Guard on leasing?
Admiral Neffenger. It was done 2 years ago, sir.
Mr. Young. Really?
Admiral Neffenger. And there is a----
Mr. Young. Have you submitted that to Congress?
Admiral Neffenger. Yes, sir, we did.
Mr. Young. You did?
Admiral Neffenger. It came in the form of a response to
queries, but we can--and we can provide that----
[The information follows:]

The most recent analysis on leasing was reported in the Polar
Platform Business Case Analysis, delivered to Congress on
November 2, 2011. The Coast Guard analyzed prospective leasing
of currently available platforms and several build-to-lease
alternatives.

The analysis concluded that leasing a polar heavy icebreaker is
not feasible or cost effective for the Coast Guard in line with
the following reasoning:

1.  There are currently no U.S.-built polar heavy icebreakers
available for demise or time charter. A prospective leasing
entity would need to construct a polar heavy icebreaker.
Considering the unique design requirements and crewing
restrictions associated with multimission operations and
defense readiness, and lease terms exceeding that allowed under
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) guidelines, a lease would
prove more expensive to the Government than purchasing a polar
icebreaker.

2.  OMB Circular A-11, Preparation, Submission, and Execution
of the Budget (Appendices B and C) requires agencies to score
all long-term lease funding authority upfront in the year the
lease is started. This budgetary requirement makes it
difficult, if not impossible, to execute long-term capital
asset leases, especially considering the high cost of polar
heavy icebreakers.

3.  Contract structures are typically more complex including
sophisticated termination liability processes, lease
termination clauses and contingent liability clauses which will
be difficult to calculate and negotiate, which increases
uncertainty and cost risk for both any prospective leasers and
the Government.

4.  Unless capable of self-financing, the leaser would be
obligated to obtain financing for prospectively leased ships
and aircraft, creating the potential for liens which, in cases
of a leaser's financial difficulty, could impact the
availability of the polar heavy icebreaker to conduct its
missions as required.

5.  The maintenance support method and costs for nonstandard
assets are unknown but would need to be included in the cost of
leasing commercial assets. Limited flexibility in maintenance
planning may restrict the ability to surge assets or incur
significant costs by breaking the terms of the lease. Emergency
or unscheduled repairs, which are more likely due to the nature
of icebreaking operations, would result in additional costs.

6.  14 U.S. Code 665 prohibits constructing a U.S. Coast Guard
vessel in a foreign shipyard unless the President determines it
to be in the national security interest of the U.S. to do so
and transmits the determination to Congress. The Coast Guard
currently has no plans to construct or lease a heavy icebreaker
built in a foreign shipyard.

Mr. Young. I would appreciate that.
Admiral Neffenger. The real challenge--it is both a
challenge with respect to requirements in the build, a
challenge with respect to sovereign requirements, if--as you
are operating a military vessel. Some of those are
surmountable.
But the real challenge is--well, it comes on a couple
fronts. There is a scoring issue. Again, that perhaps is
surmountable, but there is a scoring issue, which actually
makes a lease less desirable, in terms of costs, than an
outright purchase. There is the fact that we tend to operate
our vessels for 40 to 40-plus years. And so leases tend to be
short-term solutions, bridging strategies to longer term.
For example, we leased our airborne use of force
helicopters while we were arming and preparing our existing
helicopter fleet for service. That provided a good, you know,
interim bridging strategy until we could get an armed
helicopter in place in our existing fleet.
The other problem is that you still have to build heavy
icebreakers. There are no heavy icebreakers available for
lease. So you still have to go through the requirements
process, and we are still looking at a number of years.
But the real question is, does a lease answer the question
for that long-term need? If you only use it for a short period
of time, then you are going to amortize those costs over a much
shorter period.
Mr. Young. Well, again, Mr. Chairman, you know how I feel
about this. I actually believe that I can get a proposal to
you, if you would be receptive, for a vessel to do the job for
a lot less. Because you are not going to get the $10 billion
from this Congress to build a new icebreaker. That simple. You
are not going to get it.
Admiral Neffenger. Yes, sir.
Mr. Young. You can ask all you want, you are not going to--
in the meantime, we don't have icebreakers, and all the rest of
the countries do have icebreakers. I am looking for a solution
to a problem, has American-built icebreaker in the Arctic.
Admiral Neffenger. Well, yes, sir. We would evaluate any
proposal that comes our way. We are--like you, we are
interested in finding effective solutions to what is a daunting
challenge, to put heavy icebreaker capability back on the
water.
Mr. Young. Mr. Chairman, that is--I do appreciate your
having this hearing, because we are an Arctic nation and, you
know--of course, we may be--cart before the horse, or horse
before the cart, I don't know which one it is going to be. A
lot of scientists I talk to, contrary to what people in this
audience may believe, we may be not having--other than a
tremendous need for big icebreakers, because it may not quite
be as warm as they think it is up in the Arctic. Everybody says
it is going that way, but we will see.
I want to be flying over this area when I am long gone, as
a raven. And I want to say if your ancestors get plopped on, it
is going to be me saying, ``I told you so.''
[Laughter.]
Mr. Young. So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hunter. I envision Don more as an eagle when he comes
back.
I have got a quick question. What if the Coast Guard just
went for search and rescue, navigation aids, fisheries,
enforcement, oil spill recovery? Forget about the other stuff
that other agencies want you to do, and the Navy's not--if they
are not going to help you, they are not going to help you. How
much would that cost? Just a Coast Guard enforcement-type
icebreaker to be up there, clear the ice, rescue vessels, and
not do anything with national security, meaning not be able to
operate any type of military operation off of it. What would
that cost?
Admiral Neffenger. I can't give you a dollar amount, but
what I will tell you is that is essentially what we are looking
at, through the requirements process. We have spent a lot of
time talking to other agencies in the work, and we said,
``Look, if we build one of these things, we would like to
build, basically, a heavy icebreaker, and we don't want to load
it down with things that detract from the ability to break
ice,'' because, as you know, the more stuff you put on to a
vessel, the more requirements you ask of it, the more
compromises you make, in terms of basic hull design, and the
like, particularly with an icebreaker.
What I would tell you is that we will probably still need a
heavy icebreaker, even if you are only conducting Coast Guard
missions, because you still need the ability to access--and one
of the things, as I talk to scientists who are looking at a
receding ice pack--you know, receding doesn't mean
disappearing, to Mr. Young's point. And what you find is that
sometimes you have actually much more challenging ice
conditions as a result of that, because you have ice flows
moving, they collide into one another, they create pressure
ridges, and they create much more opportunity, like this
character that we just rescued from the ice in the Northwest
Passage, to get beset in the ice and get into trouble real
fast.
In fact, we saw an example of that in the Antarctic last
year, where you had a medium icebreaker from the Chinese and a
medium icebreaker from the Russians beset in the Antarctic ice.
And, fortunately, before we had fully diverted to go rescue
them, the ice pack shifted, as a sort of wind shift, and they
got themselves free. But they were in danger of being there for
some extended period of time, because they didn't have the
capability to break themselves out.
So, you always want that capability. But I would agree with
you, that you want to reduce the requirements and descope them
as much as possible, so that what you have is a purpose-built,
heavy icebreaker that can conduct the basis round of Coast
Guard missions.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you.
Mr. Garamendi?
Mr. Garamendi. Just quickly, I think for all of us on this
side of the panel, the Healy gives us an opportunity and a
thought process on how it might be done. Money in the defense
budget was used to build the Healy through the Navy, a process
that we should take a look at, if we are serious about having a
new heavy icebreaker.
I want to go back to the Northern Sea Route. We were
discussing that issue. It seems to me to be one that we need to
understand, relationships with Russia and the rest. Admiral
White, you were going to take up that issue.
Admiral White. Yes, sir, Ranking Member Garamendi, thank
you.
The Northern Sea Route represents the most navigable sea
route that is open for certain periods of time during the late
summer during the ice minimum in the Arctic. We anticipate, by
the mid-2020s, that it will be ice free, which, under
international definition, means less than 10 percent ice
coverage, for up to 6 weeks per year. That represents
significant amount of transit across that passage, even without
necessarily having to have an icebreaker.
We look at the Northern Sea Route, and especially the
entrance to it through the Bering Strait, as a strategic
crossroads that we are concerned about, just like we are all
those crossroads, this one especially because we own part of
that strategic crossroads. So, as we monitor what is happening
in the Northern Sea Route, we do so from a national security
perspective, but also understanding that the way that these
routes unfold in the Arctic, we anticipate that they will do so
peacefully, with low risk of conflict. We have no anticipation
of that.
We also, as I mentioned, are looking for a deepwater route
to start opening up in the mid-2020 timeframe, which would be
near the pole, and would provide another alternative, although
it would unfold and open up more slowly, certainly, than the
Northern Sea Route. But all these routes are going to change
the way that the Arctic is looked at, and we are monitoring
them closely, as we watch our missions evolve, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you.
Mr. Balton. Thank you, sir. I don't have much to add. You
suggested that relations with Russia are problematic; that is
certainly so. However, our nations do have common interests in
the Arctic, and one of them is to prevent or prepare for the
possibility of a casualty in the Bering Strait region.
And so, even in these difficult times, we need to be
working with all of our neighbors, regardless of other
problems, to----
Mr. Garamendi. Well----
Mr. Balton [continuing]. Prepare for just that.
Mr. Garamendi. The Northern Sea Route appears to be totally
within the Russian sphere of influence. That is, the economic--
--
Mr. Balton. Yes, that is true. But vessels that pass all
the way through the Northern Sea Route come through the Bering
Strait.
Mr. Garamendi. Understood.
Mr. Balton. And that is where our interests kick in, of
course. Because, if there were an accident there, the effects
in Alaska and the United States would be palpable.
Mr. Garamendi. Is that northern route, under the current
Russian program----
Mr. Balton. Yes.
Mr. Garamendi [continuing]. Open to all?
Mr. Balton. Yes, I do believe so. However, there are
requirements Russia has put in place for escorts, Russian
escorts, icebreak escorts and others.
Mr. Garamendi. I noticed the admiral took a real deep
breath as you began.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Garamendi. So finish, and then the admiral----
Mr. Balton. No, I was just trying to recall what I had
heard about that. But the answer is yes.
Mr. Garamendi. Admiral, anything to add?
Admiral White. With the qualifier the Ambassador put in, I
agree. The Russians are very careful, in that they--certain
ships going through there must be escorted during certain
parts, because of the concerns with navigating safely, the
hazardous conditions that are involved, and some of these choke
point areas going through the Northern Sea Route. So they do
also require that vessels meet a certain limit through the
Polar Code and other requirements, in terms of the ship's
ability to maintain and sustain itself in going through those
passages.
So, it is open with conditions, I think, is the best way to
say it, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Very good. I have completed my questions on
this particular panel. So I will yield back what time there is.
Thank you.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the ranking member. Mr. Sanford is
recognized.
Mr. Sanford. I don't want to be a broken record, but I do
want to follow up on what Chairman Young was saying, which is
this whole leasing alternative. Because when you think about
it, essentially, about a third of our heavy-duty icebreaking
capacity is built around that trip down to McMurdo and back.
You know, settling in after you get back, the trips through the
South Pacific and back up.
And therefore, I mean, if you have that kind of time that
is allotted to that one mission in a multibillion-dollar asset,
it just begs this larger question of free up that time, have
that asset utilization available for the Northern Sea Route and
other, and look at the leasing option that the chairman was
talking about. And I would yield back.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentleman. Mr. Larsen?
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just to clarify, I
think in my colleague from Alaska's excitement to be a raven,
he said an icebreaker cost $10 billion. The only estimates I
have seen are anywhere from $800 million to $1 billion. Still a
lot, but not $10 billion. Is that right?
Admiral Neffenger. That is correct. Those are current,
rough order estimates.
Mr. Larsen. Unless you want to buy 10. I will yield to Mr.
Young.
Mr. Young. Well, as far as I am concerned, I got that
number because I thought we were going to ask for 10. I mean I
never saw an agency that didn't have----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Larsen. Duly noted. Duly noted. The other thing I just
want to clarify, having been here late--but I understand a lot
of discussion was taking place around icebreakers--but
implementing Arctic policy is a diplomatic--certainly more and
more diplomatic effort. But from a Coast Guard perspective,
icebreakers do not a policy make. There are other assets and
other missions you have to implement up there. And you all are
trying to figure out how to do that. Is that right?
Admiral Neffenger. Yes, sir. And I had mentioned earlier
that we have a number of initiatives to implement our Arctic
Strategy.
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Admiral Neffenger. But some of those are policy in nature.
They include support to the chairmanship of the Arctic Council
coming up, and they also include support to the Arctic Council
itself. We serve on a number of the working groups. And, in
fact, directly involved in the negotiations of the two
agreements that were referred to on search and rescue, as well
as on oil spill response.
We are also looking at, in conjunction with this idea of an
Arctic Coast Guard forum as a way for the Arctic Council
nations and the operating agencies, the maritime agencies, the
Coast Guards or the Coast Guard-like navies of the Arctic
nations, to work together, to find a way to not just implement
those agreements, but to think about how you would share
information, how you would monitor the sharing of that
information so that you have awareness of what is happening,
how you would do--conduct joint exercises, and the like.
So, all of that is designed to take the policies that are
being discussed, and figure out how you implement those in a
real-world basis, because that is what we care about. Somebody
hands us a policy, you think, ``Well, how am I going to
actually carry this policy out?''
We are also looking at standing up a Center for Arctic
Studies and Policy at our Coast Guard Academy, and this is a
low-cost standup. This is really an establishment of a venue to
begin to look at those, at the operational implications of
policies that are being developed with respect to the Arctic.
And it will give us a chance to, again, to provide an academic
setting for sharing of that information.
But I think what I owe you is--the committee is just the
explanation of that Implementation Plan, and it lays out a
number of the policy-related initiatives that we have, with
respect to operations in the Arctic. But it largely centers on
understanding what is happening up there, working with
partners, and then looking at governance issues and how you
would implement those.
[The information follows:]

The Implementation Plan for the Coast Guard's Arctic Strategy
centers around 12 initiatives. These 12 initiatives carry out
our strategic objectives of Improving Awareness, Modernizing
Governance and Broadening Partnerships. The 12 are outlined
below:

1.  Enhance Operation Arctic Shield: Operation Arctic Shield is
our mobile and seasonal operational presence in the Arctic.
This initiative seeks to enhance our operational effectiveness
to meet mission demands. Operations include air and sea patrols
for search and rescue, maritime domain awareness, training, and
protection of sovereign interests; exercises with Federal,
State, local, tribal, industry, and international partners; and
evaluation of technologies for pollution response.

2.  Improve Maritime Domain Awareness: Maritime domain
awareness (MDA) is a tool used for effective Coast Guard
Operations. MDA involves collection, analysis, and
understanding of data pertaining to a wide range of information
including vessel locations, awareness of current and historical
passengers, crew ownership, and financial relationships; what
activities the vessels are conducting; what cargoes they may be
carrying; and what natural conditions they are facing--wind,
seas, tides, currents, storms, ice conditions, and marine
mammal migrations. With our Federal, State, local, tribal and
international partners, the Coast Guard is developing
improvements within this initiative to provide a more complete
operational picture of activities in the Arctic.

3.  Recapitalize Polar Icebreaking: Heavy icebreaking
capability is critical to providing assured access to the Polar
Regions for the U.S. and executing the Coast Guard's statutory
responsibilities in areas such as search and rescue and marine
environmental response. The Preliminary Operational
Requirements Document (PORD) Integrated Product Team (IPT) has
gathered and compiled Coast Guard and external stakeholder
requirements (Department of Defense, National Science
Foundation, Department of State, Department of Homeland
Security, etc.). The PORD is currently in concurrent clearance.
The Operational Requirements Document (ORD) and Alternatives
Analysis has an estimated completion date of May 2015.

4.  Improve Arctic communications capabilities: The harsh
environment in the Arctic has hampered development of a robust
communications infrastructure. The Coast Guard is working with
the Department of Defense to evaluate gaps in communication
capability and identify communications needed to support
military operations in the Arctic region.

5.  Continue International Maritime Organization (IMO) Polar
Code Development: The United States is working through the
International Maritime Organization (IMO) to develop and
achieve adoption of the Polar Code, which includes both
mandatory and recommended provisions, to cover the full range
of safety, design, construction, equipment, operational,
training, communications and environmental protection matters
relevant to ships operating in the Arctic and Antarctic.

6.  Promote Waterways Management: The Coast Guard is developing
Arctic waterways management regimes including aids to
navigation, vessel tracking, and ship routing in cooperation
with international partners to ensure safe, efficient, and free
flow of maritime traffic.

7.  Support Arctic Council and U.S. Chairmanship: The United
States will chair the Arctic Council from May 2015 to May 2017.
The Coast Guard expects to play a significant role due to our
existing engagement in Council activities. The Coast Guard is
currently participating on the Arctic Council Oil Spill
Prevention Taskforce and has served on two previous taskforces
that established the 2011 Arctic Search and Rescue Agreement
and the 2013 Oil Spill Prevention and Response Agreement. The
Coast Guard is also active within the interagency process,
known as the Arctic Policy Group, in preparation for U.S.
chairmanship of the Arctic Council in 2015.

8.  Establish an Arctic Coast Guard Forum (ACGF): The Coast
Guard proposes to establish an Arctic Coast Guard Forum to
bring all eight Arctic coast guards together to collaborate on
Arctic issues. Modeled after the North Pacific Coast Guard
Forum, the ACGF will be a unique arena where the maritime
governance service of the Arctic countries discuss coordination
of exercises, strengthen relationships, and share best
practices. The first ``expert-level'' meeting of the ACGF
occurred March 2014 in Canada, and garnered enthusiastic
approval of concept. A senior leadership meeting will occur in
September 2014 to approve the Terms of Reference and issue a
joint statement.

9.  Establish a Center for Arctic Study and Policy: The Coast
Guard will develop a think tank to study the operational
implications of policies that are being developed with respect
to the Arctic.

10.  Establish an Arctic Policy Board: The Coast Guard is
working with DHS to develop an Arctic Policy Board under the
Federal Advisory Committee Act. The Coast Guard will seek Board
members from industry, science, academia, tribal communities,
environmental groups, and other stakeholders. It will provide a
broad range of expertise to the Secretary of Homeland Security
on safety, security, and stewardship matters relating to the
Arctic region.

11.  Create an Arctic Fusion Center: The Coast Guard plans to
study and, if warranted, implement a Fusion Center to collect
and disseminate critical information with Federal, State,
local, and tribal stakeholders.

12.  Create an Arctic Maritime Assistance Coordination Center:
The Coast Guard plans to study and, if appropriate, implement
an international center for Arctic mission coordination for
search and rescue and other emergency response.

Mr. Larsen. OK, thanks. And for Admiral White, I will
just--I will follow up with you later about the Navy Arctic
Road Map. We are--my office is taking a look at that in a
little more detail, but I will just follow up with you
specifically on that later.
Admiral White. Yes, sir.
Mr. Larsen. Yes. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yield back.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentleman. Unless Mr. Garamendi has
more questions----
Mr. Garamendi. Just a quick question. A lot of the
icebreaking activities would seem to benefit commerce, specific
ships that may want to go from here to there. Can you charge
for the services, breaking the ice so the ship can pass or get
unstuck?
Admiral Neffenger. Well, I suppose the best example would
be, if you look at the Great Lakes icebreaking mission that we
have, we do not charge for those services. And--although, what
we have done there is develop a tiered approach to it. We keep
the major arteries open, for lack of a better description, and
then we leave it to commercial icebreaking services and those
contracted for--to open up the entrances into the ports and the
small harbors.
We used to do it all, but over the course of the last 6 or
7 years we have really changed that, and trying to reduce to
simply the large--you know, basically the maintenance of the
main waterway, which is in the interest of the Nation.
Mr. Hunter. I have got just one last statement, I guess. I
have always said whoever--I didn't say this originally, someone
else did, but whoever controls the ocean controls the world,
right? And now, whoever controls space controls the oceans.
But I think this portends bad things for America. I think
you see us with one heavy icebreaker, everybody else with more
than that. And I think, in 20 years, you are going to see all
of them in the Arctic doing what we should be doing, and not
doing it as well as us, or as environmentally safe as we would
do it, and we will be watching. We will be talking about all
these policy things we would like to implement, and these neat
Arctic groups that we talk to ourselves in, but with no actual
presence in the area.
I think that is what is happening here. I think we are
going to look back in 10 years and have absolutely nothing,
because it doesn't seem like it is that big of a deal, because
money is not being appropriated or set aside from the Navy's
$15 billion defense budget, or acquisition budget that the Navy
has. The Coast Guard's budget is only $1 billion a year. You
are trying to recapitalize a fleet right now that is 40 or 50
years old. It is not going to happen.
And I guess what I would say is that until you want it to
happen, we are not going to hold another hearing like this,
unless specifically requested by another Member for a certain
reason, because nothing has really changed. I mean there is no
Presidential request for this, there is no money being put in
by the Navy. I guess the need just isn't there right now. If we
are happy to let Russia do it for us, we will have Russia do it
for us. We are happy to have them take us into space, too.
Mr. Garamendi. They make our rocket engines.
Mr. Hunter. Then we can do that--yes. So, I guess that is
what you are saying, because it is all talk. It is no action.
And it seems like it is not that important that we are in the
Arctic. Message received here.
We are not going to force you to do what you don't want to
do. And if you don't want to be there, and you don't want to
build an icebreaker, if you don't want to lease one, or if you
are going to do study after study for 20 years to see what the
best cost analysis is to do it, then we just won't do it, and
we will focus on other things, like making sure we have enough
tunafish for the fleets. And we won't be in the Arctic, and
that is fine.
So, with that, I would like to call our second panel of
witnesses. Thank you, gentlemen. Appreciate it.
Good morning. Our second panel of witnesses today includes
Captain Dave Westerholm, Director of the Office of Response and
Restoration for NOAA; Dr. Kelly Falkner, Division Director of
Polar Programs at the National Science Foundation; and Ed
Fogels, Deputy Commissioner of the Department of Natural
Resources of the great State of Alaska.
Captain Westerholm, you are now recognized.

TESTIMONY OF CAPTAIN DAVID WESTERHOLM, USCG, RETIRED, AND
DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF RESPONSE AND RESTORATION, NATIONAL OCEANIC
AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION; KELLY KENISON FALKNER, PH.D.,
DIVISION DIRECTOR, DIVISION OF POLAR PROGRAMS, NATIONAL SCIENCE
FOUNDATION; AND EDMUND FOGELS, DEPUTY COMMISSIONER, DEPARTMENT
OF NATURAL RESOURCES, STATE OF ALASKA

Captain Westerholm. Good morning, Chairman Hunter, Ranking
Member Garamendi, and members of the subcommittee. My name is
Dave Westerholm, and I am the Director of the Office of
Response and Restoration at the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, NOAA, which is in the Department of
Commerce. In this capacity I was recently selected to serve as
the Arctic lead for the National Ocean Service.
Thank you for inviting NOAA to testify today on our work to
implement U.S. policy in the Arctic. I am pleased to follow my
colleagues from the U.S. Coast Guard, U.S. Navy, and Department
of State, and I am pleased to join here my colleagues from the
National Science Foundation and the State of Alaska Department
of Natural Resources. We work with all of these agencies to
advance U.S. security interests, pursue responsible
stewardship, and improve maritime domain awareness, safety, and
environmental intelligence in this critical region.
NOAA envisions an Arctic where decisions and actions are
based on sound science, and support healthy, productive, and
resilient communities and ecosystems. To achieve this vision,
NOAA is using state-of-the-art technology and innovative
partnerships to improve Arctic marine navigation, provide ocean
and coastal observations and weather forecast, promote
environmental stewardship, and prepare for and respond to
maritime hazards.
Although NOAA provides important stewardship in science in
the Arctic region, today I would like to focus my remarks on
the services that NOAA provides, which are deemed critical in
various Arctic reports to meet our Nation's maritime safety,
economic security, and environmental protection needs.
One of these services is charting, and NOAA is responsible
for providing foundational data and services to support safe
marine navigation and domain awareness. Accurate and up-to-date
nautical charts are critical to safe operation, and these
charts require not only bathymetric data, but also data on
shoreline features, water levels, sea floor characteristics,
and precise positioning. NOAA is investing in hydrographic
surveys in the Arctic, as well as shoreline mapping missions
and tide and current surveys, in order to enhance our
navigation products and services.
Furthermore, NOAA is working closely with our partners such
as the State of Alaska, the U.S. Coast Guard, Navy, and members
of the academic community to provide the data needed for safe
navigation, science, and more informed coastal decisionmaking.
Major stakeholders and partners, including those who live,
work, or are responsible for activities in the Arctic, also
require weather, water, and sea ice information for planning
and decisionmaking. NOAA provides this information. However,
weather analysis and prediction capabilities are not as robust
in the Arctic as they are in other parts of the United States,
due to the limited scope of existing observations.
Because of Alaska's vast size, remote population, and
environmental conditions, our decision support services are
vitally important to Arctic communities. As an example, the
decision when to deliver heating and fuel oil to a coastal
community may require weather and sea ice outlooks weeks in
advance to ensure safe transit.
NOAA is also responsible for delivering scientific support
to the U.S. Coast Guard for marine hazards, including oil
spills and marine debris, which can pose additional challenges
in the Arctic. With decreased summer sea ice, we expect to see
continued growth in maritime commerce, tourism, and oil and gas
exploration. Given this growth, we must be prepared in the
event that a vessel or exploratory drilling unit has an oil
spill.
To support our planning and preparedness for spill response
in the Arctic, NOAA has been working with all our partners,
engaging with Alaska communities, and compiling and developing
baseline information on natural resources. We are providing
access to critical observations and data through the Alaska
Ocean Observing System, and we have launched a web-based tool
to assist emergency responders in dealing with incidents called
the Arctic Environmental Response Management Application, or
Arctic ERMA. Arctic ERMA was tested during the 2013 Arctic
Shield operation, in collaboration with the U.S. Coast Guard.
Arctic ERMA is again being used in Arctic Shield in 2014 to
further enhance our ability to respond to an Arctic incident.
As transportation grows in the Arctic, where there is
cargo, tank, fishing, cruise, or recreational vessels, the
potential for incidents will continue to grow, and we must be
prepared to give the response community the most accurate
navigation, weather, and sea ice information possible, as well
as sound scientific advice on the most effective response
strategies. We will continue to build our services in the
Arctic, working with our Federal and State partners, as well as
academic institutions, local communities, and industry.
In closing, NOAA plays a unique and important role in
providing critical information and services to support safe,
reliable, and efficient navigation in the Arctic. I thank you
for inviting NOAA to testify today, and I welcome any questions
you may have.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Captain. Dr. Falkner is recognized.
Dr. Falkner. Chairman Hunter, Ranking Member Garamendi, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, we appreciate this
opportunity to discuss how the National Science Foundation is
implementing U.S. policy and meeting its icebreaking needs for
research in the Arctic, as well as for research and operations
of the U.S. Antarctic Program that NSF manages on behalf of the
United States.
To promote scientific progress, NSF bears a critical
responsibility for providing scientists with access to the
oceans. In recent decades, the polar oceans have undergone
wide-ranging physical, chemical, and biological changes, with
implications for global change. Moreover, relatively unexplored
Arctic and Southern Ocean areas remain ripe for new
discoveries. I refer you to my written statement for important
examples of polar marine science objectives.
So, Mr. Chairman, ice-capable research platforms are
essential to keeping the U.S. at the forefront of polar
research. In addition, NSF also requires heavy icebreaker
services to conduct vital annual resupply of our Nation's
Antarctic research program.
So, with respect to Antarctic operations, U.S. policy calls
for year-round U.S. presence at three research stations in
Antarctica: McMurdo, Amundsen-Scott South Pole, and Palmer.
These support an active and influential science presence that
ensures the U.S. a leading role in governance through the
Antarctic Treaty system.
Last year, after a 7-year hiatus, the Coast Guard
successfully provided icebreaking services for Antarctic
operations via the 38-year-old refurbished Polar Star. Barring
unforeseen circumstances, the Coast Guard expects it will be
able to meet this mission requirement for at least the
remainder of Polar Star's projected life of 6 to 9 years. We
are now at a critical juncture in planning how to meet this
national need beyond this timeframe.
In considering how to best fulfill our responsibilities for
the U.S. Antarctic Program, NSF operates, in accord with U.S.
policy and instructions contained in Presidential Memorandum
6646, that every effort will be made to manage the program in a
manner that maximizes cost-effectiveness and return on
investment. Now, going forward, NSF must secure cost-effective
and reliable icebreaking services for the resupply mission that
is critical to supporting the broad goals of the U.S. Antarctic
Program.
For research in the Southern Ocean, NSF-supported
scientists primarily rely on two leased vessels: the light
icebreaker, Nathaniel B. Palmer; and the ice-reinforced
Laurence M. Gould, both owned and operated by Edison Chouest
Offshore of Louisiana. Over the past two decades, this
combination of vessels fostered development of NSF's world-
class Southern Ocean research and ensured regular resupply and
personnel movements for Palmer Station.
In the Arctic, NSF exercises a range of options in order to
expeditiously and cost effectively support cutting edge marine
research. NSF funded the construction in Marinette, Wisconsin,
of a highly science-capable vessel that can operate in ice up
to about 3 feet thick. Sikuliaq, to be operated by the
University of Alaska, will service the U.S. research community
from her home port in Seward, Alaska, beginning in early 2015.
This vessel will be used to study the vital ecosystems and
ocean processes in the resource-rich waters of the Gulf of
Alaska and Bering Sea, and within the Arctic Ocean, as ice
conditions permit, or under escort of a more capable
icebreaker.
The only other U.S. Government-owned research icebreaker is
the 15-year-old Coast Guard cutter, Healy. NSF and other
agencies sponsor Arctic marine research on the Healy, and the
vessel can routinely operate in ice of up to about 5 feet
thick. Since operations began in 2001, the vessel has been
tasked at capacity. NSF coordinates with the Coast Guard for
scheduling and scientific technical support of this medium-duty
icebreaker that can operate in the summer in the High Arctic.
NSF also engages international partners in a variety of
ways to facilitate activities of U.S. scientists. International
engagement has proven to be a very cost-effective way to
leverage our research assets, both in the Arctic and in
Antarctica.
In addition, NSF expects to continue to exploit
technologies such as autonomous underwater vehicles, surface
buoys, and moorings with innovative sensor systems, as these
will increasingly provide cost-effective and wide-reaching
Arctic and Southern Ocean marine observations.
So, in closing, Mr. Chairman, sustaining U.S. scientific
preeminence in the coming decades will continue to demand
appropriate research and logistical support, including an
efficacious, reliable, cost-effective blend of ice-capable
research platforms and heavy icebreaking services.
I thank you for your time and interest, and I will be happy
to answer any questions.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Doctor. Mr. Fogels is recognized.
Mr. Fogels. Mr. Chairman, members of the committee,
Congressman Young, my name is Ed Fogels, and I am the Deputy
Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources for the
State of Alaska, in the administration of Governor Sean
Parnell. I am honored to be here today.
Alaska appreciates the Federal efforts to include us in the
deliberations on the National Strategy for the Arctic Region,
and the invitation of the Governor's cabinet to participate as
part of the U.S. delegation at the Arctic Council meetings. It
will be of utmost importance to ensure that the State is
welcome as an active collaborative partner in these
proceedings.
The United States is only an Arctic nation because of
Alaska. Arctic Alaska is mainly remote, presenting challenges
that few non-Alaskans could comprehend. Everyday essentials are
all dependent on the ability to transport people and supplies
across vast roadless areas. As the committee envisions the
future of Arctic transportation and infrastructure, the needs
and challenges of Alaska's citizens must be kept at the
forefront. The very health of our communities depends on us.
We already have a strong framework of existing laws and
regulations in place that guide resource management in the
Arctic. My written testimony lists all these laws that we have
that are specific to Alaska. We also have broad national laws,
a long list that guide resource development. We must strive to
use these laws and regulations more efficiently, and avoid the
unnecessary, overly burdensome application we have seen in
recent years.
The State supports the expanded use of Alaska's existing
military bases: Joint Pacific Alaska Range Complex; the Joint
Base Elmendorf-Richardson; and Eielson Air Force Base. And we
believe these bases and their assets are critical to security
in the Pacific and the Arctic.
We need more icebreakers. I really don't need to go into
too much more detail, as we have been discussing icebreakers
quite a bit today. But needless to say, we do support more
icebreakers. The Coast Guard will also need expanded aviation
assets in the U.S. Arctic. At this point, we believe that
conflicting and unnecessary Federal policies, as well as
limited financial means appear as obstacles. Fortunately,
Alaska Native Corporations and the State are willing partners
to expedite this expansion of these assets.
Let me talk a little bit about mapping. Our Arctic needs
better maps. We have mapped the surface of the planet Mars more
accurately than America's Arctic. The State is leading the way
in the effort to get better mapping, with excellent
collaboration from Federal agencies, under the leadership of
the Department of the Interior. And we are making good
progress. The State has contributed $12 million, the Federal
agencies $16 million, but $30 million is still needed to
complete our Arctic base map of the State.
We need better oil spill response infrastructure for both
future development and for the increased shipping. The United
States has highly prospective oil and gas basins in the Chukchi
and Beaufort Seas that will provide for the necessary private-
sector investment in oil spill response systems.
Let me talk a little bit about our communities. Communities
in the Arctic are some of the--have some of the highest rates
of poverty, suicide, domestic and sexual abuse, and substance
abuse in the Nation. These social issues are clearly linked to
the economic well-being of these communities. The Parnell
administration has invested in clearing pathways of economic
opportunity wherever possible to allow these communities to
take control for a better future. Rather than developing
redundant or overlapping regulations that hurt our efforts to
help these communities, we need to focus on ways we can improve
infrastructure for access, and streamline our regulatory
process.
An example of what we need to do is to develop an Arctic
deepwater port. The State and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
are working together, and we are already far along in the
process of investigating possible deepwater port sites in
Alaska. We would like to see expedited analysis, permitting,
planning, that would make State port investments more
economically feasible and certain.
An example of what we don't need to do in the Arctic is to
unnecessarily block our rural communities from developing
access, like the Federal veto of a short stretch of road that
would connect the community of King Cove to a decent airport.
Many lives have been lost because of this community's inability
to access this airport.
In closing, I would just like to say that, for over half a
century, the State of Alaska has been at the forefront of
natural resource management, employing some of the world's most
accomplished scientists and technical specialists. We are a
model for responsible resource stewardship amongst Arctic
nations within the United States. We don't need to increase the
already overly complex regulatory burden. We need to look for
ways to make the system more efficient. We need to work
together to improve Arctic infrastructure. This is critical for
not only the health of our communities, but for the security of
the Nation.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify, and I
welcome any questions from the committee.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, sir.
My first question is for NSF and NOAA. You have
requirements that you have given to the Coast Guard for what
you would like to see in an icebreaker. Are you contributing
funds? You have a--Doctor, your funding for NSF is about $7.6
billion a year. What is NOAA's funding?
Captain Westerholm. For icebreaking?
Mr. Hunter. Just overall. What is your budget? Four billion
dollars?
Captain Westerholm. About $4 billion.
Mr. Hunter. $4 billion, $7.6 billion. The Coast Guard's
acquisition budget, again, is just about $1.2 billion. So I am
asking. Are you willing to put in money? And, if not, why are
we here?
Dr. Falkner. We do, in fact, reimburse the Coast Guard for
the day rates of the services that we need.
Mr. Hunter. Excuse me, ma'am. Let me clarify. Are you
willing to put in money to build an icebreaker?
Dr. Falkner. We need icebreaking services; we don't need a
full-time, heavy icebreaker at our beck and call. And we do not
have the resources to support such. So, as I mentioned in my
testimony, the most cost-effective way for us to meet our needs
is to contract for the time that we need. We have worked
successfully with the Coast Guard for many years, going back to
the inception of the program in the fifties. At this point in
time, they have that one ancient asset that we are relying on.
I think the answer to your question is that NSF is not
resourced to build a heavy icebreaker for the Nation.
Mr. Hunter. I didn't ask that. I asked if you were willing
to contribute even a small amount. I guess the answer is no.
Sir? Captain?
Captain Westerholm. So my answer would be very similar in
that, you know, we support the Coast Guard's icebreaking
capability and their long-range plans, and we are working with
them, but NOAA is also not resourced for the icebreaking
mission.
Mr. Hunter. OK. The answer is no. OK. So that is easy. I
guess what that means, in the long run, is why should the Coast
Guard care about your requirements if you are not willing to
put any skin in the game. That is what I would make sure the
Coast Guard does not do. Why should they have to spend more on
their acquisitions for you, when you are not willing to pay to
have it made?
So let's go from that to the next thing I think Mr. Young
is interested in, too. When it comes to leasing, Doctor, you
lease from Chouest. Is that right? The two smaller----
Dr. Falkner. Our research vessels are leased from Chouest.
We work with the Military Sealift Command to lease our cargo
vessel and our tanker.
Mr. Hunter. Are they operated by civilian mariners?
Dr. Falkner. They are. It is----
Mr. Hunter. They are? And that actually----
Dr. Falkner. Contractor-owned, contractor-operated right
now. They can also do Government-owned, contractor-operated
leases for us.
Mr. Hunter. The Coast Guard has told us over and over again
that that is impossible. It is impossible to have merchant
marines in charge of one of their ships, when the ship's main
goal is just icebreaking and research----
Dr. Falkner. They provide icebreaking services with their
breaker. They are not doing the resupply of the fuel, and they
are not bringing in--the cargo in, as part of that mission.
They are cutting the channel and the ice to McMurdo Station to
allow those other vessels to come in.
Mr. Hunter. But you have a model right now, where you are
basically using those leased icebreakers.
Dr. Falkner. They are not icebreakers.
Mr. Hunter. Oh, they are not?
Dr. Falkner. They are ice-reinforced vessels that require
escort of a leased breaker----
Mr. Hunter. The Nathaniel B. Palmer and--OK, got you. That
is the Nathaniel B. Palmer and the--how do you say it?
Dr. Falkner. Those are our research vessels. That is
another set of vessels. What I was referring to before were our
resupply mission vessels. And we, through the Military Sealift
Command, contract each year for a tanker to bring down
approximately 6 million gallons of fuel, and for a cargo vessel
to bring down hundreds of containers of materials, and to
return materials from the continent back.
Mr. Garamendi. Somebody has to break the ice.
Mr. Hunter. OK, so who actually--who breaks the ice? You
don't contract with the icebreakers----
Dr. Falkner. The Coast Guard broke the ice this year.
Mr. Hunter. OK.
Dr. Falkner. Prior to that we had 7 years where the Coast
Guard did not have an asset capable of doing the job. And those
7 years, we contracted with foreign breakers to handle that
mission.
Mr. Hunter. Got you. Where does Chouest come in? I am----
Dr. Falkner. Chouest purpose-built two vessels for us. One
is the icebreaker, the light--medium icebreaker that I referred
to.
Mr. Hunter. OK. So Chouest did build an icebreaker for you.
Dr. Falkner. They did.
Mr. Hunter. That they operate?
Dr. Falkner. They operate, right.
Mr. Hunter. OK.
Dr. Falkner. They--we, through our prime contractor,
contract with them to operate our research vessel.
Mr. Hunter. OK. But it is an icebreaker, it is a small
icebreaker.
Dr. Falkner. It is.
Mr. Hunter. OK. And they operate that all the time for you?
Dr. Falkner. They do.
Mr. Hunter. OK. Got you.
Dr. Falkner. And we also have an ice-reinforced vessel, the
Laurence M. Gould, which runs between Punta Arenas in Chile, to
our station, Palmer Station, on the peninsula, and performs
both the resupply and personnel movement for us, as well as
does research. And it is a shallow draft vessel, which is
necessary at the moment, to get into that station, given the
constraints.
Mr. Hunter. How are you able to lease the icebreaker if CBO
scores it upfront in 1 year, the entire lease? Did you have to
work through that?
Dr. Falkner. All of these arrangements were made before the
current requirements for scoring were put in place.
Mr. Hunter. So it wasn't scored in 1 year, it was scored
over the life of the lease, like real life is supposed to be.
Dr. Falkner. Right. This was done quite a while ago now.
Mr. Hunter. OK, got you. All right, Doctor, thank you very
much.
Mr. Garamendi?
Mr. Garamendi. Very interesting set of questions, Mr.
Chairman. In the earlier testimony, we heard discussions about
the cost of a new icebreaker being significantly greater if
there are research facilities on board, and it is designed for
research. Let's explore that a little bit in the context of the
chairman's questions about skin in the game, and participation.
And the specific question is should we build--if we were to
build a new heavy icebreaker, would NOAA and the National
Science Foundation want to--I guess Alaska, also--want to have
scientific capability on that icebreaker? Yes? No?
Captain Westerholm. I will start this time, I guess. So I
think the answer is, to the extent that it can be economically
done.
And I go back to that--I go back to the chairman's
question, and I think I need to amplify the fact that, much
like our survey vessels, much like our weather and sea ice
forecasting, I mean, it benefits the Nation. The Coast Guard's
icebreaking capability benefits the Nation.
So to work ahead on a combined Federal requirement, I
think, is a smarter plan than to stovepipe into a single set of
missions. So I think----
Mr. Garamendi. So the answer is basically, yes, you would
want to have scientific research capabilities on the
icebreaker.
Captain Westerholm. Those that would support our missions,
yes.
Mr. Garamendi. National Science Foundation?
Dr. Falkner. We have participated in the process of
defining requirements that Vice Commandant Neffenger described
earlier. It is NSF's position that we do not wish to see a
heavy icebreaking capability compromised by adding on mission.
We really do need heavy icebreaking in Antarctica. We can't
get by with less than that capability.
Mr. Garamendi. I am working towards a strategy on how we
can find the money to build such an icebreaker. Timing issues
are, obviously, in play here. But it seems to me that, in the
budgets of the National Science Foundation, and NOAA, and the
Coast Guard, and the Navy, and a few others, we could put
together the money necessary to build this with each providing
a specific amount of capital money for their specific mission
requirements.
So, NOAA, you need a--you want an icebreaker that has some
capabilities on it. National Science Foundation says, ``Yes,
but we don't want to pay for it, and therefore, it is not
necessary.'' OK. But I think we can put together something
here, if we put our minds to it. We are going to have to work
across our own committees and across various budgets in order
to do that. But, anyway, it is the strategy that you may want
to comment on at another time.
I want to go to the U.S. Navy and NOAA. We have the
navigator of the Navy just sitting behind you. The Navy--The
Navigator.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Garamendi. How do you coordinate with the Navy on what
seems to be the same mission? That is, what is going on, how do
navigation, tides, sea floor, all of those things, how does
NOAA coordinate with the Navy on what apparently is the same
type of mission?
Captain Westerholm. So I would say it is not exactly the
same mission, but we do coordinate well with the Navy. I mean,
obviously, they need information, but not only mainly in the
United States, but worldwide, for operations of defense. But
certainly in the United States, some of the survey information
that we have, some of the weather, sea ice information, we
coordinate. We work together with them at the National Ice
Center, as well as the Coast Guard.
So, I would say that our mission is to, you know, chart the
waters of the United States. And theirs is to defend the United
States. But certainly we work closely with them----
Mr. Garamendi. The navigator seems to have a mission, in
addition to defending the United States, which is to what the
heck is going on in the ocean. What is the weather? What is the
tide?
Captain Westerholm. Absolutely, in terms of national
security----
Mr. Garamendi. I hear not too much coordination from you.
Captain Westerholm. I would probably disagree with that.
Mr. Garamendi. And in written testimony, please tell me
exactly how you do coordinate----
Captain Westerholm. OK. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. And since Admiral White is still here,
answer the same question, please. You can do it in writing. We
are running out of time here, so--I know you want to speak. You
take that deep breath and want to jump in, and I like that. But
you are not at the table at the moment. So, we really need to
do that.
Mr. Chairman, we have had some briefings that are in the
classified area that I think are pertinent to this issue of
both NOAA and the navigator's tasks. And I would like some
opportunity to go back through that on the more classified side
of it. So, we will do some thinking on that, and maybe have a
conversation amongst ourselves on how we might be able to bring
that kind of information into this issue.
We have had a good discussion about the type of vessels
that are needed, and the like. It seems to me--and I will just
make this as my final 8 seconds here--that there is a
increasing activity in the Arctic and the Antarctic, climate
change being a principal piece of that, and causing it to
happen. That is going to require icebreaking capability, more
than we have had in the past. And, frankly, I think the problem
is ours.
We are hearing basically the agencies or the various
Government organizations protecting their current budget turf,
and saying it is somebody else's responsibility, when in fact
they all share the responsibility, which means we are going to
have to coordinate. We are going to have to find some way to
pull together the necessary resources from multiple budgets and
appropriations so that the task of providing sufficient
icebreaking capability can be met.
And so, perhaps from the oil revenues of Alaska we can find
money. Perhaps from NOAA, NASA, and the Navy, and the rest, we
can pull together the necessary money. With that, I will yield
back.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentleman. And the gentleman from
Alaska is recognized.
Mr. Young. I can assure the gentleman we----
Mr. Hunter. Give us your money.
Mr. Young. If we build an icebreaker, we are going to
charge the hell out of you. I can tell you that right now.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Young. But this is a national issue, and I think
everybody understands that.
But I was interested, Doctor, in your comments. You lease--
it has worked well?
Dr. Falkner. Our leases for our research----
Mr. Young. Yes.
Dr. Falkner [continuing]. Icebreakers? Yes.
Mr. Young. It has worked well. See, because that is what I
am saying, Mr. Chairman. It can work. It is this ingrown ``I
have got to own it'' atmosphere. We have got a problem.
Mr. Garamendi. Ask about the heavy icebreakers. Those are
light icebreakers.
Mr. Young. Well, they are the same thing. I mean they--we
have two ships that I know built capable right now to break
heavy ice by a private company that does this, American made.
And that is my key, is American made. And I just think we can
do it.
I have to say one thing, Captain. Are you aware that NOAA
has the authority now to build an icebreaker?
Captain Westerholm. The----
Mr. Young. A high-latitude survey vessel.
Captain Westerholm. Correct.
Mr. Young. Yes. And that was passed through--that is one
thing wrong with being here too long--or everybody says that,
``been here too long.'' We passed that law in 2001, and I don't
think any time that your organization has asked for that money
to build that type vessel----
Captain Westerholm. And, to my knowledge, sir, we haven't.
We have asked for ice-capable vessels which can operate in ice,
but not icebreaking vessels.
Mr. Young. OK. Well, I mean, I would be interested. And I
am like the chairman and the gentleman from California that,
you know, with everybody interested in this, I think we can
solve this problem, instead of, you know, working together to
get icebreaker capability in the Arctic.
And I have to say, Ed, I was proud of you because you
finished your testimony exactly on time. You know how rare that
is in Congress? I mean very nearly that is about like a rare
bird. I go back to my raven, as I was saying before.
Mr. Garamendi. You still have 3 minutes.
Mr. Young. Yes, I still have 3 minutes. The--it was brought
up by the gentleman of California. What role is the State
playing as far as infrastructure in the Arctic for this so-
called new boom that is going to occur?
Mr. Fogels. Yes. Thank you, Congressman Young. I think we
are participating in a number of ways. We are working with--
right now, with the Federal Government and with the Bering
Straits Native Corporation to look at possibilities of
developing a new deepwater Arctic port. We are looking at road
infrastructure, both on the North Slope and to the Ambler
Mining District, about the possibilities of perhaps increasing
our road system in Alaska. I believe we are working with the
Federal Government to try and improve our aviation facilities
up in Barrow, which will be key to any--supporting any future
Arctic activity.
Mr. Young. How is the cooperation? You getting pushback
from the Federal Government, or are they willing to do
something besides talk? Or how is that working?
Mr. Fogels. Congressman Young, on some fronts we are
getting good cooperation. On other fronts we would like to see
better cooperation. We are seeing some conflicting policies,
Federal policies, as I mentioned in my remarks.
I think that probably the biggest single conflict that I
see is this new interest in the Arctic. Wow, we have to do
something new in the Arctic. But then there is no funding to go
along with it, as I think has been discussed in this committee,
too. So----
Mr. Young. And again, for the committee, we--you look at
our State. You know, if you take all the land east of the
Mississippi River to the Atlantic Ocean, from the tip of Maine
to the tip of Florida, that is part of Alaska. And we are
surrounded--the State is not as you envision a State, because
all those States have got State borders. But we are a body of
land on a map that has the State of Alaska scattered all over
the State.
And that is our biggest challenge, because the Federal
Government has a tendency not to work with the State on these
bodies of land, and we do have some on the Arctic. And that is
something we have to realize, is this is a--you are State of
California. But this is State of Alaska, scattered all over.
And it is hard to put this together. And if we don't have
cooperation from the Federal--cooperation, not dictation--then
we have a real challenge. And that is our biggest challenge we
have today.
One last thing, mapping. Are you doing--are you contracting
that out? Or how is that working?
Captain Westerholm. We're employing three approaches to
surveying in the Arctic. We award contracts to private sector
surveying firms, which we have done in the Arctic the last 5
years. We also conduct hydrographic surveys using NOAA's fleet.
And lastly, we use data from the Coast Guard, Navy, and the
academic community for reconnaissance surveying.
So, to the extent that our trusted partners are able to
collect data, and that NOAA is able to use it, we employ all
three methods.
Mr. Young. Now, have you mapped the waters from the Arctic
north--I am talking about Barrow north--all that activity, as
far as shoals, upheavals, mountains, depths? Have you done
that?
Captain Westerholm. So the short answer to that is no,
there is a lot more to do. We have done some surveying in the
High Arctic, such as at Delong Marine Terminal, where Red Dog
Mine is located. In 2015, we plan to survey at Barrow, Point
Hope, Kotzebue, the Bering Strait, and Port Clarence.
NOAA surveys approximately 500 nautical square miles per
year in the Arctic. There are about 40,000 square miles of
priority surveying to be done up there. So it is going to take
not only our contracting survey effort and our partners, but it
will take some time as well.
Mr. Young. OK.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentleman. And let me get this right,
too. It seems like NOAA and the NSF and Alaska, just with
public-private partnerships, would be happy to do what you--you
are able to do what you do without Government-created vessels,
meaning you could piggyback on Shell or any of these other big
energy companies that are going to be in the Arctic now, the
way that they are in the central U.S. now. They are going to
hit the Arctic in a big, big way probably over the next 10 to
20 years, right?
So, I guess all we are missing by not having the Government
paid-for icebreakers is the Coast Guard enforcement capability
of maritime law, and environmentalism, and that type of thing,
and the Navy's ability to move freely up there. But I guess
those aren't a big deal. So, if you didn't have those, you are
happy. you could work off of private ships, right? I mean
meaning you could lease them, you could piggyback on Shell or
other energy companies that build their own icebreakers to use
for themselves. You could do that if you had to, and keep doing
what you are doing. Is that correct?
Dr. Falkner. Provided the assets existed. They do not, at
this point in time. What we are talking about is a national
mission in Antarctica. NSF has a responsibility for
coordinating it because, under the treaty system, an active and
influential science presence is central.
But we have had the pleasure of coordinating since 1957 the
presence with our military partners, with Department of
Defense. We work with the Air National Guard, we work with the
Air Force, Military Sealift Command, and the Coast Guard. And
we have had a long tradition of that type of cooperation for
supporting that national mission.
So, if you are talking about an alternative that doesn't
yet exist, we would be making a change.
Captain Westerholm. And I think that, for some of our
missions that we fulfill with ice-capable vessels but not
icebreaking capability, the answer is yes, we would still be
doing some of those, and leasing those.
I think there is some actual scientific work we do right on
the sea ice edge. We do some of the oil pollution work in
NOAA's Office of Response and Restoration, actually, with the
Healy, as I mentioned, and Arctic Shield. So there are some
missions that we do that benefit from having an icebreaking
capability that is able to get into and out of areas to give us
more information that we need for NOAA.
And I would also mention--and I have earlier--that our sea
ice and weather forecasts are enhanced by being able to get
accurate data right at that edge of where the Healy can
operate, where vessels with a lesser ice class could not.
Dr. Falkner. We are capable of operating our own research
vessels. We are cooperating with the Coast Guard. The Healy
exists, and she has done a good job up until now, and she will
exist, presumably, for the rest of her service life, and we
would continue to cooperate. But if we look beyond Healy, we
could imagine the science community meeting its needs
collectively across Government in other ways. And we have been
clear with the Coast Guard about that.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you. Mr. Garamendi?
Mr. Garamendi. I think we are about ready to wrap up, Mr.
Chairman. I want to thank you for putting together a very, very
important hearing, and the information that is coming forth.
David whispered in my ear that at 500 nautical square miles
per year, it is going to take some time to map the 950,000
square miles in the Alaska region.
Captain Westerholm. And the 40,000 priority square miles
that we have already identified, correct.
Mr. Garamendi. So we are going to be at that some time. The
public-private partnerships that are inevitably going to have
to take place in order to move that along are something that we
should probably be encouraging in multiple ways here.
Mr. Young raised a question about private heavy
icebreakers, and I think there are several around. I was
reminded there was one that operates off the east coast of
Canada for some mining operation, where they are bringing
mineral out of that area. So maybe that is something that may
be available. We ought to explore that. It seems to be more--
and see what potential there is on private icebreakers, private
heavy icebreakers, and whether that could be a stop-gap.
I do think we need to have a heavy icebreaker for the U.S.
Coast Guard, and I think we can find a way to do it if we pool
together the resources from--excuse me, the money from multiple
agencies that would benefit from such an icebreaker. And we
might best be able to do that in the defense budget. We will
talk about some strategies that that might--and the Healy might
be a strategy that we talk about.
So, all those out there in the defense industry and the
defense budget that are protecting your budget, know that I am
looking at it.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Garamendi. OK. Admiral White, we can talk offline about
my question.
That is it, keeping in mind Mr. Young, who went 1 minute
and 10 seconds over his allotted time, I yield back.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the ranking member. Thank you to the
witnesses today for your testimony.
And I think one thing, too. If we bring DOD and Coast Guard
in on this, you are looking at a $1 billion heavy icebreaker.
If you are looking at science research, and simply the ability
to break ice, you are looking at $500 million for a heavy
icebreaker. You double the cost by bringing in a defense-
capable ship, where you can actually run operations off of it.
So I think that is a way to look at it, too, is, once
again, if you are not going to pony up and put skin in the
game, then why do you get to even give us your requirements? We
don't really care, unless you want to put in some money.
So with that----
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Hunter. Yes, yes, please.
Mr. Garamendi. You have said several times in this hearing
that you don't care. In fact, you care deeply. Otherwise, you
wouldn't be----
Mr. Hunter. Here is what happens here. I have got 4 years
to chair this subcommittee, just if everything stays as is. Don
Young has been working the icebreaker issue for decades,
literally. And it hasn't gone anywhere. And what I see as an
unwillingness on behalf of the parts of Government that need
this and actually will use it to really try to make it happen,
just a lot of talk.
And what is going to happen is we are not going to have a
seat at the table when you have these Arctic countries up in
the Arctic, doing what they are doing. We are going to say,
``Hey, but we have a policy that says this,'' and they will
say, ``But you don't have a Coast Guard within 200 miles of us
here. So why do we really care?''
And we are going to lose power and influence that way with
our allies and with our enemies, and that is what is happening
right now, is we are going to fall behind as other countries
are ramping up, and we are going to look back in 10 years and
go, ``Wow, it sure would have been great if we had a presence
in the Arctic, because now we are way, way behind.'' But that
is what I see happening here. And it would be nice to get
something done within the next decade, instead of having the
first meeting on whether we can even build one scheduled over
the next 3 years. That is simply too slow, and it is
bureaucratic and ineffective.
So, anyway, so thank you all very much. And, with that, the
subcommittee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 12:24 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]


