- INTEGRATED PLANNING AND PERMITTING FRAMEWORK: AN OPPORTUNITY FOR EPA TO PROVIDE COMMUNITIES WITH FLEXIBILITY TO MAKE SMART INVESTMENTS IN WATER QUALITY

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INTEGRATED PLANNING AND PERMITTING
FRAMEWORK: AN OPPORTUNITY FOR EPA TO
PROVIDE COMMUNITIES WITH FLEXIBILITY TO
MAKE SMART INVESTMENTS IN WATER QUALITY

=======================================================================

(113-79)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON

WATER RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 24, 2014

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
88-819                    WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL, II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee,      Columbia
Vice Chair                         JERROLD NADLER, New York
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                CORRINE BROWN, Florida
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
GARY G. MILLER, California           ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 RICK LARSEN, Washington
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           JOHN GARAMENDI, California
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              ANDREE CARSON, Indiana
STEVE SOUTHERLAND, II, Florida       JANICE HAHN, California
JEFF DENHAM, California              RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              DINA TITUS, Nevada
STEVE DAINES, Montana                SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
TOM RICE, South Carolina             ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina
DAVID W. JOLLY, Florida

(ii)

Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment

BOB GIBBS, Ohio, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
GARY G. MILLER, California           DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  JOHN GARAMENDI, California
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD,           ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
Arkansas,                            Columbia
Vice Chair                         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
JEFF DENHAM, California              STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            JANICE HAHN, California
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
STEVE DAINES, Montana                ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
TOM RICE, South Carolina             DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         NICK J. RAHALL, II, West Virginia
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois                 (Ex Officio)
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina
DAVID W. JOLLY, Florida
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania (Ex
Officio)

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................   vii

TESTIMONY

Hon. David Berger, mayor, city of Lima, Ohio, on behalf of the
United States Conference of Mayors.............................    12
Todd Portune, commissioner, Hamilton County Board of
Commissioners, on behalf of the ``Perfect Storm'' Communities
Coalition......................................................    12
Stephen Meyer, P.E., director, Department of Environmental
Services, city of Springfield, Missouri, on behalf of the
National Association of Clean Water Agencies...................    12
Ron Poltak, executive director, New England Interstate Water
Pollution Control Commission, on behalf of the Association of
Clean Water Administrators.....................................    12

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Hon. David Berger................................................    32
Todd Portune.....................................................    71
Stephen Meyer, P.E...............................................    78
Ron Poltak.......................................................    87

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Hon. Larry Bucshon, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Indiana, request to submit written testimony from Hon. Lloyd
Winnecke, mayor of the city of Evansville, Indiana.............     6
Hon Bob Gibbs, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Ohio, request to submit the following into the record:

Hon. Donald L. Plusquellic, mayor, city of Akron, Ohio,
written testimony..........................................    93
Joint written testimony from the following organizations:
American Rivers, Stacey Detwiler, associate director, clean
water supply and government relations; Clean Water Action,
Jennifer Peters, national water campaigns coordinator;
Natural Resources Defense Council, Larry Levine, senior
attorney; and Southern Environmental Law Center, Navis A.
Bermudez, deputy legislative director......................    96
Joint written testimony from the following Representatives in
Congress: Hon. Marcia L. Fudge, of the State of Ohio, and
Hon. Steve Chabot, of the State of Ohio....................   104
Joint written testimony from the following Representatives in
Congress: Hon. Robert E. Latta, of the State of Ohio, and
Hon. Timothy J. Walz, of the State of Minnesota............   106
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, written testimony......   108
Hon. Grace F. Napolitano, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California, request to submit the following into the
record:

Hon. Mary Ann Lutz, mayor, city of Monrovia, California,
written testimony..........................................   113
United States Conference of Mayors, Mayors Water Council, The
Financial Impact of Public Water and Federal Manadate Costs
on Economically Vulnerable Populations in San Gabriel
Valley/Los Angeles County Communities--An Interim Report
(July 22, 2014)............................................   115

ADDITION TO THE RECORD

Laura Vaught, Associate Administrator, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, responses to questions for the record issued
by Hon. Grace F. Napolitano, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California \1\....................................   143

----------
\1\ Questions for the record are not typically issued to an
organization that was not a hearing witness. In this case, however, the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency was invited to be a hearing
witness and was unable to attend, and so it submitted a written
statement for the record (see page 108).

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

INTEGRATED PLANNING AND PERMITTING FRAMEWORK: AN OPPORTUNITY FOR EPA TO
PROVIDE COMMUNITIES WITH FLEXIBILITY TO MAKE SMART INVESTMENTS IN WATER
QUALITY

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 24, 2014

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bob Gibbs
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Gibbs. The Subcommittee on Water Resources and
Environment of the Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure will come to order.
A couple of housekeeping issues first. I ask unanimous
consent that Mr. Bucshon from Indiana be included in today's
hearing.
Hearing no objection, so ordered.
I ask unanimous consent that the hearing record be kept
open for 30 days after this hearing in order to accept written
testimony for the hearing record. Is there any objection?
[No response.]
Mr. Gibbs. Without objection, so ordered.
I also ask unanimous consent that written testimony
submitted on behalf of the following be included in the hearing
record: jointly from Representatives Chabot and Fudge; jointly
from Representatives Latta and Walz; from the mayor of the city
of Akron, Ohio; from the Environmental Protection Agency; and
jointly from American Rivers, Clean Water Action, Natural
Resources Defense Council, and the Southern Environmental Law
Center.
Is there objection?
[No response.]
Mr. Gibbs. Without objection, so ordered.
Today we have one panel. We will welcome our witnesses in a
few minutes, but I will open here with a statement.
First of all, I would like to welcome everyone here to our
hearing today for ``Integrated Planning and Permitting
Framework: An Opportunity for the EPA to Provide Communities
with Flexibility to Make Smart Investments in Water Quality.''
This is a followup to hearings we held last Congress on
EPA's integrated planning framework. In our previous hearings,
we heard about how communities all across the Nation are facing
increasing regulatory enforcement and financial pressures not
only to address sewer overflows and other aging wastewater
infrastructure issues, but also to deal with numerous other
burdensome regulatory issues that recently have become national
priorities.
These include more stringent and widespread regulation of
stormwater discharges, nutrients and other pollutants, total
maximum daily loads, and public drinking water systems, which
could lead to many communities having to install and operate at
great expense advanced treatment, removal and prevention
technologies.
All of these initiatives are piling up additional layers of
regulatory requirements and economic burdens on our
communities, and somehow our communities have to deal with it.
A large portion of these regulatory mandates are going unfunded
by the Federal and State governments, with the result that many
municipalities have had to make substantial increases in
investments in wastewater and public water infrastructure in
recent years. Local communities and ratepayers are now
increasingly getting economically tapped out.
In response to some of these issues, EPA developed an
integrated planning and permitting policy in 2012 that was
intended to provide some flexibility on how communities managed
their regulatory and enforcement mandates under the Clean Water
Act. The policy outlines how communities can prioritize
multiple Clean Water Act obligations and develop plans for
addressing those obligations in a flexible manner and reduce
their cost burdens.
At earlier hearings we heard from witnesses about the
implementation of the policy. Concerns that were raised
included inadequate consideration of strained municipal budgets
and affordability, especially in setting compliance timelines;
the continued focus on using enforcement mechanisms in the
integrated planning process rather than permit; and
insufficient regulatory flexibility to adapt to new or changed
circumstances.
Some of the witnesses also urged the EPA to become more
proactive and collaboratively assist communities through
technical assistance and pilot demonstration projects to
develop flexible, practical, and affordable integrated plan.
I am concerned that 2 years have passed since the EPA
released the final policy, and little seems to have been done
to successfully implement it. I understand that while several
local governments are working on integrated plans, no such
plans have been approved, and one has been disapproved.
EPA has still not done enough to define the roles and
responsibilities of the EPA, the States and the communities in
implementing the policy. It has not provided clear standards
for approval of integrated plans.
It appears that some at the EPA, particularly in a number
of Agency regional offices, still may not be willing to provide
flexibility to communities and limit EPA's enforcement efforts
even when the goal is to achieve a more efficient compliance
with the Clean Water Act.
A continued emphasis on an enforcement approach, including
consent decrees and a resistance to considering affordability
and innovative approaches to addressing water quality issues,
will undermine the flexibility that the EPA ostensibly is
trying to seek to provide under this policy.
However, there might be some cause for optimism that the
EPA is finally starting to become more supportive of
implementing an integrated planning policy. I am pleased that
back in May the EPA announced the availability of some Federal
funding to a few communities for technical assistance in
developing municipal integrated plans. This will be an
important first step in demonstrating support for and
implementing the policy, although EPA still needs to do more.
To help with this, I and jointly with Ranking Member Tim
Bishop have written a letter to the House Appropriations
Committee requesting their support in directing EPA resources
towards pilot projects to assist communities in developing
integrated plans.
There are several legislative proposals under development
that attempt to address various issues and concerns related to
the EPA's integrated planning initiative. These proposals
include H.R. 2707, the Clean Water Compliance and Ratepayer
Affordability Act of 2013, introduced by Congressman Chabot;
H.R. 3862, the Clean Water Affordability Act of 2014,
introduced by Congressman Latta; and the draft bill entitled
``The Water Quality Improvement Act of 2013'' being circulated
by members of the U.S. Conference of Mayors, including Mayor
Berger who is one or our witnesses today.
I would like to hear from today's witnesses about their
thoughts on EPA's implementation of the integrated planning
policy today and whether EPA has adequately addressed their
concerns.
In addition, I would also like to hear from our witnesses
about the pending legislative proposals and how specifically
the proposals could help address their concerns and any
impediments that stand in the way of making an effective
initiative for both communities and the regulators.
It is time for a national clean water strategy to evolve
from a one size fits all mandate and enforcement approach to an
integrative strategy that recognizes the individual public
health needs and water quality benefits of water and wastewater
utilities, and the resource limitations of communities.
Our goal is clean water, and that is best achieved by
focusing more on facilitating compliance and less on punitive
enforcement mechanisms. Hopefully, this initiative will truly
give our communities the flexibility they need to prioritize
their water quality requirements and address the huge, unfunded
costs associated with the growing number of mandates stemming
from the EPA water rules and enforcement actions.
Lastly, I should mention that we had invited the EPA to
participate in this hearing in order to get the Agency's
perspective on implementing the policy. Unfortunately, however,
the EPA declined to participate due to what the Agency said was
other commitments.
I yield to my ranking member, Mr. Bishop, for any remarks
you may have.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this morning's hearing.
In my view, today's hearing demonstrates the challenges and
the frustrations of two intersecting trends in our efforts to
improve the overall quality of the Nation's waters. As I have
noted in the past, there is significant evidence that in the
last decade this Nation has stopped making significant progress
in improving the overall quality of its waters.
For example, if one reviews the last three State
assessments of water quality covering the years from 2008
through 2012, the results should be alarming. For rivers and
streams, State assessments show a steady decline in water
quality from 50 percent of assessed rivers and streams not
meeting their State water quality standards in 2008, to 52
percent of these waters not meeting State water quality
standards today.
Similarly for lake and reservoirs, the 2008 State
assessments showed that 64 percent of these waters failed to
meet State water quality standards. Today 68 percent of
assessed lakes and reservoirs fail to meet these standards.
Finally, in 2008, State data shows that 45 percent of
assessed coastal shoreline miles failed to meet State water
quality standards. Today a shocking 86 percent of assessed
coastal shoreline miles fail to meet State standards.
These trends are also reflected in the Environmental
Protection Agency's recent wadeable streams assessment. For
example, in 2006, EPA noted that nationally 41.9 percent of the
Nation's wadeable streams were given a poor rating for
biological condition, while only 28.2 percent were given a good
assessment. In 2013, EPA's followup report noted that 55.3
percent of the Nation's wadeable streams have a poor rating,
but only 20.7 percent have a good rating.
This information suggests that we are moving in the wrong
direction in improving the quality of our Nation's water
resources. Yet the reality is that any significant additional
improvements in water quality will be complicated, more
expensive, and more politically challenging.
The second trend highlighted at this morning's hearing
focuses back on the Congress and how the Federal Government has
stopped making significant Federal investments in improving our
Nation's water quality. For example, only 4 years ago Congress
appropriated over $6 billion to the Clean Water SRF to finance
the cost of necessary wastewater infrastructure, $2.1 billion
through the regular appropriations process and an additional $4
billion through the Recovery Act.
Since that time, annual appropriations for the Clean Water
SRF have been declining from an appropriation of $1.5 billion
in fiscal year 2011 to a recommendation of $1 billion in the
chairman's mark of the Interior and Environmental
Appropriations Bill for 2015. Not surprising as Federal
investments in water quality improvements decrease, we hear
more and more concern about the risk in unfunded Federal
mandates.
To be clear, I do not share the view that the recent
actions of EPA or the Corps are the result of overzealous
Federal agencies. In my view, these agencies are simply doing
the job that we, the Congress, told them to do over 40 years
ago, to ``restore and maintain the chemical, physical and
biological integrity of the Nation's waters.''
EPA and the State regulatory agencies see the same trend
lines in declining water quality that I mentioned earlier and
are trying to do something about them. However, in carrying out
the job we gave them, they are exposing the difficulties that I
also mentioned earlier: that continued improvement in restoring
and protecting water quality will be more complicated, more
expensive, and more politically challenging.
To our witnesses, let me clearly say that I am sympathetic
to all that the States and local communities are compelled to
accomplish with limited funding. However, I am not convinced
that our constituents have thrown up the white flag on making
further improvements to our Nation's water quality. We should
not be satisfied that, as some have suggested, our waters are
as clean as they can ever be.
We must continue to make progress in achieving the goals we
established over four decades ago, and we, the Congress, must
be willing to put resources on the table for States and
localities to accomplish this task.
Earlier this summer the President signed into law the Water
Resources Reform and Development Act, which includes the first
reauthorization of the Clean Water State Revolving Fund ever.
This new law will provide additional financial flexibilities to
States and to communities to make the cost of building water
infrastructure more affordable. Enactment of WRRDA was a
tremendous first step and one that we should take pride in
discussing.
However, I think we all agree it is only the first step.
Now we must follow through on providing the Federal resources
necessary to partner with our States and our communities to get
this job done. If we remain committed to the goals of fishable
and swimmable waters, then we must be willing to commit to
providing a portion of the funds to do so.
Investing in our water infrastructure network, like so many
of the things we do in this committee, is an investment in our
Nation's future. Let us not shortchange the public
environmental and economic health for generations to come by
failing to meet this commitment.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Gibbs. At this time I yield to Mr. Bucshon for a
unanimous consent request.
Dr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would ask unanimous consent to submit a letter from Lloyd
Winnecke, mayor of the city of Evansville, Indiana, to Chairman
Gibbs and to Ranking Member Bishop.
Mr. Gibbs. So ordered.
[The letter presented by Dr. Bucshon follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.011

Mr. Gibbs. I also ask unanimous consent for Mr. Chabot to
sit on the committee. Any objection?
[No response.]
Mr. Gibbs. So ordered.
At this time other Members who have testimony may enter it
for the record.
I want to call on Mr. Chabot to allow him to introduce one
of our witnesses today.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will be very brief. I want to thank you and the committee
for holding this very important hearing, and I want to
especially thank one of the county commissioners from Hamilton
County, Todd Portune, who has held that office for quite a few
years, and prior to that he was also a member of Cincinnati
City Council, and I was actually a member of both of those fine
institutions as well.
We are different parties, but this is an issue that we
agree on, and that is what we ought to give local communities
more flexibility so that they can meet the same high clean
water standards that are required now, but do it at a more
reasonable cost to the ratepayers and the taxpayers.
So I want to commend him for his leadership in this area.
He has worked with a whole coalition of other similarly
situated elected officials across the country, and this is
bipartisan legislation introduced by another Democratic Member
of Congress, Marcia Fudge from Cleveland, and she is also the
head of the Congressional Black Caucus and also a different
party than myself, but this is an issue that we agree on.
And I want to thank Mr. Portune for his leadership in this
area and look forward to hearing his testimony today.
Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Also today we have Mr. David Berger, who is the mayor of
the city of Lima, Ohio. He is representing the U.S. Conference
of Mayors and is a member of USCM's Mayors Water Council.
We also have Mr. Stephen Meyer, who is the director of the
Department of Environmental Services for the city of
Springfield, Missouri. He is representing the National
Association of Clean Water Agencies.
And we have Mr. Ron Poltak. Did I say it right?
Mr. Poltak. Poltak.
Mr. Gibbs. Poltak. OK. It was close. I am doing better.
Executive director of the New England Interstate Water
Pollution Control Commission, and he is representing the
Association of Clean Water Administrators.
Welcome to all today, and thank you for being here, and we
will turn it over to Mayor Berger for your testimony, and the
floor is yours. Welcome.

TESTIMONY OF HON. DAVID BERGER, MAYOR, CITY OF LIMA, OHIO, ON
BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES CONFERENCE OF MAYORS; TODD PORTUNE,
COMMISSIONER, HAMILTON COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, ON BEHALF
OF THE ``PERFECT STORM'' COMMUNITIES COALITION; STEPHEN MEYER,
P.E., DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES, CITY OF
SPRINGFIELD, MISSOURI, ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
CLEAN WATER AGENCIES; AND RON POLTAK, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NEW
ENGLAND INTERSTATE WATER POLLUTION CONTROL COMMISSION, ON
BEHALF OF THE ASSOCIATION OF CLEAN WATER ADMINISTRATORS

Mr. Berger. Good morning. Thank you for inviting me to
provide an update on integrated planning from the perspective
of the U.S. Conference of Mayors.
In my written testimony, which is some 40 pages, I cover in
detail four topics: the challenges local governments face with
their water and wastewater systems; the integrated planning
dialogue between EPA and the Conference of Mayors; the actual
experiences of individual cities; and finally the legislation
the Conference of Mayors has developed.
I will now concentrate on the experiences of cities which
serves as the basis of our draft Clean Water Improvement Act,
which is designed to provide solutions.
Local government, not the Federal Government, is where the
job of providing water and wastewater services gets done and is
paid for. We are on an unsustainable path, however, when it
comes to public water investment and unfunded mandates. We must
change or we will bankrupt communities and permanently
impoverish households in those communities.
EPA is to be commended for their high level and sustained
involvement in this integrated planning dialogue, including
Deputy Administrator Bob Perciasepe, Assistant Administrator
Cynthia Giles, and Acting Assistant Administrator Nancy Stoner.
Their leadership resulted in the issuance of a green
infrastructure memorandum and an integrated planning
memorandum.
The third anticipated product of the dialogue is a
memorandum to the regional offices on how they can be more
flexible. Unfortunately, local governments trying to address
water issues with the regional offices have not been afforded
the flexibility discussed with EPA Headquarters. While EPA has
told us that over a dozen local governments are working on
integrated plans, no plan has been approved and one has been
disapproved.
EPA recently disapproved Evansville's $540 million
integrated plan even though they used EPA's integrated planning
framework to integrate SSO, CSO and flood controls. Their plan
uses an adaptive management approach, relies on green
infrastructure, and recommends a 28-year implementation period
to try to remain affordable. It appears EPA has rejected both
Evansville's plan to use green infrastructure and the city's
affordability analysis.
Akron, Ohio's original plan was estimated to cost $865
million, and the city passed rate increases totaling over 150
percent to pay for the plan. Late last year the city advised
EPA about escalating costs to implement its plan which has now
risen from $865 million to $1.4 billion. An analysis of the
newly estimated cost by income distribution shows that nearly
15 percent of households within the city would pay over 10
percent, 10 percent of their annual incomes to implement the
plan.
My community, Lima, Ohio, has a median household income of
$26,900. The impact of rate increases necessary to meet our
proposed $100 million-plus integrated plan include the fact
that some 47 percent of households in my community would
experience rates above 4 percent of their household incomes.
We have seen EPA's integrated planning framework as a very
promising initiative that would allow us to protect the
environment in an affordable and economically sensible way. Yet
more than 2 years after the integrated planning framework was
issued, we are still waiting for EPA to say yes to Lima's
integrated plan.
Cities around the Nation are finding that little or no
change has occurred in the regional offices in dealing with the
challenges of the Clean Water Act. While headquarters
prioritizes integrated planning, the regional offices actively
resist proposals that require flexibility, longer time tables,
and priority settings and instead focus on high-cost
approaches, fixed deadlines, and penalties.
While cities applaud the continuing engagement and good
faith efforts of EPA Headquarters, we must report that the
message is not getting through to the regional offices.
To fill the gap between EPA assurances and EPA action, the
Conference of Mayors developed a Water quality Improvement Act.
Mayors greatly appreciate the interest shown by Members of
Congress, and we are happy several pieces of legislation have
been developed to address them. However, we are concerned that
some of the bills will not solve the real world problems
identified by the Conference of Mayors.
We are looking for legislation that can benefit all cities
through all parts of the country that does not leave relief for
local governments subject to the discretion of the EPA. EPA
discretion is what we have now, and we are not seeing EPA use
its discretion in ways that recognize that environmental
improvements must be affordable.
We need Congress to provide relief. We need Congress to
provide oversight and to remember the EPA has its authority
because of the way the Clean Water Act was written and enacted
by the Congress. We need Congress to act.
Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mr. Portune, the floor is yours. Welcome.
Mr. Portune. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Bishop, members
of the subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to be here
today.
As you heard from my good friend and Congressman, and he is
my Congressman, the Honorable Steve Chabot, my name is Todd
Portune, and I serve as commissioner for Hamilton County, Ohio,
and I am here testifying on behalf of the ``Perfect Storm''
Communities Coalition in my home community in favor of H.R.
2707, the Clean Water Compliance and Ratepayer Affordability
Act.
The coalition that I represent is made up of communities
that are dealing with the ``Perfect Storm,'' combinations of
high unemployment, high home foreclosure rates, stagnant
economic growth, and an exodus of business and industry, all
while being mandated to meet expensive wet weather consent
decrees and stormwater regulations. We very much appreciate the
subcommittee holding this hearing and want to thank personally
Representative Chabot and fellow Ohioan, Representative Marcia
Fudge, for their leadership in introducing the bill and the
bill's 13 bipartisan cosponsors.
Hamilton County and our coalition emphatically support H.R.
2707, the Clean Water Compliance and Ratepayer Affordability
Act, and in answer to your question, Mr. Chairman, EPA's
integrated planning policy framework and the Agency's
implementation of it is inadequate to meet the needs of local
communities. It has been inadequate to address the concerns
expressed by this community, and it has failed the American
people who want clean water, but want clean water met in ways
that are flexible, affordable and reasonable, and the current
approach is not.
The bill, H.R. 2707, does not gut the Clean Water Act, nor
limit EPA's authorities, but on the contrary it provides
congressional authorization, direction and guidance in
implementing EPA' own integrated planning and permitting
framework.
H.R. 2707, however, will require the EPA to carry out a
program to work cooperatively with up to 16 specifically
identified showcase communities each year for 5 years to
develop and implement integrated plans to meet their wastewater
obligations under the Clean Water Act, and in doing so, to
develop a credible body of data that EPA, the Department of
Justice and the Congress can rely upon with respect to a new
approach, green infrastructure approaches to the obligations of
the Clean Water Act that are more efficient, more effective,
and more economical to local communities.
By naming specific showcase communities, the EPA would
offer a promising opportunity to provide transparency in how it
is applying these flexible and new and cost effective
compliance technologies that are being optimized within the
framework.
The stake are high, extremely high for the hundreds of
communities across the Nation that are working diligently to
conform with EPA mandates. Over the last 10 years along over
$40 billion in mandated wastewater and stormwater upgrades have
been required of communities large and small. In fact, 18 of
that $40 billion, or 44 percent compliance, falls on distressed
communities, communities that are experiencing some of the
worst economic conditions in decades.
Hamilton County is one of those communities. Between 2000
and 2012, our poverty rate for individuals in the county
ballooned by over 66 percent. Forty percent of the county
households have incomes of less than $35,000 per year, and one
in ten in 2012 had annual incomes of less than $10,000 per
year.
These are the families that are hardest hit by the rate
increases that we project, 350 percent rate increased in order
to meet the obligations of the Clean Water Act under current
conditions, and yet those same families will benefit the most
from the savings that will be realized though the flexibility
and new technologies that will be allowed through H.R. 2707 and
the showcase communities program.
As matters stand today, a green billed approach will result
in a $500 million savings for Hamilton County alone, and with
the adoption of 2707, that will translate into additional
savings for our community and for our residents who are
struggling to make ends meet and yet to also afford the rates
that are increasing to meet Clean Water Act obligations.
Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, we believe that
H.R. 2707 is the best immediate solution to this issue of
integrated planning and permitting execution. Other proposed
legislative changes will require significant changes to the
Clean Water Act or billions of dollars of additional
appropriations, neither of which appear to be politically or
legislatively feasible at this time.
Our communities need relieve now. We cannot wait for a
better solution to wind its way through the difficult
legislative path, but H.R. 2707 will provide relief immediately
if adopted.
Hamilton County, Ohio, and the ``Perfect Storm''
Communities Coalition look forward to continuing to work with
you, Chairman Gibbs, Ranking Member Bishop and members of this
subcommittee, as well as working with the EPA in enacting and
implementing H.R. 2707.
I thank you for this opportunity to provide testimony and
am ready, willing and able to answers any questions you may
have.
Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mr. Meyer, welcome. The floor is yours.
Mr. Meyer. Chairman Gibbs, Representative Bishop and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you.
My name is Stephen Meyer. I am the director of the
Department of Environmental Services for the city of
Springfield, Missouri. I am also the president of the
Association of Missouri Clean Water Agencies, and I serve on
the board of directors for the National Association of Clean
Water Agencies, and that is who I am testifying on behalf of
today.
I applaud the subcommittee for holding this important
hearing on the issue of clean water affordability and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency's integrated planning framework
for municipal wastewater and stormwater requirements. I am also
pleased to testify in support of H.R. 3862, the Clean Water
Affordability Act of 2014.
NACWA applauds Representatives Bob Latta and Tim Walz for
leading the efforts in the House to raise awareness of these
affordability concerns and to help craft practical solutions to
address them.
The Clean Water Affordability Act of 2014 does three
critical things:
One, it codifies EPA's integrated planning framework and
incentivizes its adoption by extending NPDES permit terms for
communities with an approved integrated plan.
Two, it helps small rural communities more affordably
finance their clean water obligations by ensuring at least 15
percent of the State revolving funds are set aside for them.
Third, require EPA to revise and broaden its guidance for
determining a community's financial capabilities to more
accurately reflect a community's financial challenges.
I urge every member of this subcommittee to cosponsor this
important legislation.
I also thank you, Chairman Gibbs and Representative Bishop,
for being part of a bipartisan group of Members in the House
and Senate who have requested $5 million for this upcoming
fiscal year to support an integrated planning pilot program at
EPA, and I am pleased that the House has included an
appropriation in support of this request in its fiscal year
2015 spending proposal.
Like many others across the Nation, the city of Springfield
and Green County region are addressing the challenges of
increasingly stringent environmental regulations from every
front. From stormwater, to wastewater, to air quality, and
drinking water, as regulations continue to evolve, our
community is required to devote more money and resources to
comply.
Currently the city of Springfield is operating under a 7-
year, $50 million amended consent judgment to correct sanitary
sewer overflows through investments in inflow and infiltration
reduction in our collection systems. After the 7-year period
concludes, we will anticipate having to move more investments
at the treatment plant and collection system to completely
eliminate overflows which will likely cost hundreds of millions
of dollars.
We also have a stormwater related TMDL developed for
several of our river segments impaired by bacteria, metals,
nutrients and other pollutants that need to be address.
While the city of Springfield is currently in attainment
under the Clean Water Act, forthcoming Clean Water Act related
regulations will likely cause us to go out of attainment
quickly.
And finally, we have two closed landfills listed as
Superfund sites requiring remediation under CERCLA.
The median household income in Springfield is $42,000.
Twenty-five percent of our citizens' household income is
$20,000 or less.
Because our challenges involve multiple Federal statutes,
we believe an integrated plan approach is really the only
practical and affordable way forward to ensure optimization of
taxpayer resources. At the heart of Springfield's integrated
plan are six guiding principles: affordability; effectiveness--
that assures the biggest bang for the buck--fairness to ensure
all citizens are being treated fairly and equally;
attainability, to ensure measures can be reasonably
accomplished; measurability, that ensures progress is tracked
over time; adaptability so that we can adapt and improve based
on experiences and results.
We know we will achieve success when community resources
are directed toward managing environmental issues using the
most effective solutions to address the most significant
problems in a way that is affordable to our citizens:
When we are in compliance with all Federal and State
regulations while addressing the specific needs of our
community;
When we have the ability to address water, air and solid
waste issues holistically, allowing both our community and the
regulators to operate more efficiently;
When our community has a high level of trust that resources
are being used to address environmental issues effectively and
efficiently;
When our community has a clear understanding of how funding
and other resources will be used to improve environmental
quality;
When our community realizes a competitive advantage toward
growth and economic development and increases in quality of
life as a consequence of this plan. We have identified specific
goals relevant to each environmental resource.
In conclusion, Springfield's integrated plan will offer a
practical yet effective approach to addressing water, land and
air challenges. NACWA remains optimistic that with Congress'
help EPA can advance its framework to address mutual concerns.
I thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today,
and I look forward to addressing any questions you may have of
me.
Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mr. Poltak, welcome. The floor is yours.
Mr. Poltak. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Gibbs. Thank
you, Mr. Bishop.
My name is Ron Poltak. I am the Executive Director of the
New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission; been
in that position for 32 years; started my career with Senator
Muskie writing aspects of the Clean Water Act; been around a
long time, but I am a young, energetic 66-year-old. So I will
try to be as quick as I possibly can this morning.
I am here representing ACWQ, the Association of Clean Water
Administrators. ACWA has been very active over the course of
the inception of the concept of the integrated planning
approach. We have been extremely supportive of EPA and the
framework and been working earnestly to try and make it happen.
Our members agree that when the integrated plan is designed
and implemented properly, it will promote innovative solutions
that deliver results. We have collaborated with EPA. We have
collaborated with our partners here in DC, and we have brought,
as my case in New England, three workshops where States,
communities, municipalities of a larger proportion, meaning
cities as well as towns, and in addition, the consultant
private sector community together to talk about implementing
the integrated planning approach of which there is tremendous
interest and respect thereto.
Cities in each and every one of our New England States, as
well as New York, are vitally interested in moving forward with
this concept.
During the workshops, what I wanted to share with you this
morning is a range of implementation challenges were
identified, including the potential increased burden on State
resources, consistency and interpretation and application
between EPA Regional offices and EPA Headquarters; the level of
detail necessary for plan approval; and how best to handle
financial capability issues.
The workshops also exposed several statutory and regulatory
challenges to implementation that must be overcome for this
effort to move forward. Progress has been made, but there still
is yet a lot to be done.
It is clear that the integrated planning framework
anticipates a prominent role for State permitting authorities,
and we appreciate the Agency's recognition of our role as
coregulators responsible for ensuring that the goals of the
Clean Water Act are met. Yet the details of the role are still
not clear.
The framework makes clear that the State permitting
authorities will need to approve the integrated plan as
developed by municipalities, but it does not provide details on
how exactly States should perform this role. EPA has repeatedly
stated that it intends to provide practical examples and
guidance as it works through the first integrated planning
efforts, but active members are still waiting for these details
to be fleshed out.
The committee can assist the States by encouraging EPA to
move more quickly, to develop case studies and practical
examples of how integrated planning works, and by sustaining
adequate Federal funding to support these programs.
In addition to the lack of clarity with regard to the
responsibilities of State permitting authorities, ACWA members
are concerned that while EPA anticipates States taking the
primary role in reviewing and approving integrated plans, EPA's
authority will linger over the process until the Agency makes
clear that it will support State decisions.
State time and resources are at a premium, and States are
concerned that they will invest time and resources in the plan
review and approval only to have EPA question that decision in
the end.
States are also concerned that EPA will object to a permit
based on an integrated plan that was approved by a State.
Finally, the States are concerned that after a plan is
developed and implementation is underway that EPA could come in
and order more stringent or different controls or approaches to
manage pollution.
Certainly this type of action by the Agency would undermine
the economic savings envisioned by integrated planning. The
role of the States and EPA needs to be clearly defined so that
the integrated approach agreed upon by the States and
municipalities can be relied on by all stakeholders.
We are very much engaged and intentioned to move forward
with this process. ACWA encourages EPA to begin exploring the
ways that the permits can legally and effectively incorporate
integrated plan elements into each and every permit that is
employed. The Agency could begin developing a set of guidelines
or a model permit where the Agency is the Clean Water Act
permitting authority. The process of developing a model permit
would help identify any barriers to implementation and enable
the Agency and the regulated entities to test out solutions to
overcoming the challenges that many of our municipalities as
well as the States are faced with.
A model permit or case study completed in a State where EPA
is the permitting authority would tremendously help the process
move along. We need a template, and we are finding that we do
not have one.
To conclude, I want to emphasize that ACWA's members are
supportive of the integrated planning framework and we
appreciate EPA's efforts and receptivity to our comments and
concerns. However, many of the concerns I have outlined here
today will not be put to rest until there are more real world
case studies and guidance for the States to follow. We
encourage EPA to quicken the pace of identifying and conducting
case studies to test and evaluate the best way to move forward
with developing and implemented integrated plans for all of the
communities, for example, that I have in my district of
authority who are anxious to move forward without hesitating.
Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. I want to thank you all for coming in
again, and your dedication to enhancing and improving the
environment, protecting the environment, and also to protect
your ratepayers or your customers.
And I have got to single out Mr. Berger. I just understand
that your flight was canceled last night, and you got in your
car and drove last night from Lima. That is a good 10-hour
drive so I can understand you might want to take a nap later.
First of all, I wanted to start out with kind of the theme
here. You know, we are trying to figure out why the EPA came to
this committee 2 years ago and put this forth, and it looks
like there has not been the leadership from Washington, DC,
into the regional offices, and the first part of my question
is: is it because there is a culture within the EPA?
I know Mr. Berger talked a little bit about the enforcement
and the penalties, and what has been frustrating to me is to
see when an entity, such as the entities that you all
represent, is working hard to do what you need to do to comply
with the Clean Water Act and at the same time you are being
fined with enforced penalties.
Do you think that there has been the lack of leadership
from Washington to the regional offices or is it just a culture
within the whole EPA that we have got a whole cultural problem
and they cannot adapt?
Does anybody want to answer?
Mr. Portune. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member and members of
the committee, our experience has been that there may be
cultural aspects connected to it. There are differences between
the permitting side and the enforcement side of EPA. Sometimes
it just simply comes down to individuals and their experience,
what their experience has been.
But the bottom line is that there is not consistency in
terms of delivering the message that we are receiving out there
in the field. So sometimes we are seeing differences between
districts or regions, I should say, in the approach, and even
within a region it depends on who shows up as a regulator
sometimes in terms of how the approach is going to be, and that
is why we believe that there is definitely a need for
congressional oversight, definitely a need for new legislation.
And that is why H.R. 2707 has embraced within it real
transparency and accountability.
Mr. Gibbs. Let me ask kind of a followup and anybody else
can address it, too.
Like in Lima you have been working to develop an integrated
plan, what is the involvement of the EPA during the
development? Are they there working with you or what is the
status of that?
Mr. Berger. We have been not only developing a plan but
also negotiating a consent decree, and I can say that that has
been an entirely frustrating process. The last time we were at
the table in Chicago, folks from headquarters were in the room
and had they not been there, it would not have gone well. It
was only the presence and the active engagement of folks from
headquarters that actually moved the discussion. Otherwise the
discussion would have been over very quickly.
So I would assert that you can use the term ``culture,''
but the fact is that the regional offices do not believe in
integrated planning. They are actively resisting it, and
headquarters has not had the ability to discipline those
offices to make certain that things are happening.
I think that the issues of penalties that you raise are a
very real part of not just culture. It is policy. It is policy
at DOJ and EPA to penalize cities and other POTWs as a way of
enforcing, bludgeoning, goading people and intimidating folks.
It has nothing to do with the shared stewardship
responsibility that cities, States and the agencies have. And
that policy needs to change, and I have had direct
conversations with folks at the White House. They have said to
me they agree, but nothing yet is happening.
That policy of requiring penalties simply extracts money
from local communities that have nothing. I mean, we have lots
of things to do with those resources, and paying hundreds of
thousands or millions of dollars in penalties that go into the
U.S. Treasury effects nothing in terms of good public policy in
my community or any other community around the country.
Mr. Gibbs. I also see in Mr. Meyer's testimony you talked
about I think it was four points, examining community
priorities, prioritizing the solutions, and then the financial
capability. I like that approach, and it goes on here in your
testimony and you talk about we have got to find the source of
the pollutant as the major problem, mitigating that, and move
on to the next pollutant.
Of course part of this whole concept of integrated
permitting is to give you that flexibility to address your
needs because the needs of Lima, Ohio, are probably different
than the needs in New York City or Dallas, Texas, or wherever.
Then also it gives you that flexibility.
So I think legislation is needed here because we are
hearing this testimony, but I want to ask Mr. Meyer when you
say out these phases and do this, what are you hearing from the
EPA when you are saying you have got this plan?
We are doing this. We are trying to work with the local
community, and then we also take in the financial capabilities
of the local community to support this.
Mr. Meyer. To start off with, we were taking a Missouri
solution to clean water. Find the pollutant, find the source,
remediate the source. It is very simple, and it should be very
effective.
We then move on to the next pollutant. We have formed a
citizens priorities task force which is currently gathering,
and they are helping us to determine what the community's
priorities are.
The first pollutant may be a water pollutant. The second
pollutant may be an air pollutant. We want to be flexible
enough that we can move around to different sources.
EPA Region 7, Dr. Brooks and Director Pauley of the
Missouri Department of Natural Resources, when we developed our
proposal, we invited them in and explained what our proposal
was. They seemed very supportive. We had a very good
discussion.
In Missouri, EPA Region 7 had delegated that responsibility
for consent decree negotiations for Springfield to the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources as well as the integrated plan
development. We have had Missouri Department of Natural
Resources in all of our technical committees, as well as a
technical resource to the citizens committee. They have been
very active and very supportive.
So far we have presented to EPA twice, to the senior staff.
We have kept the headquarters as well as Region 7 up to date.
Every time we have a movement forward we update them, and so
far EPA Region 7 has not said stop.
Mr. Gibbs. I am out of time, but just a quick followup. One
of the things in integrated permitting is to get longer permit
time extension. It is currently 5 years, maybe 10 years or
longer. When any of you have had discussions with EPA on that,
do you feel real push-back on that or is that a nonissue on the
permit extensions?
Mr. Portune. Chairman Gibbs, if I may, since in Hamilton
County we are in a consent decree, it is about $4 billion that
local rate payers are paying, and one of the programs that we
were required to do within the original consent decree under
the new integrated planning and flexibility, we were allowed to
present a green bill alternative to that.
But here is where the flexibility and the time extension
stopped. Number one, we did not have help in terms of working
with EPA as a partner on that. We had to design it on our own.
So the consent decree required a gray build solution that cost
about twice as much as a green build approach, but we had to
come up with a green build approach by a date certain. We had
to do all of the research and the evaluation behind it, and if
we wanted to follow that approach, we were not given the
extension of time in order to meet the requirement of dealing
with that one issue.
So if our green build solution was not approved, we had to
have a gray build solution that was ready to go or else we
faced very, very stiff penalties.
Mr. Gibbs. OK.
Mr. Portune. So what we had to do was go forward on
parallel tracks and design both, very expensive, very time
consuming, resources wasted, as opposed to there being a
flexible approach. It was still very much in the adversarial
relationship as opposed to a partnership relationship, which is
what we need in local communities and working with EPA.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Poltak. Could I just add relative to the 5-year permit
just one quick?
Mr. Gibbs. Go ahead.
Mr. Poltak. The 5-year permits that ensure compliance with
water quality standards are a real problem in terms of not
being able to extend that time period associated with being
able to meet in a conceptual sense the requirements that we are
trying to address under an integrated planning approach. I mean
it just goes without saying.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, and thank you to the panel
both for your work on this very important issue and for you
testimony.
I want to stay on this 5-year permit issue, and I
understand the concern that water quality solutions obviously
could take longer than 5 years, and if you have a 5-year permit
what happens at the end of it.
But my understanding is that the EPA has built in extended
periods of compliance to 5-year permits. For example, the city
of Boise has a permit that memorializes obligations for 10
years after the permit begins; the same with the city of
Chicago. For Milwaukee it is 7 years.
So I guess my question is: is this an example of selective
use of discretion on the part of the EPA such that it is not
something that all communities can count on?
So I guess my fundamental question, Mr. Poltak, is if the
EPA is willing to do it for the communities that I have cited,
and I am sure there are others, why is it that there is not the
capacity to do it for other communities?
Mr. Poltak. The way I can answer is we would expect that to
be the case nationwide. Our communities in our region are
saying that there is no financial forgiveness in the integrated
planning process, and the cities are well aware of that.
But in terms of being able to deliver on the mandates that
are mounting and the costs that are escalating, we have to have
that way of thinking incorporated into our regions through
headquarters as a message. It has to be the case to make this
work.
Mr. Bishop. So I am sorry. I want to just put this in my
own words. So you are saying that the regional offices, let us
say, that have jurisdiction over Boise, they are getting the
message from headquarters, but the other regional offices are
not. Is that basically what you are saying?
Mr. Poltak. I think what I am imply saying is what we are
talking about here in terms of added flexibility and extended
permit time limit has to become a national policy that is
allowed to be negotiated.
Mr. Bishop. Anyone else want to comment on this particular
issue? Mr. Berger.
Mr. Berger. I do think it is based upon individual cities,
individual relationships that get built between cities and
certain Administrators.
I think what is also important here is not just the idea of
longer permits, but the adaptive management approaches and also
building that into approaches that are outside consent decrees,
allowing these to be part of the natural, the framework of
permitting that is allowed and that gives cities the shelter
that the Agency believes the consent decrees give from citizen
lawsuits.
These are things that ought to be a part of the framework
available to every city, and I want to emphasize that idea of
every city in the United States having the opportunities under
the Clean Water Act framework. Part of our concern from the
Conference of Mayors with the other 2 bills that are offered is
that the pilot program is limited to a number of cities, 15 per
year, and with the Clean Water Affordability Act, discretion
remains entirely with the Agency.
We believe that there has to be a real opportunity within
the law that limits the EPA's discretion; that, in fact, gives
cities shelter they can rely upon, not relying upon
individuals, not relying upon the personalities of regional
offices or even personalities here in headquarters.
A big concern I have right now is that Mr. Perciasepe has
announced that he is going to be leaving. A concern we have is
how much momentum is going to be lost because his leadership is
leaving the Agency, and does that signal to those in the
regional offices that the pressure is now off and it is back to
business as usual?
Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
I just have one more question and, Mr. Portune, it is for
you. You spoke in your testimony quite favorably about using
green infrastructure approaches as both a means of addressing a
problem and as well as saving money over both the short term
and the long term. Can you talk more about that, just what sort
of broad-based advantages green infrastructure approaches
provide to municipalities?
Mr. Portune. Yes. Ranking Member Bishop, thank you very
much.
Our experience is that green infrastructure, watershed
management, daylighting streams, riparian issues, detention
areas to keep rainwater out of sewers, things of that nature
give us an opportunity, number one, to transform neighborhoods
because the green solutions are also the kinds of things that
people want in their communities, so not huge gray build,
overbuild type of things that dominate a neighborhood, but they
lend themselves to community beautification and other quality
of life issues that are very important.
Second, the green build approaches tend to be less
expensive, and yet they are more efficient and quicker to put
into place. So the benefit that we see there obviously is we
can get the job done quicker. We can also get the job done
cheaper, which is important to our ratepayers.
The one issue that I mentioned earlier with respect to the
two approaches where we still had to meet the deadline, there
as a savings of about $250 million. The gray build approach was
almost twice as expensive as the green building approach. So,
therefore, having the flexibility to implement new
technologies, new science, green build approaches, adaptive
management, watershed management is very important to local
communities for those reasons.
I did want to say one other thing, Chairman Gibbs, if I
may, with respect to Mayor Berger's comment about H.R. 2707.
The 15 showcase communities is not a limitation in terms of
flexibility or the full implementation of an integrated
planning process. We embrace that fully for all cities. That
flexibility has to be built in for all cities, and what that
bill does is it requires reporting, accountability,
transparency with respect to all of that, and congressional
oversight so that we have EPA consistently implementing its
policy completely.
The 15 communities is to build a partnership relationship
that becomes cultural within the Agency and to build the data
so that EPA becomes much more comfortable with green build
approaches than they are today.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much.
I am way over my time, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
indulgence.
Mr. Gibbs. No problem. Mr. Crawford.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have just a quick question of all of you. In my district
in Arkansas, we are kind of struggling with the critical
habitat designation that will affect about 41 percent of the
States. So as you can imagine, there are a lot of small cities
and towns, a lot of municipalities that are concerned about how
that will impact them in obtaining permits.
I am just wondering from each of you if you can comment if
you have had any experience with obtaining permits from the EPA
because of an endangered species or the potential of an
endangered species that resides in a body of water like, for
example, a river that you might utilize for discharge after
treatment.
Any comments on that? We will start with Mr. Berger.
Mr. Berger. No experience in water, but we have dealt with
Indiana bat habitat issues and associated concerns like that.
Mr. Crawford. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Portune. I wish I could help you, but no direct
experience with that, Congressman, in Cincinnati, Hamilton
County, with what we are doing at this point.
Mr. Crawford. OK.
Mr. Meyer. Congressman, since we are neighbors, we have
similar problems. Our DNR is trying to implement ammonia to
protect mussels. Missouri is unfortunately mussel rich, and we
have plenty of them. Some of the smaller communities will see
increases from $32.75 a month to $354 per month just to address
ammonia for mussels.
This is a community that has 155 residents, 45 connections.
They have absolutely no way to pay for it. The permit was
issued.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you.
Mr. Poltak. Representative, we have had a lot of experience
in New England associated with that type of issue. It is a
long, costly, negotiated process to get to an endpoint. I would
be glad to put my staff in touch with yours and follow up to
any level of detail you might be looking for in that regard.
Mr. Crawford. That would be great, any input you could have
based on your experience and how you might expedite the
process. I know that it can be a problem.
Mr. Meyer, you mentioned the mussel. That is primarily the
issue that we are having in Arkansas is the Neosho Mucket and
the rabbitsfoot mussel. So we are experiencing a similar
problem downstream from you.
Mr. Meyer. In our opinion, mussels are very delicious.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mrs. Napolitano.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman Gibbs and Ranking
Member Bishop, for holding this very important hearing on the
affordability and flexibility within the EPA permits.
As a former mayor, I know how devastating unfunded mandates
are to our communities that are trying to do their best and the
right thing in addressing the environmental needs of our
Nation's communities, but also let us not forget and be aware
that more new laws and their unintended consequences could have
a problem with you.
Cities have been facing budget restrictions, and the
recession has hit them hard, and with more unfunded mandates
this is not necessarily something that we want to go over
lightly, but be sure that we do protect our cities.
EPA's integrated planning framework is a very good first
step towards addressing the financial burden that many cities
are facing with meeting their obligations under the Clean Water
Act, but more, much more needs to be done to address the
current and growing disparity in the water costs on the poor,
and I stress that, the poor.
The biggest problem facing my district in Los Angeles
County is the expected cost of implementing a new municipal
stormwater permit. It has increased the amount of total maximum
daily loads, the TMDLs, of pollutants regulated to 33 from the
last permit, which was two TMDLs.
The Public Works Department of L.A. County, 13 million
people, say the permit will cost at least $850 million per year
to comply. That is million. That means every city with 50,000
residents will have to pay approximately $10 million per year.
Mr. Chairman, I ask to submit for the record a letter to
you and Ranking Member Bishop from my constituent, mayor of
California's city of Monrovia, Mary Ann Lutz, with an attached
report from the U.S. Conference of Mayors regarding financial
impact of Clean Water Act permits on just some of the
economically vulnerable cities in Los Angeles County.
Mr. Gibbs. So ordered.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, sir.
Mayor Lutz is the leader in the L.A. County water quality
issues and helping our cities and the Council of Governments
deal with the new MS-4 stormwater permits. She states that ``it
has become readily apparent that the cost for water and
wastewater mandates has grown to an alarming rate and is
disproportionately impacting our poorest and our most
vulnerable citizens.''
The problem is EPA established affordability guidelines
based on median household income at a maximum of 4.5 percent,
which does not take into account personal household income.
This means that poor people pay far more as a percentage of
their income towards their water bill than anybody else.
The Conference of Mayors report cites examples from
communities in the L.A. region that were surveyed, and that is
in the record. Every city experiences the greatest financial
impact amongst the lower median income household groups,
especially those households with annual income below $15,000.
Residents of the city of La Verne in my district currently
experience regressive financial impacts from public water costs
in households earning up to $50,000 in annual income. The
poorest households in several cities are spending a significant
amount of their actual income over a 10-year period on public
water services and the compliance with various Federal and
State regulations: in the city of Inglewood, $30 million; La
Verne, $25 million; Redondo Beach, $29 million, and La Mirada,
$9 million; the poorer half of the American households
currently bear a disproportional financial burden paying for
public water services. With the new L.A. County stormwater
permit, this proportionate burden will creep into the middle-
class income groups.
Mr. Chairman, we need to seriously look at this issue and
try to find some commonsense solutions that still protect
public health and the environment, but do it in a way that does
not necessarily burden our low-income and middle-income
residents.
And to that I want to add that we need to help cities
develop information for their public-private partnerships and
be able to find other means of being able to support doing the
remedies that are expected of all of us. We have, of course, in
the U.S. some of the best water than other countries, and we
need to be able to protect that, but also ensure that this
proportionate impact does not hurt those communities that
really cannot afford any more unfunded mandates.
And with that I return the balance of my time.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am glad my colleague from California talked about the
affordability issue. That is, frankly, why we are here. I know
it was addressed a little earlier before about the disconnect
between what happens here in Washington versus what happens on
the ground in the regional offices that regulate States like
mine.
As a matter of fact, just a few weeks ago in this hearing
room a Deputy Administrator from the EPA told me he was at a
loss when I brought up the fact that they were regulating
aboveground septic discharge units in Illinois when we were
talking about the new proposed rule under the Clean Water Act.
So it does not surprise me when we hear examples that Mr.
Meyer talked about of a community that is going to face a
burden upwards from $30 a month to $300 a month just to get
water due to the impacts of regulations out here in Washington,
and it is affordability. All Americans when you look at
statistics, the wages for American families have gone down
every year since 2007. American families are not living in a
healthy economy right now, and they are having to do more with
less.
It seems as though while we are asking American families to
do more with less, agencies like the EPA are asking cities to
provide more regardless of the cost. Now, this affordability
issue has got to be addressed because in the end, the burden
falls on the taxpayers, falls on the hard working families in
this country.
So on the affordability issue, and I want to ask each of
you to respond, how optimistic are you that the EPA will adjust
its affordability guidelines and move away from its enforcement
approach to the clean water requirements in order to allow
communities like yours, Mr. Meyer, and like yours in Hamilton
County, to prioritize your requirements based upon the cost
versus the environmental impact?
And what suggestions do you have to us as a legislative
body to make some positive changes in this arena?
Mr. Berger. I have a couple of things to say in that
regard. The first would be that we applaud the current
discussion. We want to see integrated planning go forward.
But in addition Congress needs to change the Clean Water
Act because the language of the act has enabled this set of
regulatory actions to be fostered in a thoroughly unlimited
way, and so, for example, there is language in the act that
says there will be no sanitary sewer overflows. It is absolute,
regardless of what the environmental impact is.
And I have sanitary sewer overflows in my community.
Mr. Davis. Most communities do.
Mr. Berger. There is no demonstrable public health or
environmental impact from spending millions of dollars to
eliminate those SSOs, but the Agency has no discretion because
of the way the act is written.
Furthermore, there is in the law what are called use
attainability analyses, and it is the fact that law requires
that the Agency is to determine that certain uses can, in fact,
be obtained, but the Agency minimizes that, discourages States
from using it. The law needs to be changed to make certain that
this provision for use attainability analyses of the Clean
Water Act, in fact, undergirds all the regulatory decisions
that are being made so that we are not spending money on
streams.
I have an intermittent stream. That term means it dries up
in the summer. So when we start looking at all of the range of
potential wildlife in the stream, the river may not ever make
it just because it all dries up in the summer.
Those kinds of language changes within the law are
necessary. So we must have integrated planning. It must work.
The regional offices must get the message, but we have to have
changes in the Clean Water Act as well.
Mr. Davis. Thank you.
Mr. Portune.
Mr. Portune. Congressman, thank you for asking the question
and also Congresswoman Napolitano for raising the issue of
affordability, both of you in bringing our attention around to
that. It is critically important.
First, in direct answer to your question, we do not believe
anything short of an act of Congress is going to compel the EPA
to effectively and responsibly address the issue of
affordability in a way that provides real relief to those who
need it. There is no sense of proportionality or balance with
EPA on this issue at all.
My general fund budget for everything we do as a county,
sheriff, corrections, the courts, coroner, auditor, treasurer,
general government services is $210 million a year. I have to
raise in excess of $220 million a year new, on top of that,
just to meet our consent decree obligations under the Clean
Water Act, and when we raise those issues, the reaction that we
get typically is, ``Well, it is the law. You have to do what
the law requires.''
So there is no sense of proportionality in terms of
prioritization, of what is more important or things of that
nature. We need Congress to act.
Now, I applaud what the Conference of Mayors is doing and
others that want to change provisions in the Clean Water Act.
Those things will provide immediate relief. We have avoided
proposing that in H.R. 2707 because we thought that would,
frankly, result in a long, elongated, contentious legislative
process that might not get anything done, and we need help now.
We need relief now.
So what H.R. 2707 does is, one, it codifies this entire
process of integrated planning, flexible approaches, adaptive
management practices, and compels annual reporting on that and
compliance with that and consistency among the regions and
within the regions on that. That will be of direct help.
And, second, the showcase communities program will develop
a body of data that all communities can benefit from with
respect to an entire new way of addressing these issues that
save dollars.
The poorest in my community are poverty stricken families.
Households have gone up by 60 percent in the last 10 years. I
have got over 50 percent of children living in poverty in my
community, but those are the very families that will benefit
from the $500 million to $1 billion in savings that we will
realize from a mandated flexible approach that allows us to
prioritize and use new processes, new approaches that will save
money.
To us a dollar saved is just as important as a dollar
given, and being able to save money is critically important,
and we need that help now.
Mr. Davis. Thank you.
If the chairman will allow him to answer.
Mr. Gibbs. Go ahead.
Mr. Meyer. I agree that Congress needs to act. We would
like to see this committee to cosponsor H.R. 3862. We believe
that does bring some responsibility to EPA.
We also have ephemeral streams. They only flow 3 to 4 days
after it rains, yet they are classified and must be fishable/
swimmable. Can you imagine somebody fishing in a gravel bed?
And that is what it would amount to. They only flow when it
rains.
There are a number of cities that have the experience that
I just mentioned to you. They are smaller communities. We see
absolutely no way that they can afford these permits, and it
has been issued. In fact, the only way that we can see this
village can meet their regulations is to close their treatment
systems and use the facilities in Unionville 30 miles away.
Mr. Davis. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Go ahead.
Mr. Poltak. I will be quick. When I go around and talk to
young college students and I talk to young adults associated
with the history in our Nation of clean water, I always
emphasize that the Clean Water Act is probably one of if not
the most successful statutes we have had in place over time to
deal with clean water issues. That is, in fact, the case.
I just give you Boston Harbor as an example. I use a
picture of my son who is now 32 years old standing in Boston
Harbor when we could not get on a boat when he was 3 years old
because it was too contaminated to spend a day out in the
harbor, and now he is fishing for stripers off the shore in his
professional working career when he has time off.
I hate to elaborate, but my point is that the EPA has also
done a wonderful job over the years. I do not tend to bash
them. Without the EPA we would be nowhere respectful of the
success stories that we can share here today.
I want to plea to you all associated therewith that the
mandates we are talking about, the elimination of nutrients,
phosphorus, the like in our water bodies which is existing
throughout New England as a matter of course, the nonpoint
source program is voluntary. We cannot continue to ratchet down
on treatment facilities and utilities to get the job done when
we are trying to at this point--well, we just cannot go much
further with it.
With that said, my point is that we need help out of
Congress. The age-old way of funding water may not be the way
of the future. We cannot sustain our needs and the obligation
that the Federal Government has to make, which has assured
success in the past, without a recommitment and reinvigorating
new concept, idea, commitment, whatever it takes.
The fact of the matter is that the greater good is served
by further Federal dollars associated with the point of clean
water, and without it we cannot get the job done. It becomes
unaffordable, and the level of commitment and burden that is
placed on our citizens is intolerable. So I mean, that is where
I am coming from.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Ms. Edwards. We lost her. Mr. Mullin.
Mr. Mullin. Well, I will leave it to Rodney to do that. I
appreciate it because it sped me up. I thank you for that.
Panel, thank you for being here. Is it Berger? Is that
right, Mr. Berger?
Mr. Berger. Yes, sir.
Mr. Mullin. Just what the chairman said about you driving
10 hours to be here shows your dedication to your town and the
importance that this has on all the communities around the
country.
This is also something I have dealt with. See, I have been
in this business for over 17 years, not politics, but this
right here. I am actually a licensed operator. I operate
plants, and I have operated plants, and I saw a great shift
over the last 7 years where DEQ used to regulate me, and that
is where I still receive my licensing from, and I am sure that
is still where you receive your license from, but yet they have
zero impact anymore because it is the EPA now that is calling
all the shots.
My question to the panel, and I will let you kind of
elaborate on this: is where does the role play now with DEQ?
I mean, I used to complain about DEQ all the time, the
Oklahoma DEQ, Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality, and
I have worked in many of your all's States with the company
that we own that is called Mullin Environmental, and we process
waste and water, and the compliancy now that the EPA is putting
out there, you cannot comply with it, not with the technology
that is here, not on the backs of these small communities.
Yet DEQ had some common sense to them because they lived,
worked, and breathed in the same communities. Now that the EPA
has come in there, and I have heard this over and over again
from the panel, there is no common sense. There is no
justification or rhyme or reason, but yet you are having to pay
for it.
Mr. Meyer, I heard you say that one community, which I
represent a very rural community, all the actually rural
communities in Oklahoma on the eastern side; one community
where their water bill is going to go from $30 to $300 to
comply with the new mandates. Did I hear that right?
Mr. Meyer. Yes, sir. That is correct.
Mr. Mullin. Because of the EPA requirements. Now, has
anybody gotten sick in that community? Has DEQ failed to do
their job?
Mr. Meyer. No, sir. Nobody has gotten sick. We see very
little impact on the human health due to SSOs. We need to stop
them, but let's do it in an affordable manner.
Mr. Mullin. But is the EPA's role here not to protect the
health and safety of others when it comes to pollution and
clean water, what we are drinking, right?
Mr. Meyer. That is correct.
Mr. Mullin. Was that not the same role that DEQ was playing
inside the State?
Mr. Meyer. We have found that our DNR, and it feels great
to be here today. I have got Illinois. I have got Oklahoma. I
have got Arkansas.
Mr. Mullin. Well, Oklahoma is better. We all know that. I
mean, come on.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Mullin. I mean look at us. You know which one looks
better.
Mr. Meyer. But our Department of Natural Resources is
centered in Jefferson City. They have delegated the work with
us to the region, which is in Springfield, Missouri. We have
found that the people on the ground do understand the issues.
They do understand affordability, but they also do have their
hands tied.
Mr. Mullin. So, Mr. Berger, inside your community?
Mr. Berger. We had a long-term control plan actually
approved by the State of Ohio.
Mr. Mullin. By DEQ?
Mr. Berger. By our Ohio EPA, and that was preempted 10
years ago after 5 years of our beginning implementation, and
that price tag on that approved plan was $60 million.
What we are now negotiating is a consent decree that we
have been working on for over 10 years. That price tag is
approaching $150 million.
And so the State's EPA, Ohio's EPA was neutered in the
process, and we are the ones that had to insist in the last
year and a half that they needed to be back at the table
because we were getting caught between obligations on our NPDS
permit versus what the consent decree was now obligating us to.
So, again, it goes back to the issue of a balance of
relationships, a stewardship approach that is now lacking. It
is much more a top down approach from the regional office to us
and to the State.
Mr. Mullin. I think it was you, sir, that had mentioned
about the fines.
Mr. Berger. Yes, sir.
Mr. Mullin. Can you elaborate a little bit just for the
record of what these fines are being paid for because of?
Mr. Berger. My understanding is that the fines are a part
of a consent decree process which is in itself necessary
because of our violations of the Clean Water Act.
Mr. Mullin. But you have not had any violations with your
State agencies. These are all from Washington, DC. They are the
ones giving you the fines, right?
Mr. Berger. Correct.
Mr. Mullin. And how much have you spent in your community?
Mr. Berger. We are now in the process of spending another
$25 million. We had spent $10 million up to that point.
Mr. Mullin. In just fines?
Mr. Berger. Not in fines, no.
Mr. Mullin. In trying to comply.
Mr. Berger. The fines we have not yet paid, and I am
unwilling to pay them.
Mr. Mullin. And I support you in that, too. You have
critical infrastructure needs. You are trying to comply with
unfunded mandates, and if they are going to throw it out, then
they should be giving the States the financial resources to be
able to do it, not put it on the backs of these small
communities.
But so many of these agencies, they have never even lived
in these communities, and yet they do not understand the impact
it is going to have like, Mr. Meyer, you saying one community
with 150 people and their water bill is going to go from $30 a
month to $300 a month, and most of them will not be able to
afford that.
Do you want to respond to that?
Mr. Chairman, do you mind if he responds to that?
Mr. Meyer. That is absolutely correct. I just want to say
that is absolutely correct.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, panel, for being here.
And I went over my time. Chairman, thank you for
entertaining my lateness.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Davis from Illinois wanted a rebuttal, but
we are not going to let him do it.
I want to thank all of the witnesses for coming in. This
has been very helpful, and it is my intent and commitment that
we need to move forward with some legislation to address all of
your issues, and we will be working that. But this hearing
today was very helpful to get to that point.
So thank you for coming and have a safe trip back.
That concludes the hearing.
[Whereupon, at 11:25 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8819.127


