- OPERATION ALLIES WELCOME: EXAMINING DHS'S EFFORTS TO RESETTLE VULNERABLE AFGHANS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OPERATION ALLIES WELCOME: EXAMINING DHS'S
EFFORTS TO RESETTLE VULNERABLE AFGHANS

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT,
MANAGEMENT, AND ACCOUNTABILITY

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON BORDER SECURITY,
FACILITATION, AND OPERATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 21, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-33

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov/

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-713 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            John Katko, New York
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island      Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Clay Higgins, Louisiana
J. Luis Correa, California           Michael Guest, Mississippi
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri            Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Al Green, Texas                      Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Yvette D. Clarke, New York           Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
Eric Swalwell, California            Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Dina Titus, Nevada                   Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey    Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Val Butler Demings, Florida          Peter Meijer, Michigan
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California    Kat Cammack, Florida
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          August Pfluger, Texas
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey
Ritchie Torres, New York
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Daniel Kroese, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT, MANAGEMENT, AND ACCOUNTABILITY

J. Luis Correa, California, Chairman
Dina Titus, Nevada                   Peter Meijer, Michigan, Ranking
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey         Member
Ritchie Torres, New York             Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex  Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
officio)                         John Katko, New York (ex officio)
Lisa Canini, Subcommittee Staff Director
Eric Heighberger, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
Geremiah Lofton, Subcommittee Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON BORDER SECURITY, FACILITATION, AND OPERATIONS

Nanette Diaz Barragan, California, Chairwoman
J. Luis Correa, California           Clay Higgins, Louisiana, Ranking
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri                Member
Al Green, Texas                      Michael Guest, Mississippi
Yvette D. Clarke, New York           Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex  Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
officio)                         John Katko, New York (ex officio)
Brieana Marticorena, Subcommittee Staff Director
Natasha Eby, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
Zachary Wood, Subcommittee Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable J. Luis Correa, a Representative in Congress From
the State of California, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Oversight, Management, and Accountability:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable Peter Meijer, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Oversight, Management, and Accountability:
Oral Statement.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Nanette Diaz Barragan, a Representative in Congress
From the State of California, and Chairwoman, Subcommittee on
Border Security, Facilitation, and Operations:
Oral Statement.................................................     6
Prepared Statement.............................................     8
The Honorable Clay Higgins, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Border
Security, Facilitation, and Operations:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................     9
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................    10

Witnesses

Mr. Michael Breen, President and Chief Executive Officer, Human
Rights First:
Oral Statement.................................................    12
Prepared Statement.............................................    13
Ms. Robin Dunn Marcos, Senior Director for Resettlement, Asylum
and Integration, International Rescue Committee:
Oral Statement.................................................    16
Prepared Statement.............................................    18
Ms. Naheed Samadi Bahram, U.S. Country Director, Women for Afghan
Women:
Oral Statement.................................................    21
Prepared Statement.............................................    22
Mr. Art delaCruz, Chief Executive Officer, Team Rubicon:
Oral Statement.................................................    23
Prepared Statement.............................................    25

For the Record

The Honorable J. Luis Correa, a Representative in Congress From
the State of California, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Oversight, Management, and Accountability:
Statement of Church World Service..............................    52
The Honorable Andrew S. Clyde, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Georgia:
Article, Wall Street Journal...................................    42

OPERATION ALLIES WELCOME: EXAMINING DHS'S EFFORTS TO RESETTLE
VULNERABLE AFGHANS

----------

Thursday, October 21, 2021

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Oversight, Management,
and Accountability, and the
Subcommittee on Border Security,
Facilitation, and Operations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 2:32 p.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. J. Luis Correa
[Chairman of the Subcommittee on Oversight, Management, and
Accountability] presiding.
Present: Representatives Correa, Barragan, Payne, Titus,
Jackson Lee, Langevin, Meijer, Higgins, Bishop, Harshbarger,
and Clyde.
Mr. Correa. The Homeland Security Subcommittees on
Oversight Committee on Oversight, Management, and
Accountability and Border Security, Facilitation, and
Operations will now come to order. Without objection, the Chair
is authorized to declare the subcommittees in recess at any
point.
We now begin by thanking everyone who is joining us today.
I would like to also thank Chairwoman Barragan and Ranking
Member Higgins of the Border Security, Facilitation, and
Operations subcommittee for coming together with myself and
Ranking Member Meijer and holding this important hearing.
We are here this afternoon to discuss Operation Allies
Welcome, the effort led by the Department of Homeland Security,
to resettle Afghan evacuees and ensure that they have the
support necessary to build their new lives here in America. We
know that this transition will not be easy, and to leave one's
home and resettle in a new country is a difficult undertaking,
no matter what the reasons are. Unfortunately, many of our
Afghan allies faced hardship long before arriving in the United
States. The Federal Government evacuated thousands of our
allies and brought them to America for a safer and more
prosperous life, but that is hardly where our obligation ends.
We now face the much greater challenge of finding communities
where these evacuees can build new lives and provide them with
on-going support.
This means ensuring that our allies will have access to
long-term housing, employment, as well as access to basic human
needs like health care, food, and clothing. Thankfully,
Americans across the country are welcoming Afghan evacuees into
their cities and communities with open arms. This should come
as no surprise, since it is a long-held American tradition to
welcome those who are looking for a better life, and it is a
tradition that makes us stronger as a Nation.
I have had the opportunity to observe first-hand how
refugees can bring new life and new opportunities to America as
well. My district is home to the largest community of
Vietnamese Americans, many of whom resettled in southern
California after the Vietnam War. They have built a home in the
United States and enrich our society, contributing to the
creation of a more diverse and prosperous community. I have no
doubt that our Afghan allies will also do the same in the
cities they decide to settle in.
We are fortunate to have seen incredible outpouring of
support, including from our veterans, faith leaders, and Afghan
American community members. While the Department of Homeland
Security seeks to provide supporting coordination services for
these organizations, it is civil society that has stepped up to
deliver the local and long-term care for our Afghan evacuees. I
am pleased to welcome today representatives from four non-
Governmental organizations that are working directly with the
Government to ensure that our Afghan allies have access to
those services and care.
This month, evacuees began moving out of the temporary
housing at military bases around the country and into local
communities that have welcomed them. But many, of course, are
still waiting to see where their new homes will be.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses how we can
best support Afghans during this critical period and what
additional support we may provide from DHS and other Federal
partners to ensure this transition is smooth. I think all of us
can agree that we owe it to our Afghan allies to get it right
the first time.
[The statement of Chairman Correa follows:]
Statement of Chairman J. Luis Correa
October 21, 2021
We're here this afternoon to discuss Operation Allies Welcome, the
effort led by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to resettle
Afghan evacuees and ensure they have the support necessary to build new
homes here in America. We know that this transition will not be an easy
one. To leave one's home and resettle in a new country is a difficult
undertaking, no matter the reason. Unfortunately, many of our Afghan
allies have faced hardships long before arriving in the United States.
The Federal Government evacuated thousands of our allies and
brought them to America for a safer and more prosperous life, but that
is hardly where our obligation to them ends. We now face the much
greater challenge of finding communities where these evacuees can build
a new life and providing them with on-going support. This means
ensuring that our allies will have access to long-term housing and
employment, as well as access to basic human needs like health care,
food, and clothing.
Thankfully, Americans across the country are welcoming Afghan
evacuees into their cities with open arms. This should come as no
surprise since it is a long-held American tradition to welcome those
who seek a better life. And it is a tradition that makes us stronger as
a Nation.
I have had the opportunity to observe first-hand how refugees can
bring new life and new opportunities to American cities. My district is
home to a large community of Vietnamese-Americans, many of whom
resettled in Southern California after the Vietnam war. They have built
a home in the United States and enriched our society, contributing to
the creation of a more diverse and prosperous community. I have no
doubt that our Afghan allies will do the same in the cities that they
settle into.
We are fortunate to have seen an incredible outpouring of support,
including from the veteran, faith, and Afghan American communities.
While the Department of Homeland Security seeks to provide support and
coordination services for these organizations, it is civil society that
has stepped up to deliver the local and long-term care for Afghan
evacuees.
I am pleased to welcome today representatives from four non-
governmental organizations that are working directly with the
Government to ensure that our Afghan allies have access to that care.
This month, evacuees began moving out of temporary housing at military
bases and into the local communities that have welcomed them. But many
are still waiting to see their new homes for the first time.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses how we can best
support Afghans during this critical period and what additional support
may be necessary from DHS and other Federal partners to ensure this
transition goes smoothly. I think we can all agree that we owe it to
our Afghan allies to get this one right.

Mr. Correa. With that, I thank you again for joining us
today. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee on Oversight, Management, and Accountability, the
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Meijer, for an opening statement.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important joint subcommittee hearing today, and thank you to
our witnesses for joining us in this discussion.
We are gathered here after months of extreme turbulence for
America and its allies following the U.S. military's drawdown
and then the full withdrawal from Afghanistan that concluded at
the end of August 2021. As a veteran of the Iraq war, and later
a conflicts analyst who served in Afghanistan with the
humanitarian aid community from late 2013 to early 2015, this
is a very personal subject, as I know it is to many in the
room. As the veterans' community saw what was happening, I
think we all felt a sense of heartbreak and rage looking at the
images coming out of Afghanistan in August after the swift
takeover by the Taliban and complete collapse of the Afghan
government and security forces.
I was one of the many Americans receiving desperate emails,
calls, texts, WhatsApp messages from friends in Afghanistan
seeking aid and assistance. This is a personal issue, as I
said, and I appreciate how personal it is for some of the other
Members and witnesses here today, and again, deeply grateful
for everyone's participation.
Despite repeated calls and warnings from a bipartisan group
of lawmakers dating back to April, the administration failed to
adequately plan for this withdrawal and was not prepared to
protect our Afghan allies who put their lives on the line to
help the United States. In the final weeks of August, the U.S.
military, State Department personnel, and others on the ground
completed incredible work under impossible circumstances,
saving countless lives in the process, and helping over 120,000
individuals leave Hamid Karzai International Airport. This
group included Americans, U.S. lawful permanent residents,
Special Immigrant Visa holders, interpreters, and other Afghan
allies, fearful of what a Taliban-controlled Afghanistan would
be.
Tragically, given the unimaginable conditions on the ground
and the fact that the country had been ceded to the Taliban,
this effort cost the lives of 13 brave U.S. service members and
scores of Afghans frantically trying to reach safety. Policy
decisions made here in the District of Columbia put our folks
in this dangerous position. But every American should take
pride in the heroism that those on the ground displayed in
their final days. Every American should, likewise, demand
accountability from officials whose decisions put them in a
position that required those very heroic acts.
My thoughts and prayers remain with those who lost loved
ones and for those who were left behind in the chaos of the
withdrawal, and I hope today we can discuss ideas to make sure
every at-risk individual who served alongside U.S. forces,
supported the U.S. mission, or otherwise, put their lives on
the line our mission is accounted for.
With the U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan having now
concluded, we have largely shifted that mission from evacuating
Afghan allies to resettling them. The United States has an on-
going moral obligation to evacuate Afghan allies left behind,
and at the same time, ensure that resettlement of individuals
who have already been evacuated is completed in a safe, secure,
and humane manner.
Operation Allies Welcome is a whole-of-Government effort
led by DHS in coordination with DOD, State Department, Health
and Human Services, and other Federal partners to provide
resources, immigration processing, medical services,
transportation, temporary housing, and a variety of other
essential services to the evacuated Afghan population in the
United States.
I know from first-hand experience what an incredibly
complex undertaking this is. Prior to serving in Congress, I
worked alongside Team Rubicon and volunteered with them which
is a veteran-based, non-Governmental organization focusing on
disaster response efforts, both in the United States and
abroad, and I am very grateful and thrilled to see them
represented here today.
While working with Team Rubicon, I witnessed first-hand
communities around the world that struggled with a variety of
crises, and our work focused on helping those communities build
back following a natural disaster. We provided vital support
and exceptional subject-matter expertise in disaster
situations, often at times working hand-in-glove with
governments around the world as well as other NGO and private-
sector organizations.
Now Team Rubicon and other NGO's are teaming up with the
U.S. Government to facilitate the successful resettlement of
Afghan evacuees through Operation Allies Welcome. Their work
encompasses a wide range of activities for providing food and
transportation to coordinating with the local communities where
evacuees will be resettled to help them find housing and
employment.
The work that NGO's are currently conducting on behalf of
Afghan nationals in the United States and around the world is
key not only to Operation Allies Welcome but to the successful
integration of these evacuees into their new communities. These
organizations are filling gaps in the capabilities of our own
Government during this undertaking, and we have a lot to learn,
and I am grateful to be having this hearing here today.
I am also excited to hear how the groups are working with
the Federal Government during this historic resettlement effort
so that we can better understand the challenges, how operations
are going, what we need to anticipate moving forward, and also
how we can help.
The evacuees arriving in the United States have already
been through so much prior to their arrival, so again, we owe
it to them to ensure the resettlement is better planned and
better executed than the evacuation was. I was proud to join a
bipartisan group of my colleagues in introducing the Welcome
Act in September to provide evacuees admitted to the United
States under humanitarian parole with the standard refugee
benefits that are provided to others. I was pleased to see this
language signed into law as part of the Government funding
measure that passed Congress at the end of September.
But there is more that we need to know, and there is more
that we need to do, and that is the purpose of this hearing. We
know this to be a long-term, large-scale operation, and as
Members of Congress, we are here to listen, to learn, and to
help in this effort.
Mr. Chairman, thank you again for holding this hearing, and
thank you to Chairwoman Barragan and Ranking Member Higgins for
leading this important hearing with us today. I am sincerely
looking forward to hearing the witnesses' testimony and
ensuring the Government is leveraging the full range of NGO's
and their capabilities to make Operation Allies Welcome a
success.
[The statement of Ranking Member Meijer follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Peter Meijer
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this important joint
subcommittee hearing today, and thank you to our witnesses for joining
us in today's discussion.
We are gathered here today after months of extreme turbulence for
America and its allies following the U.S. military's drawdown and then
full withdrawal from Afghanistan on August 30, 2021.
I served in the Iraq War and then later worked as a conflict
analyst with the humanitarian aid community, living in Afghanistan from
late 2013 to early 2015. Like so many other veterans, I was both
enraged and heartbroken by the images we saw coming out of Afghanistan
in August following the collapse of the Afghan government and the
Taliban's swift takeover of the country. I was one of the many
Americans receiving desperate calls, texts, and emails from friends and
former colleagues at all hours of the day pleading for help. This is
personal for me, and I appreciate how personal it is for the other
Members and witnesses with us here today. I am truly grateful for
everyone's participation.
Despite repeated calls and warnings from a bipartisan group of
lawmakers dating back to April, the administration failed to adequately
plan for this withdrawal and was not prepared to protect our Afghan
allies who put their lives, and the lives of their families, on the
line to help the United States. In the final weeks of August, the U.S.
military, State Department personnel, and others on the ground
completed incredible work under impossible circumstances and saved
countless lives, with over 120,000 individuals being airlifted to
safety out of the Kabul airport. This group included Americans, U.S.
lawful permanent residents, Special Immigrant Visa holders,
interpreters, and other vulnerable Afghans fearful of a what a Taliban-
controlled Afghanistan would mean.
Tragically, given the unimaginable conditions on the ground and the
fact that the administration had ceded control to the Taliban, this
effort cost the lives of 13 brave U.S. service members and scores of
Afghans who were frantically trying to reach safety. Policy decisions
made here in the District of Columbia put our people in this dangerous
position. Every American should take pride in the heroism that
Americans on the ground displayed in our final days in Afghanistan, and
every American should demand accountability from the officials whose
decisions put them in a position that required those heroic acts. My
thoughts and prayers remain with those who lost loved ones and for
those who were left behind in the chaos of the withdrawal, and I hope
today we can discuss ideas to make sure every at-risk individual in
Afghanistan is accounted for.
With the U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan now concluded, the
administration has largely shifted from evacuating Afghan allies to
resettling them. The United States has an on-going moral obligation to
evacuate our Afghan allies who risked their lives to support the the
United States that still remain in Afghanistan, and at the same time,
ensure the resettlement of individuals already evacuated is completed
in a safe, secure, and humane manner.
Operation Allies Welcome is the whole-of-Government effort being
led by DHS in coordination with DOD, State, HHS, and other Federal
partners to provide resources, immigration processing, medical
services, transportation, temporary housing, and a variety of other
essential services to the evacuated Afghan population arriving in the
United States.
I know from first-hand experience what an incredible and complex
undertaking this is. Prior to serving in Congress, I worked with Team
Rubicon, a veteran-based non-Governmental organization that focuses on
disaster response efforts both in the United States and abroad, and I
am thrilled to see them represented among our witnesses today.
While working with Team Rubicon, I witnessed first-hand communities
around the world that struggled with a variety of crises, and our work
focused on helping these communities build back following a natural
disaster. We provided vital support and exceptional subject-matter
expertise in disaster situations. We often worked hand-in-glove with
governments around the world as well as other NGO's and private-sector
organizations to ensure optimal results.
Now Team Rubicon and many other NGO's are teaming up with the U.S.
Government to facilitate the successful resettlement of Afghan evacuees
through Operation Allies Welcome. Their work encompasses a wide range
of activities, from providing food and transportation, to coordinating
with the local communities where evacuees will be resettled to help
them find housing and employment opportunities.
The work that NGO's are currently conducting on behalf of Afghan
nationals in the United States and around the world is key not only to
Operation Allies Welcome, but to the successful integration of the
evacuees into their new communities. These organizations are filling
gaps in the capabilities of our own Government during this tremendous
undertaking, and we truly have much to learn from their work and
experiences. I am excited to hear how these groups are working with the
Federal Government during this historic resettlement effort. We want to
better understand the challenges, how operations are going today, what
we need to anticipate going forward, and how we can help.
The evacuees arriving in the United States have already been
through so much. We owe it to them to ensure the resettlement is better
planned and better executed than the evacuation. I was proud to join a
bipartisan group of my colleagues in introducing the WELCOMED Act in
September to provide evacuees admitted to the United States under
humanitarian parole with the standard refugee benefits they need, and I
was pleased to see this language signed into law as part of the
Government funding measure that Congress passed at the end of
September. But there is more we need to know, and more we need to do--
and that is the purpose of this hearing today. We know this will be a
long-term, large-scale operation, and we as Members of Congress are
here to listen, learn, and help in this effort.
Mr. Chairman, thank you again for holding this hearing, and thank
you Chairwoman Barragan and Ranking Member Higgins for leading this
important hearing with us today. I am sincerely looking forward to
hearing the witnesses' testimony and ensuring that the Government is
leveraging the full range of NGO's and their capabilities to make
Operation Allies Welcome a success.

Mr. Correa. Thank you, Ranking Member, and I know this is a
personal issue for you, and I am glad you are part of this
oversight, because it is so important to you. Of course, thank
you as well for your service to our country.
The Chair now recognizes the Chairwoman of the Subcommittee
on Border Security and Operations, the gentlewoman from
California, Ms. Barragan, for an opening statement.
Ms. Barragan.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you. Good afternoon. I would also like
to begin by thanking everyone for joining us today. I would
like to thank Chairman Correa and Ranking Member Meijer for
working with Ranking Member Higgins and me to have this
important and timely hearing.
During this hearing, we will hear from diverse voices on
the ground while working alongside the Department of Homeland
Security to welcome and resettle our Afghan partners through
Operation Allies Welcome. As we have heard, DHS is tasked with
leading the coordination of resettling thousands of Afghans who
worked alongside our military and diplomats, as well as
particularly vulnerable Afghans such as journalists, human
rights workers, and women activists.
However, this resettlement mission requires a whole-of-
community approach. Multiple Federal agencies, resettlement
organizations, and nongovernmental organizations are working
with communities and companies like Airbnb day and night to
welcome new arrivals into American communities. Resettlement
agencies, like the International Rescue Commission, quickly
operationalized to provide services and humanitarian assistance
to Afghans being brought into the United States, particularly
to those housed on military bases. Civil society groups, like
Women for Afghan Women, are working to ensure the services
administered to new arrivals meet the needs of this population
while being culturally appropriate.
Afghan-American-led organizations, like Women for Afghan
Women, are particularly critical during this time. Many of
their volunteers encompass steep knowledge of Afghan customs
and languages needed to serve this population. NGO's, like
Human Rights First, have been leading voices and strong
advocates in efforts to evacuate, welcome, and properly support
the resettlement of vulnerable Afghans here in the United
States. Veterans and veteran service organizations, including
organizations composed mostly of veterans, like Team Rubicon,
have been stepping forward and galvanizing communities to help
our Afghan allies resettle and rebuild here in the United
States.
Each witness represented here holds a unique perspective
and is vital to our discussion. Operation Allies Welcome is
well under way with evacuees being resettled across the United
States. Communities Nation-wide, like the ones that I represent
in California, are preparing to embrace these families.
Supporting those who risk their lives to help our troops over
the last two decades, along with those fleeing persecution in
dangerous conditions, is the right thing to do.
That is why I am proud that Congress passed a continuing
resolution which allows evacuees to receive refugee benefits,
like temporary housing, employment training, and medical care.
These benefits are critical to meet immediate and long-term
needs. The continuing resolution also includes additional
funding for Federal agencies working to resettle our Afghan
partners. For example, U.S. citizenship and Immigration
Services received additional funding to process Special
Immigrant Visas and humanitarian parole applications. Other
agencies received funding to augment medical support and
humanitarian assistance.
As Operation Allies Welcome progresses, Congress must work,
continue to work with both Federal and non-Federal partners to
meet the needs of evacuees and advance this resettlement
mission. I am eager to hear from the witnesses on the needs of
the Afghan evacuees and how the Department can improve services
and coordination efforts under Operation Allies Welcome.
Thank you, and I yield back.
[The statement of Chairwoman Barragan follows:]
Statement of Chairwoman Nanette Barragan
October 21, 2021
During this hearing, we will hear from diverse voices on the
ground, who are working alongside the Department of Homeland Security
to welcome and resettle our Afghan partners through Operation Allies
Welcome. As we've heard, DHS is tasked with leading the coordination of
resettling thousands of Afghans who worked alongside our military and
diplomats, as well as particularly vulnerable Afghans such as
journalists, human rights workers, and women activists. However, this
resettlement mission requires a whole-of-community approach.
Multiple Federal agencies, resettlement organizations, and non-
Governmental organizations (NGO's) are working day and night to welcome
new arrivals into American communities. Resettlement agencies, like the
International Rescue Commission, quickly operationalized to provide
services and humanitarian assistance to Afghans being brought into the
United States--particularly to those housed on military bases. Civil
society groups, like Women for Afghan Women, are working to ensure the
services administered to new arrivals meet the needs of this population
while being culturally appropriate.
Afghan American-led organizations, like Women for Afghan Women, are
particularly critical during this time. Many of their volunteers
encompass deep knowledge of Afghan customs and languages needed to
serve this population. NGO's, like Human Rights First, have been
leading voices and strong advocates in efforts to evacuate, welcome,
and properly support the resettlement of vulnerable Afghans here in the
United States. Veterans and veteran service organizations, including
organizations composed mostly of veterans like Team Rubicon, have been
stepping forward and galvanizing communities to help our Afghan allies
resettle and rebuild here in the United States.
Each witness represented here holds a unique perspective and is
vital to our discussion. Operation Allies Welcome is well under way,
with evacuees being resettled across the United States. Communities
Nation-wide, like the ones that I represent in California, are
preparing to embrace these families. Supporting those who risked their
lives to help our troops over the last two decades, along with those
fleeing persecution and dangerous conditions, is the right thing to do.
That is why I am proud that Congress passed a Continuing
Resolution, which allows evacuees to receive refugee benefits like
temporary housing, employment training, and medical care. These
benefits are critical to meet immediate and long-term needs. The
Continuing Resolution also includes additional funding for Federal
agencies working to resettle our Afghan partners. For example, U.S.
Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) received additional
funding to process Special Immigrant Visa and humanitarian parole
applications. Other agencies received funding to augment medical
support and humanitarian assistance.
As Operational Allies Welcome progresses, Congress must continue
working with both Federal and non-Federal partners to meet the needs of
the evacuees and advance this resettlement mission. I am eager to hear
from the witnesses on the needs of the Afghan evacuees and how the
Department can improve services and coordination efforts under
Operation Allies Welcome.

Mr. Correa. Thank you, Chairwoman Barragan.
Now the Chair recognizes the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee on Border Security, the gentleman from Louisiana,
Mr. Higgins, for an opening statement.
Welcome, sir.
Mr. Higgins. I thank my friend, the Chairman, and the
Chairwoman for holding this very important joint hearing today.
I would also like to thank our witnesses for being here to join
today's discussions.
It has been 2 months since the United States' chaotic
withdrawal from Afghanistan. On August 29, President Biden
directed the Department of Homeland Security, who we have yet
to hear from in a hearing format, to lead the implementation of
the on-going efforts across the Federal Government to support
and resettle Afghans who were evacuated. The disastrous
withdrawal led to thousands of vulnerable Afghans coming to the
United States under various authorities, such as the SIV, the
Special Immigrant Visas, and humanitarian parole programs.
Some of these individuals are being paroled into the
interior of the United States, or they are even prematurely
leaving military bases before undergoing proper and necessary
vetting.
The Committee on Homeland Security Republicans have
received very little information from the Biden administration
on how these efforts are progressing. It is shameful, in my
opinion, that only now has the Majority decided to hold a
hearing on Afghanistan, and I am requesting, respectfully, that
the committee hold a full committee hearing with relevant
Government witnesses on the entire resettlement process,
including the screening and vetting of Afghans into the United
States.
As part of our Congressional oversight authority, the
committee must address the fallout, including any National
security threats, due to the manner in which the United States
withdrew from Afghanistan. Additionally, the committee must
also address the screening and vetting process for all Afghans
leaving Kabul during the chaotic last days.
The committee Republicans have yet to receive answers to
many questions we put to the Department of Homeland Security
despite numerous letters and attempts, dozens and dozens.
I want to be clear that we are very appreciative of the
hard work of the nonprofits and to all the organizations here
today that have stepped forward in this hour of need to help
all vulnerable Afghans who worked alongside American military
forces and our Government at great risk to themselves and their
families. We recognize the importance of your work in Operation
Allies Welcome, helping with the resettlement efforts,
coordinating donations, and logistics support, just to name a
few of your contributions. We are very grateful.
I look forward to the witnesses' testimony. I thank them
for appearing before us today. But before I yield back the
balance of my time, I again request a full committee hearing on
Afghanistan. Mr. Chairman, respectfully to your leadership,
sir, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Higgins follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Clay Higgins
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Chairwoman Barragan, and Ranking Member
Meijer for holding this very important joint hearing today. I would
also like to thank all our witnesses for being here to join today's
discussions.
It's been almost 2 months since the United States' chaotic
withdrawal from Afghanistan. On August 29, President Biden directed the
Department of Homeland Security, who we have yet to hear from in a
hearing format, to lead the implementation of the on-going efforts
across the Federal Government to support and resettle vulnerable
Afghans who were evacuated.
This disastrous withdrawal led to thousands of vulnerable Afghans
coming to the United States under various authorities such as the
Special Immigrant Visas (SIV) and humanitarian parole. Some of these
individuals are being paroled into the interior of the United States,
or prematurely leaving military bases, before undergoing proper and
necessary vetting.
Committee on Homeland Security Republicans have received very
little information from the Biden administration on how these efforts
are progressing. I am requesting that the committee hold a full
committee hearing, with relevant Government witnesses, on the entire
resettlement process, including the screening and vetting, of Afghans
in the United States.
As part of our Congressional oversight authority, the committee
must address the fallout, including any National security threats, due
to the manner in which the United States withdrew from Afghanistan.
Additionally, the committee must also address the screening and vetting
process of all Afghans leaving Kabul during those chaotic last days.
Committee Republicans have yet to receive answers to many questions we
have put to the Department of Homeland Security, despite numerous
letters and attempts.
I want to be clear that we are very appreciative of the hard work
of the nonprofits, and to all the organizations here today, that have
stepped forward in this hour of need to help all vulnerable Afghans who
worked alongside Americans at great risk to themselves and their
families. We recognize the importance of your work in Operation Allies
Welcome, helping with the resettlement efforts, coordinating donations
and logistics support, just to name a few of your contributions.
I look forward to the witnesses' testimony and I thank them for
appearing before us today. But before I yield back the balance of my
time, I again request a full committee hearing on Afghanistan. With
that, I yield back.

Mr. Correa. I thank the Ranking Member, Mr. Higgins, for
his comments.
Members are now reminded that the committee will operate
according to the guidelines laid out by the Chairman and
Ranking Member in their February 3 colloquy regarding remote
procedures. Without objection, Members not on the subcommittee
will be permitted to sit and question the witnesses. Members
may also submit statements for the record.
[The statement of Chairman Thompson follows:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
October 21, 2021
Just weeks after 9/11, U.S. military operations began in
Afghanistan--operations that would last 20 years, until this past
August. The recent withdrawal of American forces resulted in the need
to quickly evacuate U.S. citizens and Afghan allies. Our military
undertook an unprecedented airlift mission, facilitating the evacuation
of more than 124,000 people in 17 days.
The President's decision to withdraw from Afghanistan has been
fiercely debated, and there are many questions still to be answered
about how the evacuation was carried out. But the task before us now is
resettling the tens of thousands of vulnerable individuals and families
who were evacuated from their country. Many of them risked their lives,
and the lives of their families, to assist the U.S. Government and our
military over the past two decades. They served bravely in key roles,
such as translators, interpreters, and drivers, which made them
integral partners in the fight against terrorism. It is critical we
honor these Afghans' contributions by welcoming them into communities
across the United States and providing them with the support they need
to start their new lives.
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is uniquely qualified to
carry out this work given its experience bringing different agencies
together to execute a common mission. DHS often convenes partners--
including State and local governments, non-governmental organizations,
the private sector, and public--to respond to a crisis. That is why the
Biden administration tapped DHS to lead the Federal Government's
resettlement efforts, known as Operation Allies Welcome.
As the lead Federal agency, DHS helps ensure unity of effort, clear
roles and responsibilities, and effective coordination across the
Government. To date, Operation Allies Welcome has provided Afghans with
initial support such as medical care, language access resources, and
immigration assistance while they await transfer from military bases to
their new communities. But DHS and the Federal Government are not
acting alone.
The private sector and a vast network of non-profit organizations
are vital partners for ensuring Afghans have the support they need,
especially as they resettle in U.S. communities across the Nation.
Several of these non-profit partners are represented here today. I want
to thank the witnesses for joining us and express my gratitude for the
important work that you and your organizations are doing. I look
forward to hearing how Congress and the administration can support your
efforts to safely and compassionately resettle our Afghan allies.

Mr. Correa. Now I would like to welcome our witnesses.
Our first witness is Mr. Michael Breen. Mr. Breen is
president and CEO of Human Rights, one of the Nation's leading
human rights advocacy organizations. He is also an Army
veteran--thank you for your service to our country, sir--who
served in Iraq and Afghanistan.
After leaving the military, Mr. Breen served in the Office
of the White House Counsel and co-founded the International
Refugee Assistance Project, working with refugee families from
Syria, Lebanon, and Jordan.
Our second witness, Ms. Robin Dunn Marcos, served as senior
director of Resettlement Asylum Integration Programs for the
International Rescue Committee, or IRC. She oversees a staff of
over 400 that are providing Afghan evacuees with required
processing for onward travel to their final destinations, and
the IRC is running the assurance program which matches Afghan
evacuees with resettlement agencies.
Our third witness, Ms. Naheed Samadi Bahram, serves as the
U.S. country director for Women for Afghan Women, a grassroots
civil society organization dedicated to protecting and
promoting the rights of disenfranchised Afghan women and girls.
Over the past 20 years, Women for Afghan Women has provided
life-changing services, education, and training for its clients
across Afghanistan and the United States. A native of
Afghanistan, Ms. Bahram and her family migrated to Pakistan
after her mother was killed in an explosion. She moved to the
United States in 2006.
Our final witness will be introduced by our Ranking Member,
Mr. Meijer.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Our final witness is Art delaCruz, who is the chief
executive officer for Team Rubicon, as I mentioned earlier, a
veteran-based disaster response organization to leverage those
veteran skill sets as first responders to help disaster victims
at home and abroad suffering from both environmental and man-
made disasters. The organization also promotes service and
camaraderie to help veterans gain community, a sense of purpose
and identity to promote transition to civilian life.
Mr. delaCruz served honorably for over 22 years in the
United States Navy, and enjoyed a career that included a broad
range of assignments. He commanded a Navy strike fighter
squadron, spent a year with McKinsey & Company as a Secretary
of Defense Corporate Fellow, serving as a Top Gun instructor as
well, and made 6 combat deployments. After retiring, he spent
2\1/2\ years in the aerospace and defense sectors in the roles
of business development, strategy, and planning.
We are excited to have him here today and are grateful for
his participation in this hearing.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Correa. Thank you.
Mr. delaCruz, thank you for your service to our country as
well.
Without objection, the witnesses' full statements will be
inserted into the record. Now I ask each witness to summarize
his or her statement for 5 statements, beginning with Mr.
Breen.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL BREEN, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST

Mr. Breen. Thank you. Chairwoman Barragan, Ranking Member
Higgins, Chairman Correa, Ranking Member Meijer, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittees, thank you for this
opportunity to testify on Operation Allies Welcome and
resettlement of vulnerable Afghans in our communities.
Human Rights First is an independent, nonprofit
organization that for more than four decades, has pressed the
United States to take a leading role in promoting and defending
human rights. Today, we are at the forefront of the effort to
bring to safety Afghans who are in danger following the U.S.
withdrawal from Afghanistan.
After President Biden announced that he would order the
complete withdrawal of American forces from Afghanistan by
September of this year, Human Rights First and our partners
established the Evacuate our Allies Coalition, comprised of
trusted human rights and refugee organizations to work
alongside veterans and front-line civilians to advocate in the
evacuation of at-risk Afghan allies to safety. We immediately
recognized the need to protect the allies who fought alongside
the U.S. military in Afghanistan and other Afghans at risk of
persecution by the Taliban.
Through the spring and summer of 2021, we advocated for a
plan to evacuate United States territory all persons who
qualified on the Special Immigrant Visa program, estimated at
around 80,000 individuals, similar to past evacuations of
Vietnamese, Iraqis, and Kosovars following conflicts in their
countries.
We were encouraged in late July to see late-stage
applicants under the Special Immigrant Visa program brought to
Fort Lee in Virginia and hoped that the pace of arrivals would
continue increasing the remainder of the year.
But with the withdrawal of U.S. military forces and the
Afghan government's fall to the Taliban, those hopes were
dashed. We, nonetheless, continued to advocate for evacuation,
welcoming support for the resettlement of vulnerable Afghans.
With the arrival of tens of thousands of Afghans to the
United States and many more still abroad, we quickly
established Project Afghan Legal Assistance, or PALA to support
their access to legal counsel. Through PALA and our leadership
of the EOA coalition, Human Rights First is spearheading and
collaboration between U.S. legal organizations, law firms,
resettlement agencies, and other stakeholders to provide legal
representation to Afghan refugees. Through PALA, we recruited
hundreds of volunteer attorneys and interpreters to assist
Afghans with their immigration needs. We also work with
coalition and Federal agencies to identify legal challenges to
their protection and identify referral networks.
Our aim is to help secure legal representation for all
Afghan refugees arriving in the United States, and we will
continue to mobilize the pro bono community to meet that
challenge. Thousands of Afghans remain stranded in Afghanistan
or third countries, and they need a clear and viable pathway
for reaching safety in the United States. Many filed
humanitarian parole applications with the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Service. Yet, we have heard that a
handful of those have been adjudicated. Families have paid
sizable filing fees only to have their applications sit at
USCIS with no information on when or if they will be reunited
with their loved ones.
How we welcome the Afghans is as important as the legal
frameworks that make up our immigration laws. Congress can do
its part to honor the sacrifices many of these Afghans made by
our side by following these recommendations.
First, urge the Biden administration to release a plan to
evacuate allies and at-risk Afghans seeking to leave
Afghanistan and bring those located in host countries swiftly
to safety in the United States.
Second, create categorical parole programs for Afghan
nationals that prioritizes and expedites the thousands of
humanitarian parole requests filed by vulnerable Afghans
abroad, and waive all application fees associated with
applications filed by at-risk Afghans.
Third, enhance access to legal counsel to Afghans being
brought to safety by ensuring, including through oversight of
DHS, that Afghans at the 8 safe havens across the United States
have full access to legal orientations, the ability to consult
and meet with legal counsel to better prepare themselves for
what is required of them in the U.S. immigration system, and
unlimited access to attorneys for case preparation.
Finally, pass the bipartisan Afghan Adjustment Act, which
would allow Afghan parolees to have an opportunity to seek
permanent residence. They deserve an opportunity to rebuild
their lives and contribute to our communities without the fear
and limitations associated with uncertain immigration status.
As a veteran of the war in Afghanistan, I can tell you that
veterans and others who served understand the moral obligation,
not only to evacuate our allies to the United States, but also
to welcome into our country and our communities.
This is a matter of honor, but it is much more. It is an
insight into the soul of this country. Many Americans owe their
lives to our Afghan allies. We have a duty to honor their
service and our commitments by creating pathways to their
resettlement in the United States.
As a leader of a human rights organization, and together
with many thousands of my fellow veterans, I ask you to join in
our commitment to seeing our allies evacuated to safety,
welcoming Afghans as our neighbors and our friends, and helping
integrate into our communities the thousands of Afghans who
have already been evacuated to the United States.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Breen follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael Breen
October 21, 2021
Chairwoman Barragan, Ranking Member Higgins, Chairman Correa,
Ranking Member Meijer, and distinguished Members of the subcommittees:
Thank you for this opportunity to testify on Operation Allies Welcome
and resettling vulnerable Afghans to our communities.
Human Rights First is an independent, non-profit advocacy
organization that challenges America to live up to its ideals. For more
than four decades Human Rights First has pressed the United States to
take a leading role in promoting and defending human rights. Founded in
1978, Human Rights First was instrumental in working with Congress to
pass the landmark 1980 Refugee Act, which established the framework for
the United States asylum and refugee resettlement programs. Working
with veterans, former U.S. officials and other partners, Human Rights
First advocated for enactment of the Refugee Crisis in Iraq Act of 2007
to provide visas and resettlement for Iraqi refugees and Iraqis at risk
due to their U.S. ties and for issuance of Special Immigrant Visas for
Afghans in danger due to their work with the United States. Now, we add
to this legacy by working to resettle into our communities the more
than 70,000 Afghans that have arrived in the United States in the past
2 months and help bring to safety thousands more at-risk Afghans still
in Afghanistan or in third countries.
After President Biden announced he would order the complete
withdrawal of American forces from Afghanistan by September of this
year, Human Rights First and our partners established the Evacuate Our
Allies (EOA) coalition, comprised of trusted human rights, religious,
and refugee organizations who work alongside veterans and front-line
civilians to advocate for the evacuation of at-risk Afghan allies to
safety. We saw a clear need for the administration to create a plan to
save the allies who fought alongside us through the past 2 decades of
war. In the spring and summer of 2021, the Coalition called for the
immediate evacuation to United States territory of all persons who
qualified for the Special Immigrant Visa program, estimated at around
80,000 individuals.
In the intervening months, we engaged with the administration on
ways to facilitate this evacuation. Our plan pointed to historical
examples of evacuation efforts for Vietnamese, Iraqi, and Kosovar
populations following conflicts in their countries as precedent for
what could be done for at-risk Afghans. We were encouraged when the
Biden administration announced Operation Allies Refugee. The arrival of
late-stage applicants of the Special Immigrant Visa program brought to
Ft. Lee in Virginia at the end of July brought hope that the pace of
arrivals would continue, and the number of Afghans evacuated increase,
through the remainder of the year.
When the Afghan government rapidly fell to the Taliban in mid-
August, our coalition's mission took on a new sense of urgency to
ensure the rapid evacuation and rescue of Afghans who are at risk of
Taliban persecution, and their prompt resettlement in the United
States. The Evacuate Our Allies Coalition redoubled efforts to support
those who were left behind, and it continues efforts to ensure those
brought to safety are welcomed into our communities.
While August 31 saw the withdrawal of the U.S. military from
Afghanistan, the coalition continues to advocate for the evacuation,
welcome, and support for the resettlement of vulnerable Afghans.
veteran engagement
As a veteran of the war in Afghanistan, I can tell you that
veterans understand the moral obligation to not only evacuate our
allies to the United States, but also to welcome them into our country
and our communities.
Since the end of the war was announced in April of this year,
veterans have worked tirelessly on both objectives, working alongside
us over long hours to support evacuation efforts and assisting those
Afghans who made it to our soil. Many of these Afghans saved the lives
of American soldiers, and veterans recognize their duty to protect
those who fought alongside them by creating pathways to resettlement
and integration into American communities.
evacuation and the immigration process
To date, more than 70,000 Afghans have been evacuated to the United
States, with thousands more expected to arrive in the coming weeks and
months. Most Afghan arrivals are sent to 1 of 8 U.S. military bases
across the country to begin their immigration process, obtain work
authorization, and receive required medical examinations and
vaccinations.
The overwhelming majority of Afghans are admitted to the United
States on parole. When that parole expires, they will have to apply for
lasting immigration status in the United States, or risk return to
Afghanistan. Thousands remain in Afghanistan or are stranded in third
countries, seeking access to the safety and protection of United
States.
Afghan evacuees are currently required to navigate our country's
complex immigration system to find the appropriate immigration relief
without guarantee of legal counsel. Approximately 40 percent of these
arrivals are eligible for Special Immigrant Visas, while others come
from mixed-family immigration backgrounds and may qualify for
adjustment of status through U.S. citizen or Lawful Permanent Resident
family members.
Thousands of vulnerable evacuated Afghans admitted on parole--
including human rights defenders, women and children, LGBTQ
individuals, and others--may have no option but to seek asylum through
the same legally complex, paper-intensive, and backlogged system that
has prevented thousands of others from securing safety in the United
States.
These circumstances present a number of legal challenges that Human
Rights First endeavors to address.
project: afghan legal assistance (pala)
With the arrival of tens of thousands of Afghans to the United
States and many more still abroad, we quickly established Project:
Afghan Legal Assistance (PALA) to support their access to legal
counsel. Through PALA and our leadership of the EOA coalition, Human
Rights First is spearheading a collaboration between U.S. legal
organizations, law firms, resettlement agencies, and other stakeholders
to provide legal representation to Afghan refugees.
Though PALA, we organize coalition and liaison meetings with the
several Federal agencies that support Afghans through Operation Allies
Welcome to identify representation needs, rapidly communicate legal
challenges, and identify referral networks for Afghans in need of legal
assistance. We have recruited hundreds of pro bono attorneys and
interpreters to provide volunteer assistance to Afghan refugees and
have created legal resources to help volunteer lawyers to represent
Afghans in immigration matters. We will continue to mobilize the pro
bono community to help us meet our goal of securing legal
representation for all Afghans arriving in the United States who seek
protection.
action from congress and the administration
With the processing of Special Immigrant Visas and refugee
admissions slowed to a near stop in recent times, many vulnerable
Afghans have spent years languishing in danger despite clear
eligibility for resettlement to the United States.
As a result, many of the Afghans evacuees being admitted on
temporary status under normal circumstances would have qualified for
Special Immigrant Visas or refugee admission and would have entered the
country with permanent status. Instead, they are faced with uncertainty
and forced to navigate the complicated immigration system to obtain
stability in the United States. To that end, Human Rights First and our
partners are working with veteran's organizations, faith leaders, and
the Afghan American community to ask Congressional leaders to pass an
Afghan Adjustment Act to ensure that our Afghan allies and other
vulnerable Afghans receive lasting immigration status without the need
to pursue more legally complex and overburdened avenues, such as
asylum.
Other vulnerable Afghans who were not fortunate enough to be
evacuated during the summer remain stranded at risk of persecution by
the Taliban in Afghanistan or in third countries and are desperately
searching for options to bring themselves and their families to safety.
The administration must also identify pathways for such at-risk
individuals to be brought to the United States through humanitarian
parole or other non-immigrant or immigrant visas.
Since August 31, thousands of humanitarian parole applications have
been filed with United States Citizenship and Immigration Service
(USCIS), yet we have heard of less than a handful that have been
adjudicated. Families have paid sizable filing fees only to have their
applications sit at USCIS with no information on when or if they will
be reunited with their loved ones. The Department of Homeland Security
(DHS) should waive all filing fees for humanitarian parole and other
visas filed by at-risk Afghans, as our Coalition has recommended. The
mission for DHS and the Biden administration is to identify immediate
and viable solutions for Afghans who remain in danger in Afghanistan,
as well as those who are in precarious situations in third countries.
The need for a categorical parole program is clear. The thousands
of humanitarian parole requests filed by vulnerable Afghans residing
abroad must be prioritized and expedited so that these Afghan nationals
are brought to the safety of the United States quickly.
conclusion
The United States has been a historic global leader in shielding
refugees fleeing persecution. The Nation led efforts to draft the
Refugee Convention in the wake of World War II and, with bipartisan
support, enshrined its commitments into law when it enacted the Refugee
Act. For decades, Republican and Democratic administrations recognized
the moral and strategic importance of a strong commitment to providing
refuge to the persecuted. President Biden has made clear his commitment
to protecting refugees by setting the goal of welcoming 125,000
refugees in the coming year. Now the United States must complete the
mission of Operation Allies Welcome in a manner that honors our long
tradition of bringing at-risk people to safety.
On September 30, 2021, Congress passed a Continuing Resolution that
includes welcome provisions to aid Afghans overseas and provides
authorization and funds for the welcome and integration of Afghans
arriving in the United States through humanitarian parole. However,
more must be done to address the needs of arriving Afghans; an Afghan
Adjustment Act is a good start.
Until this pathway is secured, however, USCIS must work to quickly
process their asylum applications and ensure that they are not subject
to lengthy delays, a difficult task given the backlogs in the asylum
system that have been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic.
DHS must also work diligently to expedite applications for
humanitarian parole for at-risk Afghans abroad, waive the fees
associated with such applications and ensure that no effort is spared
to bring Afghans swiftly to safety in the United States.
Finally, reports of Afghan refugees being blocked, turned away, and
mistreated when they attempt to cross international borders to seek
refuge is yet another reminder that the Biden administration must
encourage other nations to uphold international law so that Afghans can
escape to safety and seek refuge. The administration can set a strong
example by upholding U.S. asylum laws and refugee treaties and
restoring access to asylum at our own borders in accordance with those
laws.
recommendations
Human Rights First's recommendations for Congress include:

Pass an Afghan Adjustment Act, which would allow Afghan
parolees who are being evacuated from Afghanistan, even those
who were advised to destroy their documents, to have an
opportunity to seek legal permanent residence. These parolees
are fleeing violence and persecution; they deserve an
opportunity to rebuild their lives in safety--and without the
fear and limitations associated with uncertain immigration
status.

Urge the Biden administration release a plan to evacuate
allies and at-risk Afghans seeking to leave Afghanistan and
bring those located in host countries swiftly to safety in the
United States. Create a categorical parole program for Afghan
nationals that prioritizes and expedites the thousands of
humanitarian parole requests filed by vulnerable Afghans abroad
and waive all application fees associated with applications
filed by at-risk Afghans.

Enhance access to legal counsel for Afghans being brought to
safety.--Ensure, including through oversight of DHS, that
Afghans at the 8 Safe Havens across the United States have full
access to legal orientations, the ability to consult and meet
with legal counsel to better prepare themselves for what is
required of them in the U.S. immigration system, and unlimited
access to attorneys for case preparation. In addition, support
funding should be offered for legal orientations and counsel to
Afghans who must navigate our complex immigration systems.

Mr. Correa. Thank you for your testimony.
I now recognize Ms. Marcos to summarize her statements for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROBIN DUNN MARCOS, SENIOR DIRECTOR FOR
RESETTLEMENT, ASYLUM AND INTEGRATION, INTERNATIONAL RESCUE
COMMITTEE

Ms. Marcos. Chairwoman Barragan and Ranking Member Higgins,
Chairman Correa and Ranking Member Meijer, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on
Operation Allies Welcome, and the resettlement of Afghans in
the United States. My name is Robin Dunn Marcos, and I am the
senior director for resettlement and asylum and integration
programming at the International Rescue Committee. The IRC
helps people whose lives and livelihoods have been shattered by
conflict and disaster to survive, recover, and regain control
of their future.
Since late July 2021, the IRC, at the invitation of the
U.S. Government, has been working to welcome, process, and
eventually resettle tens of thousands of at-risk Afghans. I
have led a team to quickly stand up services on the 8 safe
havens established at U.S. Government facilities across the
country, and I have personally served at 5 of those locations.
I am overseeing a staff of over 400 employees to register and
process Afghan guests for onward travel to their final
destinations, to coordinate interpretation services and
volunteer management, and to support Government partners to
complete medical checks and other immigration processing steps,
among other activities.
Today, across the 8 Government facilities, we are
supporting the reception and processing of over 60,000 Afghan
guests, and the IRC alone is expected to sponsor over 10,000
Afghans across our network of resettlement offices this year.
As operations have turned from a short emergency response
to a longer-term effort, the needs of guests have and will
continue to change. The IRC has strived to incorporate its full
breadth of humanitarian expertise in areas such as prevention
and response to gender-based violence, child protection, and
psychosocial support for refugees.
As with any rapid humanitarian response, challenges have
arisen. We have found the U.S. Government to be a willing
partner in addressing these problems and working toward
sustainable solutions. Some challenges, however, require the
intervention of Congress.
First, it is critical that Congress pass legislation to
ensure Afghans are able to simply and quickly adjust to lawful
permanent residence. Most Afghans arriving in the United States
are entering under humanitarian parole which will only permit
them to remain in the United States for up to 2 years and which
does not offer a pathway to lawful permanent resident status.
Second, we urge Congress to demand the Biden administration
create a categorical humanitarian parole program for, at
minimum, U.S.-affiliated Afghans who remain in Afghanistan, or
who have fled to third countries.
Third, we urge Congress to mandate reforms to the Afghan
Priority 2 resettlement program to increase applicant access,
expand eligibility, streamline processes, and improve
communications across applicants, referring organizations, and
U.S. Government program administrators.
Finally, Congress should also ensure Afghan parolees have
access to affordable and efficient legal services. Given the
temporary nature of parole and the complexity of immigration
law, Afghan parolees must receive legal screenings to
understand their options and pursue permanent status and
protection if eligible.
There are also measures the Department of Homeland Security
can take immediately to improve the on-going evacuation,
processing, and resettlement of Afghans. DHS should work in
close coordination with the IRC, other resettlement agencies,
and the State Department, to facilitate smooth transitions from
the Government facilities to final destinations in the true
spirit of a public-private partnership. The urgency of moving
guests off the Government facilities expeditiously has to be
measured against the pace of departures and the capacity of
receiving communities.
For the IRC, involvement in this domestic emergency
response is unprecedented. It is truly an historic operation in
terms of size, scope, and complexity. Each of the guests has
their own harrowing story of escape and are thankful to the
United States for bringing them to safety.
One of IRC's staff members from our Atlanta office, himself
a previous SIV recipient, went back to Kabul to help his wife
and children evacuate. He struggled to exit the country, but
was finally evacuated to Germany. After a month delay, he and
his family just arrived at one of the safe havens in Virginia,
and he is anxiously waiting for them to complete processing so
he can take them home. When asked how it felt to be back in the
United States, he replied, The feelings cannot be expressed.
You do not know how much love I have for this soil.
In this unique and urgent moment, we beckon the U.S.
Government, including the Department of Homeland Security, to
engage with the IRC and its other partners in a fully open,
transparent, and collaborative fashion. Thank you for your time
and holding a hearing on this important topic. I look forward
to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Marcos follows:]
Prepared Statement of Robin Dunn Marcos
October 21, 2021
Chairwoman Barragan and Ranking Member Higgins of the Subcommittee
on Border Security, Facilitation, and Operations; Chairman Correa and
Ranking Member Meijer of the Subcommittee on Oversight, Management, and
Accountability; and Members of the subcommittees, thank you for the
opportunity to submit a statement for the record and testify today on
Operation Allies Welcome and the resettlement of Afghans in the United
States.
My name is Robin Dunn Marcos and I am the senior director for
resettlement, asylum, and integration programming at the International
Rescue Committee (IRC). The IRC was founded in 1933 at the suggestion
of Albert Einstein and is currently at work in 40 countries and in 31
offices across 28 U.S. cities. The IRC helps people whose lives and
livelihoods have been shattered by conflict and disaster to survive,
recover, and regain control of their future. The Resettlement, Asylum,
and Integration department creates opportunities for refugees and other
vulnerable migrants to thrive in the United States and Europe, serving
more than 50,000 individuals each year through a diverse portfolio of
programs aimed at 5 core outcomes: Health, safety, economic well-being,
education, and empowerment. In the United States, the IRC has partnered
with the U.S. Government to resettle more than 412,000 refugees and
Special Immigrant Visa (SIV) recipients comprising over 100
nationalities. In my work, I oversee programming across these offices
and provide technical support to the Resettlement Support Center Asia,
which conducts overseas processing for in-bound refugees to the United
States through the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program (USRAP).
Since late July 2021, the IRC, at the invitation of the U.S.
Government, has been working to welcome, process, and eventually
resettle tens of thousands of Afghans who are at risk of reprisal at
the hands of the Taliban because of their affiliation with the United
States or other reasons. In support of ``Operation Allies Welcome'', I
have led a team to quickly stand-up services on the 8 ``Safe Havens''
established on U.S. Government facilities across the country. I am
overseeing a staff of over 400 employees, including interpreters, many
of whom are former SIV recipients, to register and process Afghan
guests for on-ward travel to final destinations; coordinate
interpretation services and volunteer management; and support
Government partners to complete medical checks and other immigration
processing steps, among other activities. The IRC is also managing the
assurance process that matches Afghan guests with 1 of the 9 sponsoring
Resettlement Agencies (RAs). The IRC alone is expected to sponsor over
10,000 parolees through the Afghan Placement and Assistance (APA
program) across its network of resettlement offices this year. By
contrast, IRC resettled a total of 3,822 refugees and SIV recipients in
fiscal year 2021 through the Reception & Placement program. Two-
thousand one hundred twenty-two arrivals were from Afghanistan.
The IRC's involvement has grown in proportion to the scale of the
operation. Initially, our activities were limited to 1 Virginia-based
government facility and focused narrowly on the reception of Afghans
who were in the final stages of Special Immigrant Visa (SIV)
processing. As the evacuation effort grew, so too did our operations.
Today, across the 8 Government facilities, we are supporting the
reception and processing of over 60,000 Afghan guests. Guests arrived
with a variety of immigration statuses, including Lawful Permanent
Residency, humanitarian parole, and U.S citizenship. Guests are
expected to stay at the Government facilities for weeks or months,
depending on their visa status and processing steps, the ability of
resettlement agencies to absorb this capacity, and public health
measures to mitigate the risks of communicable diseases.
As operations have turned from a short, emergency response to a
longer-term effort, the needs of guests have and will continue to
change. The IRC has strived to incorporate its full breadth of
humanitarian expertise in areas such as prevention and response to
gender-based violence, child protection and psychosocial support for
refugees. IRC is also ensuring that minimum standards are in place for
safeguarding and staff care for all IRC operations. Services are
expanding across Government facilities by partner entities, including
legal counseling, cultural orientation, English lessons, recreational
activities, trauma-informed psychosocial support, family reunification
services, and donations distribution.
As with any rapid humanitarian response, challenges have arisen. We
have found the U.S. Government to be a willing partner in addressing
these problems and working toward sustainable solutions. Some
challenges, however, require the intervention of Congress. We were
grateful to see the inclusion of supplemental emergency funding for the
Afghan evacuation and resettlement effort in the recent fiscal year
2022 Continuing Resolution, as well as a critical provision to extend
resettlement services to Afghans entering the country under
humanitarian parole. Additional necessary steps remain.
First, it is critical that Congress pass legislation to ensure
Afghans are able to simply and quickly adjust to Lawful Permanent
Resident status. Most Afghans arriving in the United States are
entering under humanitarian parole, which will only permit them to
remain in the United States for up to 2 years and which does not offer
a pathway to Lawful Permanent Resident status. Humanitarian parole also
does not protect Afghans from refoulement, putting them at risk of
being forcibly returned to persecution, torture, or other serious human
rights violations. Humanitarian parole was used to expedite the
admission of these individuals given the emergency nature of the
evacuation, despite these Afghans being eligible for a Special
Immigrant Visa or resettlement through the U.S. Refugee Admissions
Program. Corrective action is needed to ensure our new neighbors are
not penalized and forced to seek existing alternative protection
pathways, such as asylum, that are limited and overwhelmed. This would
likely result in tens of thousands of new asylum claims, and given the
asylum system backlog, inevitable and lengthy legal limbo for many.
Asylum applicants are subject to a 1-year wait time for employment
authorization while their application is pending and their ability to
apply for other benefits, like driver's licenses and health insurance,
would be specific to their State residency.
Second, we urge Congress to demand the Biden administration create
a categorical humanitarian parole program for, at a minimum, U.S.-
affiliated Afghans who remain in Afghanistan or have fled to third
countries. The administration is currently prioritizing American
citizens, Green Card holders, immediate family members of American
citizens and Green Card holders, U.S. embassy staff, and Chief of
Mission-approved SIV applicants. A pathway to refuge is just as
critical for persons eligible for the Priority 2 program, all Special
Immigrant Visa applicants, and family reunification cases. The
administration's commitment to these Afghans did not end on August 31.
Tens of thousands are living in fear of reprisals specifically because
of their affiliations with the U.S. Congress should create a
humanitarian parole program to guide and expedite the review of these
applicants and to grant travel documentation allowing those eligible to
travel to the United States.
Third, we urge Congress to mandate reforms to the Afghan P-2
resettlement program to increase applicant access, expand eligibility,
streamline processes, and improve communication across applicants,
referring organizations, and U.S. Government program administrators.
Eligibility should be expanded to include parents, siblings, and their
immediate families (a measure particularly critical for female-headed
households or where women are sole wage-earners); surviving eligible
family members of a deceased principal applicant; and employees on sub-
grants and sub-contracts of U.S. Government-funded efforts. Referral
processes should be streamlined and standardized across funding
agencies. Physical documentation requirements should be adjusted to
account for the realities of a humanitarian emergency: applicants
should not be turned away from life-saving approvals due to
administrative barriers. We also urge Congress to support referring
organizations to expand staffing and internal processing capacity to
support the thousands of current and former staff members now seeking
protection. Further, we urge the Department of State's Bureau of
Population, Refugees, and Migration to create an information platform
for P-2 applicants to provide up-to-date guidance and establish a
regular NGO consultation group to identify and resolve implementation
challenges.
Finally, Congress should also ensure Afghan parolees have access to
affordable and efficient legal services. Given the temporary nature of
parole and the complexity of immigration law, Afghan parolees must
receive legal screenings to understand their options and pursue
permanent status and protection as eligible. Without a legislative fix,
many Afghans paroled into the United States will have no alternative
than to apply for asylum, contributing to the already-overwhelmed U.S.
asylum system. Without affordable, high-quality legal assistance,
Afghan parolees will be set up for failure, having to navigate the U.S.
asylum and immigration system, deadlines, and requirements on their own
and often without sufficient evidentiary documentation or
identification documents, which many were forced to destroy out of fear
of Taliban reprisal precisely on account of their close association
with the U.S. mission in Afghanistan. Many will be at risk of missing
time-limited opportunities to pursue permanent protection and become
vulnerable to detention and deportation.
There are also measures the Department of Homeland Security can
take immediately to improve the on-going evacuation, processing, and
resettlement of Afghans.
DHS should work in close coordination with the Resettlement
Agencies and PRM to facilitate smooth transitions from the Government
facilities to final destinations. The urgency of moving guests off the
Government facilities expeditiously has to be measured against the pace
of departures and the capacity of receiving communities.
DHS should expeditiously adjudicate humanitarian parole
applications for Afghan nationals in a manner that does not
disadvantage existing applicants, should grant fee waivers for
humanitarian parole applications and should create an electronic
application process for these applications. To the extent DHS does not
believe it can do a mass fee waiver for this category of applicants
without a regulation, the process should be streamlined as much as
possible. Foremost, DHS must ensure robust funding for the Refugee
Corps and staffing for overseas locations with Afghans to begin
resettlement adjudications in earnest, creating safe pathways and
expediting life-saving refugee protections.
There are also operational steps that DHS can take to streamline
the processing of Afghan guests in the United States. With large
numbers of Afghan parolees being unable to access their Arrival/
Departure Records (Form I-94) from the Customs and Border Protection
(CBP) website, we urge CBP to issue hard copy Form I-94s at Ports of
Entry. U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) should support
rapid self-sufficiency in clients by issuing Employment Authorization
Documents (EADs) to guests before they depart the Government facilities
and offering EADs in a digital format.
For the IRC, involvement in this domestic emergency response in
unprecedented and it is truly a historic operation in terms of size,
scope, and complexity. Each of the guests has their own harrowing story
of escape and are thankful to the United States for bringing them to
safety. One of the IRC's staff members from the Atlanta office, himself
a previous SIV recipient, has worked for us for 2 years. He went back
to Kabul to help his wife and children evacuate and ended up trapped
behind Taliban lines. He finally got out of Kabul and was evacuated to
Germany for over a month. He and his family just arrived at one of the
Safe Haven Government facilities in Virginia and he is waiting to take
them home. When asked how it felt to be back in the United States, he
replied, ``The feelings can't be expressed! You don't know how much
love I have for this soil.''
We have witnessed a groundswell of support from the American
public. The IRC has seen a 47 percent increase in volunteer
applications in this past month compared to the same time frame last
year and recent polling by CBS News/YouGov shows that 81 percent of
Americans say the United States should help Afghan allies come to the
United States. In this unique and urgent moment, we beckon the U.S.
Government, including the Department of Homeland Security, to engage
with the IRC and its other partners in a fully open, transparent, and
collaborative fashion.
Thank you for your time and holding a hearing on this important
topic. I look forward to answering your questions.

Mr. Correa. Thank you, Ms. Marcos, for your testimony.
I now recognize Ms. Bahram to summarize her statement in 5
minutes.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF NAHEED SAMADI BAHRAM, U.S. COUNTRY DIRECTOR, WOMEN
FOR AFGHAN WOMEN

Ms. Bahram. Dear subcommittee Members, thank you so much
for this opportunity today. My name is Naheed Samadi Bahram. I
am the U.S. country director at Women for Afghan Women, the
largest women rights organization globally with over 1,200
staff working on the ground in Afghanistan.
Women for Afghan Women is based in New York, and started
its operation from New York. We have been supporting Afghans
and other immigrant communities through social, educational,
and legal services. We appreciate the launch of Operation
Allies Welcome, which is an incredibly important initiative to
safely resettle Afghans in the United States.
Women for Afghan Women and the Afghan community at large
are very appreciative of the resources and effort that have
been made so far. Some positive feedbacks I have been hearing
from the community includes the committee being available and
connecting the members of our community to governmental
departments and organizing listening sessions, where a lot of
the questions that were unknown have been answered.
The Afghan community and our allies have been also
instrumental in providing refugees with the assistance that
they need. Community members are donating essential items,
fundraising, settling apartments, and ready to welcome our
Afghan neighbors in our communities. We are eager to work with
the refugee resettlement organizations to provide the
culturally and linguistically competent services.
Through our observation with the resettlement efforts these
last several weeks, we have 3 key recommendations we hope to
collaborate on. The first one, we strongly want the involvement
of Afghans in this process, in decision making as well as
partners with the refugee resettlement organizations. As many
of us already and have expertise on this issue, many of us have
been refugees and have been through this process ourselves.
We also want to let everybody know that there are a large
group of Afghans with their expertise available to help, but,
unfortunately, not being called on. We want Operation Allies to
partner with Afghans on any of these decision making and
resettlement. For example, initially, a group of unaccompanied
Afghan minors was sent to one of the agencies where there was
no Dari or Pashtal language services. We heard that children
were speaking to the parents, and the parents try to speak
English. Once they couldn't, they tried to speak in Spanish. We
know Spanish is not the language spoken in Afghanistan.
Our second recommendation is to assess and evaluate the
conditions present in the bases where Afghan refugees are
waiting to be processed. I, myself, visited one yesterday, and
I think I was lucky to visit the best one, but I have heard so
much from the community and people that I know in the base.
Some example of that is, I had a friend whose family are in
one of the bases. Her sister got her period and was not able to
receive a pad for over 24 hours after asking multiple times.
Another family with a pregnant woman said after standing
for hours in a line for food will not get enough portion for
her and her baby to be--to feed--to be feed. She start losing
weight, and therefore, her husband has been sharing his portion
of food with her.
The other thing that I observed yesterday in one of the
bases was a lot of--there is a lot of unknown, and people are
really worried about how long they will be staying on the
bases.
Last, but not least, is during these periods of resettling,
we do understand it is a challenging period, and we have
thousands of people here, but we also want to add that
organizations like us are ready to work, and Afghans around the
country are ready to work.
I do not want to take more time, and I want to appreciate
this opportunity to testify in front of all of you, and thank
you for your time, concentration, and support of the Afghan
people. It is very personal to me, and I really appreciate the
outpouring love that we have been getting from all over the
world. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bahram follows:]
Prepared Statement of Naheed Samadi Bahram
October 21, 2021
Dear subcommittee Members: Thank you for this opportunity to
testify today. My name is Naheed Samadi Bahram. I am the U.S. country
director at Women for Afghan Women, the largest Afghan women's rights
organization globally. We are based in Queens, New York where we
support Afghan and other immigrant communities through social,
educational, and legal assistance.
We appreciate the launch of Operation Allies Welcome, which is an
incredibly important initiative to safely resettle Afghans in the
United States. Women for Afghan Women and the Afghan community at large
are very appreciative of the resources and efforts that have been made
thus far.
Some positive feedback included Afghans expressing their gratitude
for the prompt responses and assistance when reaching out to Government
departments with questions or requesting information. Listening
sessions have been extremely valuable to the community to build on this
important communication channel.
The Afghan community and our allies have also been instrumental in
providing refugees with the assistance they need. Community members are
donating essential items, providing translation services, fundraising
for resettlement efforts, and filling in gaps where needed. Many
individuals continue to reach out to us, eager to do more to support
incoming refugees.
Through our observations with the resettlement efforts these last
several weeks, we have three key recommendations that we hope we can
collaborate together on:
Our first recommendation is to strongly increase involvement of
Afghans in decision-making processes and leverage their expertise.
As you may already know, the vast majority of Afghans in the United
States came through the refugee and asylum programs, which saved their
lives and gave them hope. We must ensure that Afghans are not only
present when making decisions on organizing and strengthening
resettlement efforts, but that their voices and lived experiences are
being prioritized.
There are Afghans in the United States that have a tremendous
amount of expertise in diverse fields such as interpretation,
operations and management, communications, medical and emergency
services, law, and so much more. Operation Allies Welcome can greatly
benefit from increasing the role our community plays in making key
decisions on resettlement.
For example, in the initial stages of this initiative, many
unaccompanied Afghan minors were processed and connected to services
that did not have any Dari or Pashto language services. WAW hopes to
serve as a bridge and ensure that Government and non-Governmental
agencies have the linguistic and cultural competencies that are
integral to resettlement efforts. In fact, we have already reached out
to organizations in the New York area to see how we could provide our
assistance.
Our second recommendation is to assess and evaluate the conditions
present at military bases where Afghan refugees are waiting to be
processed.
We have received various feedback based on the different locations
Afghan refugees are waiting. Some concerning stories were shared that
we wanted to bring to your attention.
One individual shared that her family member who was waiting at a
military base for processing was on her period and repeatedly requested
pads, but was not provided with these supplies until 24 hours later.
Another family shared that a pregnant woman waited in line for a few
hours to receive food, but when she did receive her portion it was not
enough nutrition for her and she began to lose weight, therefore her
husband had to share his portion of food with her.
We fully acknowledge the challenges in providing resources to a
large group of arrivals, but are eager and willing to support Afghan
refugees in receiving basic needs during this transition. Please let us
know how we can assist.
Our last recommendation during this period where thousands of new
families are arriving, is for Operation Allies Welcome to strengthen
partnerships with organizations and groups in addition to the 9
resettlement agencies.
Women for Afghan Women has been in close contact with Lutheran
Social Services in Virginia as well as 5 resettlement agencies in New
York. We are supplementing resettlement needs by assessing what other
types of support and items are needed for newly-arrived families.
This model of partnership can be replicated in all areas where
Afghans are resettled. During this time when many groups have limited
capacity, we can increase cooperation among Government and resettlement
agencies, community-based organizations, religious institutions, and
Afghan community members that are very eager to provide culturally- and
linguistically-appropriate support and fill in gaps as needed.
Thousands of Afghan professionals are available and very willing to
provide their skills and expertise. We look forward to finding ways to
plug them into Operation Allies Welcome and leveraging all resources to
successfully resettle our new Afghan community members.
I greatly appreciate this opportunity to testify in front of you
all today, thank you for your time, consideration, and support of the
Afghan people. We truly appreciate it.

Mr. Correa. Thank you, Ms. Bahram, for your testimony.
I would like to recognize Mr. delaCruz to summarize your
statements in 5 minutes.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF ART DELACRUZ, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, TEAM
RUBICON

Mr. delaCruz. Good afternoon, Chairman Correa, Chairwoman
Barragan, Ranking Member Meijer, Ranking Member Higgins, and
Members of the subcommittees. I am Art delaCruz, the CEO of
Team Rubicon, and I would like to thank you for convening this
forum.
So Team Rubicon is a National disaster response
organization that mobilizes military veterans and civilians to
help communities prepare, respond, and recover from natural
disasters and humanitarian crises.
Founded in 2010, we have grown from 8 volunteers to
150,000, and these men and women, the majority of who are
military veterans, deploy at a moment's notice to address unmet
needs in communities across the country following floods,
tornadoes, hurricanes, fires, and the same internationally.
From Hurricane Sandy to Hurricane Ida, from tornadoes in
Moore, Oklahoma, to Kansas, to derechos in Iowa and
international responses in the Philippines, Haiti, Mozambique,
Team Rubicon is a humanitarian organization that seeks, with
support, to alleviate human suffering and provide a safer, more
stable tomorrow.
We are committed to serving people who need us in times of
emergency, and our men and women will not turn away. We respond
to all phases of the disaster cycle from mitigation efforts to
lessen the impacts of wildfires, to helping homeowners get back
into safe homes after disasters. Team Rubicon has conducted
almost 1,000 operations since our founding in 2010.
Our volunteers are called gray shirts. They serve in other
capacities to meet any disaster to include recently the
pandemic, specifically with COVID-19. We define a disaster as
anything that overwhelms a local community. Since March 2020,
in over 300 communities, we have managed to help in efforts
with food banks, setting up testing sites, facilitating
financial aid, COVID field hospitals, and medical services in
places like the Navajo Nation. We do this while simultaneously
addressing disaster response and rebuilds of houses which is
core to our mission, to include being in Louisiana since the
record 2020 season.
In December 2020, we added vaccine distribution. We have
worked closely with similar agencies. We have seen with FEMA
and the Veterans Administration to manage fixed and mobile
sites, and we created a coalition of veterans, and we are proud
to say we have achieved 1.6 million vaccinations in 105 cities.
I will take this moment to emphasize that the majority of
our volunteers are military veterans who work alongside first
responders and all sorts of civilians from every background.
They bring unique skills and experience to the forefront in the
execution of this mission, and I am joined by people from all
of these backgrounds, and they, coupled with military
specialties, bring success. We train. We have a penchant to
continue to serve that makes these services possible. These men
and women who come from all of our service, I would like to
think that they have unique schooling. It is not just the
service, it is what they learn. It is their skills. It is their
experience. It is classes and leadership decisiveness, resource
management, ingenuity, and training that make our mission
possible.
As you know, it is no surprise that veterans continuing to
serve after they take off their uniform is a legacy that we
should all be proud of.
Regarding the Afghan resettlement, as the Nation watched
the withdrawal from Afghanistan and the subsequent evacuations
and associated efforts, the veteran bias for action again
prompted our organization and many others into action.
To be clear, it is not my intent or an area of expertise to
discuss withdrawal operations or efforts. Rather, I would like
to take this time to point out that Team Rubicon, like many
organizations, was founded post-9/11, and many of our volunteer
veterans deployed to Afghanistan and forged strong and lasting
relationships. They had complex emotions during the withdrawal
like many veterans across the country, and our volunteers were
eager to assist in the resettling. Images of men, women, and
children on C-17s as they took off served as catalysts for
action.
It is time to do something, and they asked, what is the
next mission at hand? How can our organization help?
Collaboration happened quickly. Team Rubicon was asked to
consider potential roles our volunteers could serve with. We
met with organizations, the State Department, FEMA, the
Department of Defense leadership, leadership from VOADs across
the country, and base leadership.
Ultimately, Team Rubicon decided we could have impact by
managing donations. It wasn't a core mission of our men and
women. We were going to figure it out. We were going to build
the technology to do it, and we did so.
For context, after the suicide bombing, these men, women,
and children often left with nothing but the clothes on their
back. That drove the urgency for meeting their immediate needs.
From clothing to shoes, toiletries, diapers, and baby formula,
all of this had to be a priority. With no clear mechanism,
process, or authority, we collaborated, and we began to figure
this out to quickly pivot to solve this in our space.
We were initially asked to support two bases with donated
goods management. It quickly grew to 7 bases along with the
management of shipments to Holloman Air Force Base. We began
our operations on August 30, 2021, under the guidance of the
defense coordinating officers, and we continued at Fort McCoy,
Camp Atterbury, Joint Base McGuire, Dona Ana Range, Quantico,
Fort Pickett, Fort Lee, and Fort Bliss.
It is also important to note that communities across the
country rallied. Places like the Twin Cities and Chicago gave
us donations that we could pack and move into the bases. At the
time of this writing, over 4 million items at an estimated
value of $15.5 million have been distributed across the
country. These donated goods have come from across the country
from citizens who are ready to help.
As we look forward, we understand the transition into
communities across the United States will require a whole-of-
community effort. The other witnesses have already mentioned
that, and I hope this committee knows that men and women
volunteers are ready to rally to this. Other non-profits,
veteran service organizations, coalitions have answered and are
at the ready to continue this call, place incredible agencies
we have had the opportunity to work with, like Ministries 25,
Save the Children, Salvation Army, State VOAD, Samaritan Purse,
American Red Cross, International Organization for Migration,
U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops, Peace Corps, among the
many----
Mr. Correa. Mr. delaCruz, I am going to ask you to
summarize and conclude, please. Thank you.
Mr. delaCruz. Thank you again for the opportunity to serve.
We look forward to any questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. delaCruz follows:]
Prepared Statement of Art delaCruz
October 21, 2021
Good afternoon, Chairman Correa, Chairwoman Barragan, Ranking
Member Meijer, Ranking Member Higgins, and Members of the
subcommittees, I am Art delaCruz, the CEO of Team Rubicon and a 22-year
military veteran. On behalf of Team Rubicon, I would like to thank you
for the opportunity to testify before you today regarding the efforts
to resettle Afghan families.
team rubicon mission
Team Rubicon is a National disaster response organization that
mobilizes military veterans and civilians to help communities prepare,
respond, and recover from natural disasters and humanitarian crises.
Founded in 2010 in the wake of the Haiti earthquake, our nonprofit has
grown from 8 volunteers to over 150,000. These men and women, the
majority of whom are military veterans, deploy at a moment's notice to
address unmet needs in communities across the country immediately
following floods, tornadoes, hurricanes, fires, and on a limited basis,
to the same internationally. From Hurricane Sandy to Hurricane Ida,
from the tornadoes of Moore, OK to the derechos in Iowa, to
international responses in the Philippines, Haiti, or Mozambique, Team
Rubicon is a humanitarian organization that seeks to alleviate
suffering and provide a safer and more stable tomorrow. We are
committed to serving people who need us in times of emergency and that
means we do not turn away people who need help.
Team Rubicon responds to all phases of the disaster life cycle,
from mitigation efforts to lessen the impacts of wildfires in the West
Coast, expedient home repair to get homeowners back home after
devastating hurricanes, and long-term resilient home rebuilding to
ensure residents can weather the next disaster safely at home. To date,
Team Rubicon has conducted almost 1,000 operations since our founding
in 2010.
In addition to responding to traditional disasters, our volunteers,
also called Greyshirts, have served in other capacities to meet needs
associated with the pandemic and COVID-19. Broadly speaking, we define
a disaster as anything that overwhelms the resources of a community.
Since March 2020 and in over 300 communities across the country, our
volunteers mobilized to aid in staffing and managing food banks,
setting up and facilitating testing sites, assisting with financial aid
distribution, expeditiously setting up and manning domestic COVID field
hospitals, and providing medical decompression services in places such
as Navajo Nation. These efforts ran simultaneously as we continued to
deliver disaster response and rebuild services in core response areas,
such as a continued presence in Louisiana following the hurricane
response 2020 record storm season. In December 2020, Team Rubicon added
vaccine distribution to our operation set. With the approval of
vaccines under emergency use authorization, we partnered with agencies
such as FEMA and the Veterans Administration to manage fixed and mobile
sites to ensure equitable vaccination distribution across the country.
A consortium of veteran service organizations came together as the
Veterans Coalition for Vaccination (VCV) to create a Nation-wide
network of veteran volunteers to serve as a resource to augment the
efforts to convert vaccines to vaccinations. To date, Team Rubicon has
assisted in distributing over 1.6 million vaccines to over 105 cities.
I would like to take a moment to emphasize that most of our
volunteers are military veterans who work alongside first responders
and civilians from all backgrounds. Our veterans bring unique skills
and expertise to the forefront of the execution of our mission. I'd be
remiss if I did not take time to explain that it is not their military
specialties that bring Team Rubicon success, it is the cumulative
training coupled with their penchant to continue to serve that makes
delivery of our services possible. If you view the experience in the
Navy, Army, Air Force, Marines, or Coast Guard as unique schooling,
you'll be able to understand that these men and women are graduates of
classes on decision making, leadership, decisiveness, resource
management, safety, process development, training--and many others that
allow a mission to be developed and successfully executed. As you know,
veteran service after taking off the uniform is legacy and something
this Nation has seen benefit from since our earliest conflicts. Men and
women who wore the uniform of our military services tend to continue to
find ways to serve and contribute to our society.
efforts to support afghan resettlement
As the Nation watched the withdrawal from Afghanistan and the
subsequent evacuations and associated efforts, the veteran bias for
service was once again prompted into action. To be clear, it is not my
intent or an area of expertise to discuss the withdrawal operations or
efforts. Rather, I would like to take this time to point out that Team
Rubicon originated post-9/11, and many of our veteran volunteers
deployed to Afghanistan and forged strong relationships with Afghan
translators and linguists. While processing complex emotions of the
withdrawal, our volunteers, like many veterans across the country, were
eager to assist their Afghan allies in resettling. Images of men,
women, and children on C-17s as they took off from Kabul, served as the
catalysts for thinking about what mission might lie next for our
volunteers and how they could positively impact the futures of the
Afghan families. What might be the next task at hand? How could an
organization with many veterans with first-hand experience contribute?
Team Rubicon was asked to consider potential roles our volunteers
could serve in the Afghan resettlement efforts. Initially, we met with
organizations convened by the State Department that included FEMA,
Department of Defense leadership, leadership from Volunteer
Organizations Active in Disasters (VOADs), and base leadership.
Ultimately, Team Rubicon decided, in collaboration with these agencies,
that an area where we could have immediate and direct impact was in the
management and distribution of donated goods. Though we had no core
mission centered on donation management, it was clear that the needs
would be urgent and great.
After the suicide bombing, the evacuees were limited with what they
could bring aboard the evacuation flights. Many literally fled with the
clothes on their backs and if lucky, had a backpack of belongings. They
would arrive with nothing so it would be critical to meet their
immediate and basic needs, including a change of clothing. Other items
such as toiletries, diapers, and baby formula would also be priority.
With no clear mechanism, process, or authority to receive these
donations from the community, partners or corporate sponsors, Team
Rubicon had a massive task ahead. The enablers built during our COVID
operations, allowed us to quickly pivot and problem-solve in the space.
Our tech team built out an inventory system to keep track of donations
and meet needs as they arose. We were initially asked to support 2
bases with donated goods management and that quickly increased to 7
bases, along with the management of donation shipments to Holloman Air
Force Base.
Team Rubicon began our operations on August 30, 2021, under the
guidance of the Defense Coordinating Officers at the respective bases.
Within days, the volunteers were able to begin collection operations.
They collected items based on the unique needs of each base,
established locations to collect and sort donations, and created
processes for needed items to be shipped to the bases for distribution.
At Fort McCoy, Wisconsin, we designed a manual that could be
replicated at Camp Atterbury, Joint Base McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst, Dona
Ana Range, Quantico and Fort Pickett. Donations drives were launched in
larger cities to collect donations en masse at the United Center in
Chicago and at the Minnesota Twins' Target Field Stadium. An ad hoc
partnership was formed with community organizations; the Salvation
Army, Goodwill, local churches and community leaders served as local
donation points and leadership teams at Camp Atterbury designed packing
and sorting processes that were implemented State-wide. Each base
established an Amazon wish list to meet the ever-changing needs on the
ground. At the time of this writing, over 4 million items, at an
estimated value of $15.5 million, have been distributed and 2.8 million
items were sorted and ready for distribution. These donated goods came
in from across the country and Team Rubicon served to communicate
needed items, received the donations, and ensured they were distributed
on the bases. It was, and still is, heartening to see the outpouring of
support from communities and people across the country and we continue
to receive donations even as we speak.
In addition to donated goods management, Team Rubicon is serving at
all points of the resettlement process including providing cultural
advisors to ensure that all donated items are culturally appropriate.
Further, we provided logistics support and translators as Afghan
families first arrived via Dulles Airport. Finally, we are currently
setting up housing units for families as they move from bases into
communities and anticipate this occurring more frequently across the
country as the resettlement process continues.
As we look forward, we understand that the transition into
communities across the United States will require a whole-of-community
effort. We have started conversations with Welcome.US and the Operation
Allies Welcome to explore how our capabilities can be extended to meet
additional needs.
I will conclude by stating that what Team Rubicon has done is a
small portion of the work being conducted across the country on behalf
of the Afghan families. Other nonprofits, veteran service
organizations, and coalitions have answered and continue to answer the
call to ensure the resettlement process continues. Families will leave
these bases and begin new lives in communities across the country.
Housing and employment, schooling, building new friendships,
establishing community relationships, and creating new bonds to our
culture while retaining their own will all be efforts that we can
impact. Veterans, with their unique connection and bonds from serving
with the Afghans, have the ability to lead and activate the upswell of
support that will continue and grow in the coming months and years
across this country, and I am confident they are up to the task.
conclusion
Members of the committees, thank you again for the opportunity to
share Team Rubicon's mission, the on-going needs of Afghan families in
the United States, and our efforts to support these needs. To date
1,081 volunteers have deployed to support this effort and our
volunteers will continue to raise their hands as needed.
We look forward to continuing to work with Congress and Government
partners. I look forward to answering any questions you may have and
working with the committees in the future.

Mr. Correa. Thank you very much, Mr. delaCruz. I want to
thank all our witnesses for your testimony.
I will remind the subcommittee that we will each have 5
minutes to question the panel, and I will recognize myself for
5 minutes of questions.
Following up on Mr. delaCruz' comments and Ms. Bahram,
Operation Allies Welcome was a big operation. Last week, I was
visiting a lily pad in Qatar, trying to take in the magnitude
of the mission. I did a lot in very quick time. Yet, as you
have all mentioned, there is so much left to do. What has your
experience been working with the Department of Homeland and
Federal partners?
Ms. Bahram, you mentioned the need for something beyond
humanitarian parole for some kind of a permanent residence, and
Mr. delaCruz, you talked about the fact that folks have some
skills, and we are trying to figure out how to place those
skills, how to use those skills in the United States.
Ms. Bahram, you mentioned that when--some people are
being--the language challenge. Some Afghans are being spoken to
in Spanish. In the 1960's, I had that experience. I was just
sitting there because nobody spoke Spanish, so I know the
feeling. But the challenge today is how do you get somebody's
attention to your issues? Do you feel you have a go-to person
or agency that will address your concerns? Ms. Bahram.
Ms. Bahram. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes, we have. We have
reached out to Department of Homeland Security, and they
arranged a session with us, a listening session where they
answered a lot of our questions. Fortunately, a day after that
session, I still was in touch with the agency that had the
children, and the translation service that they were using was
Google translation.
Mr. Correa. How about you, Mr. delaCruz? Do you feel you
have got some access to some folks who can make some decisions
for you and help the process?
Mr. DelaCruz. Sir, in our process, the coordination has
been good, and particularly with the Federal coordinating
officer and the defense coordinating officers on the base. They
are serving as our primary conduit between both our volunteers,
other volunteers, and the Afghan humanitarian parolees, sir.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Breen, same question.
Mr. Breen. Thank you. Our coordination has been good. I
think we would love to see a continuing effort to strengthen
the interagency coordination and response here on this
Government problem that is extremely complicated as we
mentioned, and it is going to go on for a while. So we do think
it is important that we just continue to focus on that strong
interagency coordination.
As you mentioned, sir, I do think it is critical that we
address the legal status of these individuals as they come in.
For that, Congressional action is very important. We very much
need the Afghan Adjustment Act passed.
Mr. Correa. Ms. Marcos, same question.
Ms. Marcos. Yes, sir. I also agree. Coordination has been
good, but this is an enormous operation, and there is more that
can be done.
Mr. Correa. I will now recognize our Ranking Member for 5
minutes of questions.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I guess I want to start with Mr. Breen. Knowing--I believe
actually we first met close to a decade ago when you were
working with IRAP which was then the Iraq Refugee Assistance
Program, and largely focused on the Special Immigrant Visa
program, so kind-of a full circle here. How would you assess
what you are hearing and what is going on in terms of our
continuing plan to evacuate at-risk Afghan allies?
Mr. Breen. Thank you. Thank you for your service in many
capacities and your continued leadership.
I would say that we have come a long way, and we have a
long way to go. There are many thousands of Afghans, as I
mentioned, who are outside of the United States and have not
yet reached lily pads. It is critical that we not take our eye
off the ball and continue to evacuate them. Many of them are at
great risk.
It is also important, I think, that we, as I said, grapple
with the uncertainty and legal status that will follow if we
don't deal with the consequences of humanitarian parole as the
primary pathway to entry, right. It is not a pathway to
permanent status. It is typically a temporary allowance to
enter and remain in the United States. As a result of that,
Afghans who have been or will enter the United States under
humanitarian parole under Operation Allies Welcome are going to
find themselves under a cloud of legal uncertainty.
The Adjustment Act would essentially allow them to have the
same rights and privileges they would have had they been
admitted through the U.S. refugee resettlement, or through the
SIV program. Virtually, all the Afghans arriving meet that
legal definition of a refugee or qualify for the SIV program,
so to not [inaudible] would, in essence, legally penalize them
for having been evacuated, and it is really important that we
avoid that.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you. No, I appreciate that, and, having
talked with a number of administration officials going back to
April, I hope that the assurances we are being given that there
is a plan in development, that that will ultimately occur, are
not empty ones.
Mr. delaCruz, thank you again. It is great to have you and
Team Rubicon represented here today. You know, I know first-
hand what a valuable asset the veterans community has been to
our country in general, but also addressing these complex
emergency operations, and also recognizing that for many of
Team Rubicon's volunteers and staff members, this is an
intensely personal mission that Jake Wood, co-founder of Team
Rubicon, an Afghanistan veteran.
But first, I just wanted to give you the opportunity to
speak a little bit more about how you and other veterans
working with Team Rubicon have experienced the last few months
and how that has impacted your efforts here.
Mr. delaCruz. Yes. So, obviously, like the veteran
community, Team Rubicon is as diverse as the members of this
Nation. So I think the way that people addressed it and the
feelings they had with respect to the withdrawal, they were
across the board.
The one common thing I can say from the veteran community
is there was a common bond and this understanding that we had
to welcome our allies back. That bond, that standing shoulder
to shoulder on the dirt of Afghanistan could not be broken, and
they understood that they could play a role. They activated to
try to make the resettlement process as smooth as possible and
contribute to the best of their ability, leveraging their
skills, experience, and, oftentimes, a deeply personal
connection.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you. Do you feel it is important for the
Federal Government to continue to engage, especially with
veteran service organizations, regarding the on-going
resettlement efforts? If so, what is the best way that our
Government can accomplish that?
Mr. delaCruz. Yes. I believe veterans should be considered
an asset in this moment, and we should find opportunities where
we can apply those skills that experience the adaptability that
can, in these times, again, as has been mentioned by others, of
ambiguity and a requirement to come to solutions I believe
veterans, partnered with the civilian community, can have
immense impact.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you. In your written testimony, you
mentioned that Team Rubicon is working to set up housing units
for families as they move from bases into welcoming
communities, and you also anticipate this occurring more
frequently as the process continues, as I think many of us do.
We have heard directly from several organizations involved in
those efforts that housing will be one of the biggest
challenges.
Can you provide some more detail on what you are doing to
assist with housing capacity issues, what challenges you are
facing, and what you think the Government should be doing
specifically in that area to help?
Mr. delaCruz. Representative Meijer, we aren't specifically
involved in generating the housing. We are simply helping to
provide the furniture, assembling, making sure the housing is
ready to welcome the families. So I am unfortunately unable to
comment on that, sir.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Correa. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the Chairwoman of the Subcommittee
on Border Security, the gentlewoman from California, Ms.
Barragan, for 5 minutes of questions. Welcome.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This question is for everybody on the panel. As our Afghan
allies speak to make a new life here in America, there will
undoubtedly be challenges in navigating our complicated legal
and asylum systems. Can you describe the importance of legal
services to Afghan evacuees arriving on military bases? Anybody
want to go first?
Mr. Breen. I am happy to briefly address that.
In a word, it is critical. It is absolutely crucial that
they have access to legal advice. Our immigration system, as
you well know, ma'am, is complicated on the best of days, and
the legal status and the situation that Afghans who have been
evacuated are facing is even more complicated.
Again, I think Congress has the opportunity to alleviate
that, to some great extent, with the Afghan Adjustment Act, but
access to counsel is critical.
We stood up Project Afghan Legal Assistance to meet
precisely that need. There has been an overwhelming desire on
the part of the American legal profession to meet that need and
step forward through us and through many of our partners and
allies. So that capacity is there, but ensuring access to
counsel is absolutely critical.
This is a situation in which it can make a life-or-death
difference. We are facing--a lot of these families are facing
legal situations that are not their doing. They had to destroy
their documents in order to prevent themselves from being
targeted by the Taliban at the checkpoint. Their documents were
destroyed by the U.S. Embassy during the withdrawal from Kabul
and so on.
So these are complicated legal challenges they face, and
access to counsel is absolutely critical.
Thank you.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you. Anybody else want to comment on
it?
Ms. Marcos. I agree. It is very critical that all the
Afghans have access to legal counseling, as well as the pathway
to legal permanent residency.
Ms. Barragan. Great.
Ms. Bahram. I want to comment on this because for people
who are inside the base, I think it is important that the
process should start, especially the majority of them who are
on humanitarian visas. They need to change the status. Some of
them who will be applying for asylum, they are losing time
while they are on the base and do not have legal assistance.
So I think that is something that we have to think about.
They only have 1 year to apply for asylum, and some of them
have already been there over 2 months.
Ms. Barragan. Right. Thank you very much.
I will move on to my next question. Sadly, we know that
many of the Afghan families and individuals who have come to
the United States have suffered significant trauma along the
way, and they are now facing the prospect of building a new
home in a country with a different language and different
customs.
This is for witness Marcos.
Can you describe the access that Afghan families have to
mental health services upon arriving to the United States, and
are there mental health services available for children as
well?
Ms. Marcos. Thank you.
There are efforts under way to stand up, across all safe
havens, services for both adults and children. At the final
destinations, resettlement agencies will work hard with the
community, including Afghans in the community, to provide
appropriate psychosocial services during the resettlement
process.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you.
For our witness Ms. Bahram, how can these mental health
services be improved? Can you talk about how important it is
that these services continue once evacuees leave military bases
and resettle in communities?
Ms. Bahram. I think the past few weeks have been such a
difficult time, not only for Afghans who are coming through
evacuation but Afghans all around the world, and we have seen
that when we serve the immigrant community here, how much is
the need for providing that service.
I think what we need to do right now is to recruit as many
Afghan mental health professionals as possible, because the
majority of the community who we might be dealing with will not
be speaking the languages that we have. Having a translator or
interpreter in those systems makes it difficult, especially for
a woman to be speaking about the issues that she is going
through.
So we as an organization have been training all of our
staff on mental health first. But we are also in the process of
hiring an Afghan mental health provider so that we have staff
ready to meet the need.
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you.
I just want to thank you all for the work that you do.
I think we, as Americans, need to come together to welcome
everybody with open arms and not let the immigration issue
become a wedge issue, and certainly not those that have fled
Afghanistan and are here in America now, to welcome them in
with open arms.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Chairperson Barragan.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee on Border Security, the gentleman from Louisiana,
Mr. Higgins, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. delaCruz, we are going to be moving fast here, good
sir. Thank you for your service and for being here today.
Afghan refugees, it is reported, are leaving military bases
before official resettlement administered by the U.S.
Government.
Team Rubicon and other nonprofits here today, other NGO's,
are providing intensive care for Afghan refugees, like
transportation, temporary housing, food, medical screening,
religious accommodation, other mechanisms to ease the process
of resettlement.
Given all that assistance, what incentive do Afghan
refugees have to voluntarily leave the U.S. military bases with
no resources or direction, forfeiting the assistance from
nonprofits like yours, before official resettlement? Give us
your opinion on that, sir.
Mr. delaCruz. Sir, our involvement has been limited to the
management, distribution, and collection of donated goods. So,
unfortunately, I cannot comment on your question.
I can tell you that----
Mr. Higgins. So from your--I was kind-of asking for your
opinion. You have an inside view. But you are just not
knowledgeable enough about this particular question to comment
on that?
Mr. delaCruz. Sir, yes, I don't have the insight or the
observations to be able to answer that question, sir.
Mr. Higgins. OK. Well, then the odds go down that you can
answer this one.
When refugees are resettled into a given community, is the
local government involved, and do they have any voice in the
resettlement? Do you have an opinion or a view on that?
Mr. delaCruz. Sir, from what I have observed over the
course of the resettlements, and this is primarily through
interactions with different agencies and their local
communities, as well as the VOADs, the volunteer organizations
assisting in disaster in the communities themselves, I do
believe they have a say in the resettlement of the Afghans.
What I have seen primarily has been how do we begin to set
the conditions for them to have and enjoy a smooth resettlement
into those specific----
Mr. Higgins. So if I am receiving reports from local
Government elected officials, like mayors and sheriffs, that
they have no advance knowledge of resettlement operations until
they show up, I should look further into that as to the
validity of those claims? You think that those entities are
well advised and properly advised, as they should be?
If we are bringing refugees into their community, the local
elected officials should certainly be involved and aware. Do
you feel like we should look deeper into that?
Let me just move on, because we will look deeper into that.
I would like you to comment, sir, if you can, a
confidential informant has advised me, he is a civilian
employee with direct interaction with Afghans inside Fort
McCoy, he has advised that all the refugees are divided in the
living quarters by various factors, and that those that have
been identified with disease are segregated.
He advised that the military guards there do not restrict
the movement, which is common, from the diseased quarters.
Are you familiar with that?
Mr. delaCruz. Sir, I am not familiar with that.
Mr. Higgins. OK. We will look into that as well.
That informant also advised me that the Afghan refugees are
free to leave, but that if they leave, they cannot return to
the base. Are you familiar with that?
Mr. delaCruz. I am not familiar with that, sir.
Mr. Higgins. We shall investigate that as well.
Finally, I am being told that one of the motives that would
cause them to stay in the base is that they are collecting a
daily or weekly cash stipend, that they are actually amassing
wealth.
Are you aware or have you observed, you heard rumors of or
seen, have verification of payments being given to Afghan
refugees on the base?
Mr. delaCruz. Sir, I have no awareness of that in our scope
of managing and distributing donated goods.
Mr. Higgins. OK. Thank you for your candor.
Mr. Chairman, I respectfully and officially request that we
dive deeper into some of these questions. As you can see, even
solid Americans that are inside these resettlement operations,
operating, are not aware of some of the things that are being
reported that are going on.
So we have an obligation to look into it. I trust your
leadership and that of my Chairwoman. I look forward to further
hearings on this matter because the American people deserve to
know.
Thank you all.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Higgins, and thank you for
bringing up those issues to our attention.
Now the Chair will now recognize other Members for
questioning that they may ask the witnesses. In accordance with
the guidelines laid out by the Chairman and the Ranking Member
in the February 3 colloquy, I will recognize Members in order
of seniority, alternating between Majority and Minority and
alternating between the two subcommittees.
Members are also reminded to unmute themselves when
recognized for questioning.
The Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes the gentleman, Mr.
Payne.
Mr. Payne, welcome.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chair and Madam Chair and the
Ranking Members, for having this timely hearing.
Afghan evacuees are temporarily housed at 8 military bases
before relocating to communities throughout the United States.
During this period, resettlement agencies are providing
critical support services while the evacuees undergo
immigration processing and receive vaccinations.
Robin Dunn Marcos, Ms. Marcos, what services do
resettlement agencies provide to Afghan evacuees on the
military bases? How do these services differ from the ones
offered by Federal agencies?
Ms. Marcos. Thank you.
So on the bases there are a number of different
organizations that are working together to provide services.
Incoming parolees receive COVID tests, they receive medical
examinations, they receive the full complement of vaccines that
are required, as well as other processing.
The bulk of services to support the Afghan parolees will be
at final destination with resettlement agencies where they will
provide housing. They will continue any type of psychosocial
service, health care, register the children in school, cultural
orientations, employment orientation, and intake.
Really the goal is to help them become economically and
socially self-sufficient as quickly as possible.
Also English-language classes. There is a whole array of
services.
Mr. Payne. Are any of them anti-vax? Or they don't have the
choice, do they?
Ms. Marcos. I don't believe they have the choice, sir.
Mr. Payne. Interesting.
Mr. Breen, how are the Government and resettlement agencies
soliciting feedback to improve operations on the military
bases? What has been done in response to feedback?
Mr. Breen. Thank you, sir.
I would defer to my colleagues who are more active on the
bases with respect to that question.
I think, with respect to the larger evacuation, the
coordination has been good, but as has been mentioned in this
hearing, we would like to see much stronger interagency
coordination and cooperation to ensure that we continue to
evacuate those at risk who have not yet reached a lily pad, who
are still in Afghanistan or who are in a third country.
That is many thousands of individuals, and it is critical
that we continue that evacuation effort.
We have yet to see what I would say is a robust plan to
continue to do that from the administration, and I think it is
critical that we all continue to collaborate.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
Ms. Bahram, what are your thoughts on the engagement
efforts? How can the Government and resettlement agencies best
solicit feedback from Afghan evacuees in terms of their needs
while on the military base?
Ms. Bahram. Thank you, sir.
I think yesterday I visited, as I mentioned, one of the
bases, and I talked to a few Afghans there, worried that they
had--that there were a lot of unknowns. They do not know how
long they are there, how long they will be there, in what State
they will be resettled.
So I think with resettlement agencies and the Federal
Government, I think one of the things that can be discussed is
that uncertainty and unclarity about their future.
I think that, as I mentioned earlier in my statement, there
is a lot of expertise among Afghans, both people who have been
evacuated, but Afghan-American diaspora here, and that can be
tapped in and be of use. I think that will be very beneficial
for the Federal Government as well as for the refugees who are
arriving--who just arrived.
Mr. Payne. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, I will yield back.
Ms. Barragan [presiding.] Thank you.
Mr. Chair Correa has gone to vote. Votes have been called.
Mr. Payne. Oh. Madam Chair.
Ms. Barragan. I will be taking over while he is out to
vote.
Next, the Chair recognizes for 5 minutes the gentleman from
North Carolina, Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Madam. Thank you, Ms. Barragan.
I appreciate the humanitarian concerns expressed well by
the witnesses. I acknowledge that there is a massive scope of
humanitarian disaster created by the President's mishandling of
the evacuation.
The testimony of the witnesses, I think, is helpful to
depict the extent of the burdens on Afghans and Americans alike
through that. But I note that it is pretty difficult to fit
this subject matter, frankly, into our committee's
jurisdiction.
After all, this is the Committee on Homeland Security, and
of course one of the committees is Border Security and
Facilitation. The other is Oversight. But, again, the security
of the homeland is the first obligation of this committee.
I want to make sure. The witnesses that are here could
correct me or help me understand whether I am right or wrong. I
understand, I think, The Hill has said about a month ago that
there are 124,000, roughly, evacuated by the United States from
Afghanistan.
About 6,000 of those are U.S. citizens. Three percent, so
that would be on the order of 3,700, 4,000, are Afghan SIVs.
Six percent are lawful permanent residents. That would be about
7,500, roughly. So that leaves about a hundred thousand.
I understand, as Chairman Correa mentioned, lily pad
countries, many are--there are, basically, possible parolees,
about a hundred thousand.
Someone said, I think in the course of their testimony,
about 60,000 so far in the United States--I believe that was
the number I heard, and someone can correct me on that as
well--that are being initially vetted, the remainder, in the
lily pad countries.
Then, at least according to Mr. Breen's testimony, I guess
they are all bound to come to the United States, or that is the
suggestion.
I was doing some reading. There is a joint Department of
State, Department of Homeland Security report on the Afghan SIV
process back in April that explained that required processing--
the administrative processing, security fraud and criminal
backgrounds checks--involves rigorous background checks which
are essential to the integrity of the SIV program and U.S.
National security and may take anywhere from less than 30 days
to over a year depending on the applicant's background.
There is also a special tool that was implemented after
2001, the Security Advisory Opinion, which it provides enhanced
scrutiny of certain potentially higher risk nationalities and
demographics.
So I guess the question for anybody who is inclined to take
it up is, who can speak to the question how security of the
homeland can be fully protected while the Biden administration
is paroling Afghans from the same refugee and SIV population,
whose vetting historically took months and even years, within a
matter of days or weeks? Is anybody in a position to speak to
that?
So hearing none, let me ask Mr. Breen, if you would at
least see if you could correct me on facts, in terms of what my
understanding is. Are we talking about a hundred thousand
potential parolees?
If so, you spoke about our moral obligation, but if they
are not eligible for the SIV program, doesn't that mean they
didn't serve along with American troops?
If so, what is our moral obligation there, in your view,
and what is the basis for your view about that?
Mr. Breen. Thank you, Congressman.
The latest information I have--and, again, I am not a
Government official--the latest information I have is that, of
those evacuated, about 85 percent are Afghans who would be
eligible for a Special Immigrant Visa, P1 or P2 refugee status,
or their family members. Additional information is about 40
percent of those you are speaking of are children.
So the vast majority of those evacuated, just on the face
of it, would qualify for these programs.
I think the concern around humanitarian parole is it is a
legal mechanism, of course, that allows you to enter the United
States in a moment of great need, but what it does not do is
confer upon you any assurance you can remain in the United
States.
So what we are likely to see, unless there is an Adjustment
Act, is all these folks will have to find some other channel
within existing immigration law in order to not overstay that
parole. That probably will lead to a large number of
affirmative asylum applications or cases.
As you know, sir, I would assume that the asylum system, we
currently have a 400,000-case backlog in the existing asylum
system, and so I don't think it is in anybody's interest to see
all those affirmative asylum cases added to that backlog.
There are also a number of other legal issues that may
arise related to extortion by the Taliban, forced cooperation
with the Taliban. One interpretation of existing U.S. law would
bar someone from entering if they had been forced at gunpoint
to feed a member of the Taliban.
Ms. Barragan. Mr. Bishop, I am going to interject here
because votes are happening, and Members are waiting to ask
their questions, and the gentleman's time has expired.
So I am going to now recognize, the Chair recognizes for 5
minutes the gentlewoman, Representative Titus, from Nevada.
Ms. Titus. Thank you very much, and thank you for that
courtesy.
You were talking about the backlog with the permanent
asylum. If you are looking at Las Vegas or Nevada, the closest
court is southern California. That takes a lot of time and a
lot of resources for people to get down there.
Could you comment on the possibility of using mobile courts
to address some of this backlog?
Anybody? No?
Well, that seems like it would be a good idea, to help
people fill out the paperwork and hold court in places other
than where they are formally established now if we want to get
through with the backlog. So I guess I will answer my own
question.
How about the possibility of using private sponsorships
like they do in Canada? Because our State and many States have
different programs. We have got something called a Wilson-Fish
program in Nevada. We have to depend on Catholic Charities.
Fortunately, we have an Office for New Americans that is
helpful, but it is not actually done in the executive
department.
Would that be something that we could use? Seems to me we
have got to think outside the box to deal with this problem.
Mr. Breen. Congresswoman, I certainly agree with the
thinking outside the box.
I think the most critical intervention that I would
recommend would be creating a categorical parole program for
Afghan nationals, and that would prioritize and expedite the
thousands of humanitarian parole requests that have been filed
versus having to file them one at a time. Bringing that along
with a fee waiver I think would be very effective.
Ms. Titus. Anybody else?
Ms. Marcos. The use of cosponsorship and private
sponsorship we absolutely agree should be used in the
resettlement of Afghans, as well as other refugees.
Ms. Titus. What about the mobile asylum courts?
Ms. Marcos. Sorry, ma'am, I can't speak to that.
Ms. Titus. Well, there was an article in the paper about an
audit that is being done at the State Department to look at the
Special Visa program and some of this resettlement. I wonder
how much one hand knows what the other hand is doing.
Do you know or can you comment on State Department versus
Homeland Security, what those problems are, in addition to
Federal versus State and local and private?
Anybody?
Mr. Breen. Ma'am, there is a complicated immigration law
problem that is waiting for us if there is not an Adjustment
Act passed.
So I think, to your point about mobile courts and other
things, we are all for and have advocated strongly for methods
that would clear the asylum backlog of 400,000. I mean, that in
itself is a problem worthy of Congressional attention, to put
it mildly.
But in this case, I think the best move we could make,
respectfully, would be to avoid adding additional cases,
affirmative claims, to that asylum backlog by passing the
Adjustment Act.
That would allow Afghans who have been evacuated to have a
very clear path, assuming they meet the requirements, toward
permanent residency in the United States, which is the
objective that I think we all share.
Ms. Titus. Any comment about the cooperation or the audit
for the State Department or how it affects what Homeland
Security or what you all are doing?
Well, OK. Thank you.
I will yield back. That was useless.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Representative Titus.
The Chair recognizes for 5 minutes the gentlewoman from
Tennessee, Mrs. Harshbarger.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you so much, Chairwoman. I do have
a couple questions.
I thank the witnesses for being here today.
I guess my question is this, and either one of you can
answer this, and it may be different in every case. But what
was the vetting process that your organization had to go
through to get the--I guess, is it a contract that you got with
the Government, in order to go ahead and process these Afghanis
for Operation Allies Welcome.
What kind of process did you have to go through, and was it
a contract that you were awarded to do this?
Mr. Breen. Ma'am, I would just simply say, we are not a
Government contractor. We provide the services and the legal
assistance that we provide on a volunteer basis, on a pro bono
basis. So we are an independent organization.
Mrs. Harshbarger. So you are an independent, of course, but
so how did you--I mean, how did they choose you to do this, I
guess is my question. Did you offer up your organization? Or
how did they end up using all four of your organizations to do
this operation? Anybody can start.
Ms. Bahram. This is Naheed.
We do not have any contract with the Government. As a
social service organization and human rights, women's rights
organization, we feel it is our duty to provide the services.
As I mentioned, there are no contracts with the Government
or no funding from the Federal Government for this project. We
have been receiving private funding and foundation money, that
we have been using that toward the resettlement work that we
have been doing.
I also really appreciate if people will call the people
from Afghanistan as Afghan, not Afghani, because Afghani is the
currency of the country.
Thank you.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well, as a follow-up to that, when you
are successful in your efforts of resettling a refugee in the
United States, I guess my question is, what are you doing to
make sure that he or she is successfully acclimated and
assimilated as a member of their new community?
Another, even to that, how do you determine--or who
determines where these refugees will take refuge, what State?
Because we were on a briefing and I asked the briefer,
because 421 or 451 were located in Tennessee, and I knew the
breakdown, and I got that 2 minutes before the briefing on
which parts of the State that those refugees were placed.
I guess my question is, do you have any input on that?
But how do you follow them up, and what kind of outcomes do
you use to measure how they are being assimilated, or do you do
that?
That is for anybody.
Ms. Marcos. There are 9 nonprofit organizations that have
cooperative agreements with the Department of State to enter
into a public-private partnership on the resettlement of
refugees, and within that program there are certain measures
that all of the resettlement agencies must abide by.
The 9 National resettlement agencies have a network across
the country of over 200 offices. So that is the network that is
initially resettling the parolees. It was kind-of fit right
into that established infrastructure.
As I mentioned, the goal of the resettlement program is to
assist refugees to become economically and socially self-
sufficient as quickly as possible after arrival.
IRC, like many other resettlement agencies, offers a number
of services, both through Federal, State, local, and private
funding, through citizenship. Each one of those have different
outcomes that we track, but this is certainly something that we
do.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. Yes, I am just interested. I don't
know how the process works when you volunteer as an
organization to do that or how the Government allows different
organizations to go about that.
Just making sure that you can measure the outcomes to make
sure these citizens are assimilated, that is very important.
I will look further into that, and any information you
could forward to us would be advantageous, for myself at least.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you for that.
The Chair recognizes for 5 minutes the gentlewoman from
Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee, if you are prepared.
Ms. Jackson Lee, I think you are on mute maybe. Yes.
OK. I think maybe she is not ready. I know there is votes
happening. What I am going to do here is I am going to recess
so the Chair can return.
Ms. Jackson Lee, are you prepared to ask your questions?
Ms. Jackson Lee. No. I would like you to--I am walking on
the floor to vote.
Ms. Barragan. OK.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So I would like to come.
Ms. Barragan. OK.
Ms. Jackson Lee. But I do want to ask questions, so I would
like to have you come back to me. Thank you.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you.
So what we will do is, I have to run to vote, and the Chair
is not back yet. We are going to recess, hopefully just for a
few minutes, until the Chair gets back to resume the hearing.
If our witnesses could just hold tight as we recess very
shortly. We have Members that want to ask questions, and we do
expect the Chair to come back very shortly.
With that, we will stand in recess. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. Correa. The committee will again come to order.
Our next member, Mr. Clyde, will now be recognized for 5
minutes of questioning.
Welcome, sir.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Like the rest of the world, I was horrified to see the dire
humanitarian crisis unfold throughout Afghanistan in August.
The circumstances leading to this tragedy were completely
unavoidable and were a direct result of a leadership void in
the Biden administration.
This administration must learn from these failures so they
do not repeat these mistakes in the future.
Furthermore, we must ensure that the mechanisms we have in
place to vet individuals coming from Afghanistan are sufficient
and prioritize the safety and security of our citizens and of
our Nation.
Although the heartbreaking images from Hamid Karzai
International Airport will forever be ingrained in our
country's conscience, I am encouraged by the fact that many
Americans, both at home and abroad, have stepped up to the
plate to help their fellow men in time of need.
The testimonies provided by each of the witnesses today
prove that, and I thank you.
So my first question is for Ms. Bahram.
I am not sure if you saw the heartbreaking article in The
Wall Street Journal this weekend about a mother who was being
coerced to hand over her 3-year-old daughter to a man who lent
her money so she could survive the aftermath of the
humanitarian crisis.
It is reported that the loan resulted in an insurmountable
debt load that she could not bear--it was $550--and he demanded
payment.
The article goes on to discuss the dire conditions in
Afghanistan, including a U.N. report that states 95 percent of
Afghans are suffering from malnutrition leading into the winter
months.
I understand that your organization is the largest women's
organization in Afghanistan, with over 850 local Afghan staff
working tirelessly to provide support services to women,
children, and families.
So my question is, how has your staff in the United States
and in Afghanistan been affected by the withdrawal, and what
steps are you having to take to assist staff and clients in
Afghanistan?
Ms. Bahram. Thank you, sir.
As mentioned, we have over 1,200 staff in Afghanistan. The
majority of them are at high risk because they are women's
rights and human rights defenders.
The majority of them work with families who were--with
women who were survivors of domestic violence or underage
marriages or forced marriages, and fight Taliban in order to
get the woman to safety.
So our staff in Afghanistan obviously have been under a lot
of risk, and we, unfortunately, were unable to evacuate any of
them during the evacuation period.
It has affected us personally, professionally. I have had
losses during the war in Afghanistan. From the day I was born
till now, I haven't seen a day of peace. But the past few weeks
have been the darkest days of my life.
I am sorry.
Knowing people do not have simple food to eat, having a
simple dinner on my dining table has been very difficult.
Mr. Clyde. I am sorry.
Ms. Bahram. My people do not have access to their bank
account, and I being able to get my paycheck has been very
difficult.
Knowing people have been separated from their children at
the airport and hundreds killed at that explosion, many bodies
not recovered, one that I know personally, has been very
difficult to live with my family.
So I think it is a time for us to understand the importance
of humanitarian aid for Afghanistan, and knowing that we should
not let the people suffer anymore.
As an Afghan American, I feel as an American we are
responsible and we owe them, because the past 20 years there
have been a lot of achievements, not only for women's rights
but throughout the country, and having now kids 12 years and
older sitting at home and not being able to go to school is our
failure.
Mr. Clyde. Yes. So everything that has been achieved--or
much that has been achieved--I just see us losing that, and it
is indeed a very, very terrible humanitarian crisis.
So, Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask to submit the
following article titled ``As Afghanistan Sinks Into
Destitution, Some Sell Children to Survive'' for the record.
Mr. Correa. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
Article Submitted by Honorable Andrew Clyde
As Afghanistan Sinks Into Destitution, Some Sell Children to Survive
u.n. warns that 95 percent of afghans aren't getting enough to eat as
winter approaches
By Saeed Shah/Photographs by Joel van Houdt for The Wall Street Journal
Oct. 16, 2021 8:31 am ET
HERAT, Afghanistan--Desperate to feed her family, Saleha, a
housecleaner here in western Afghanistan, has incurred such an
insurmountable debt that the only way she sees out is to hand over her
3-year-old daughter, Najiba, to the man who lent her the money.
The debt is $550.
Saleha, a 40-year-old mother of six who goes by one name, earns 70
cents a day cleaning homes in a wealthier neighborhood of Herat. Her
much older husband doesn't have any work.
Such is the starkness of deepening poverty in Afghanistan, a
humanitarian crisis that is worsening fast after the Taliban seized
power on Aug. 15, prompting the U.S. to freeze $9 billion in Afghan
central-bank assets and causing a halt in most foreign aid.

Already, 95 percent of Afghans aren't getting enough to eat,
according to the United Nations' World Food Program, which has warned
that ``people are being pushed to the brink of survival.'' Almost the
entire Afghan population of 40 million people could fall below the
poverty line in coming months, according to the U.N.
Behind these statistics lie countless personal tragedies of
families like Saleha's. She and her husband used to work on a farm in
the western province of Badghis, but two years ago lost that income
because of fighting in the area and drought. So they borrowed money
just to get food. Hoping to find employment, they ended up moving to a
giant encampment of people displaced from other provinces, known as
Shahrak Sabz, in Herat.
With the financial system and trade paralyzed after the Taliban
takeover, prices for basic food items like flour and oil have doubled
since mid-August. The lender offered early this month to write off the
debt if she hands over her little girl.

They have 3 months to provide the money. Otherwise, Najiba will be
doing household work in the lender's home and be married off to one of
his three sons when she reaches puberty. They are not sure which one.
The oldest is now 6.
``If life continues to be this awful, I will kill my children and
myself,'' said Saleha, speaking in her tiny two-room home. ``I don't
even know what we will eat tonight.''
``I will try to find money to save my daughter's life,'' added her
husband, Abdul Wahab.
The lender, Khalid Ahmad, confirmed he had made the offer to the
couple.
``I also don't have money. They haven't paid me back,'' said Mr.
Ahmad, reached by phone in Badghis. ``So there is no option but taking
the daughter.''

Following the Taliban takeover, neighboring Pakistan and Iran,
where many men from this community used to work as laborers, closed
their borders, bracing for a flood of refugees. All that is left as
work is collecting plastic bottles and other trash to sell for
recycling. Other families in the area have had to surrender children to
repay debts, residents say.
Growing destitution could undermine the Taliban's so-far solid hold
on power and serve as a recruiting tool for the local branch of Islamic
State, their only significant rival. A Taliban official in the west of
the country said that Afghans would have to get used to a meager
existence.
``We suffered for 20 years fighting jihad, we lost members of our
families, we didn't have proper food, and in the end, we were rewarded
with this government. If people have to struggle for a few months, so
what?'' said the official. ``Popularity is not important for the
Taliban.''
Taliban officials have repeatedly said they welcome international
aid for Afghanistan but wouldn't compromise on their Islamic beliefs to
secure assistance.
The humanitarian crisis, however, is prompting a debate within the
international community over whether to condition foreign assistance on
the Taliban moderating their behavior and showing more respect for the
rights of women and minorities.
Afghanistan's new health minister, a urologist appointed by the
Taliban and one of the few non-clerics in the new administration,
pleaded for the international community not to abandon the country.
``It is the same mother, the same child, the same patient you were
previously helping. They haven't changed,'' Dr. Qalandar Ibaad said in
an interview. ``Governments change in all countries.''

Groups like the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
U.N. warn that emergency humanitarian aid must be unconditional. While
demanding that the Taliban allow women to study and work is important,
they argue, a more urgent priority is to make sure women don't freeze
or starve to death this winter.
The U.S. and other Western nations that spent the past two decades
fighting in Afghanistan have a particular responsibility, some aid
officials say.
``These countries who have their fingerprints all over the sorry
situation here have at least to disburse the funding we need so we can
avoid people perishing in enormous numbers this winter,'' Jan Egeland,
secretary general of the Norwegian Refugee Council, which operates in
more than a dozen Afghan provinces, said in an interview in Kabul. ``To
pause the lifesaving funding because we're still negotiating female
rights would be utterly wrong.''
Mr. Egeland, a former head of the U.N.'s emergency aid arm, said
his organization wouldn't reopen the boys schools in provinces where
girls schools weren't allowed, but it wouldn't withhold aid that could
save lives.
Heather Barr, associate director of the women's rights division at
Human Rights Watch, said that donors had vowed they would judge the
Taliban by its actions, but the risk of famine left them with little
choice but to provide aid regardless.
``The Taliban are holding Afghans hostage and playing chicken with
the international community,'' she said.

Some 2,300 Afghan hospitals and clinics were dependent on foreign
funding before the Taliban takeover. Just 17 percent of those are now
fully functional, and 64 percent are out of essential drugs, said
Richard Brennan, the regional emergency director for the World Health
Organization.
International aid had also paid the salaries of tens of thousands
of doctors, nurses and teachers, now struggling to get by.
In Herat, an emergency feeding center for severely malnourished
babies run by the French charity Doctors Without Borders is full and
has had to expand capacity. Babies are arriving with respiratory
distress, dehydration, and shock. Their mothers are getting such little
sustenance that they can't produce enough milk.
At Herat Regional Hospital, the staff have threatened to quit after
not having been paid for 4 months. The government hospital has run out
of even common medicines like antibiotics and basic supplies like
surgical gloves and bandages. Oxygen is in short supply.
Patients have to purchase their own medicines, anesthetic, and
other necessities for surgeries.
``I hope we don't go back to the situation of 25, 30 years ago,
when there were basically no health facilities in this country,'' said
Dr. Mohammad Aref Jalali, the medical director. ``We could lose
everything we have achieved.''
In the orthopedic ward, Abdul Rahman, was lying on a bed with pins
sticking out of his leg, where he was shot by robbers for the motorbike
he was riding. The wound had become infected and doctors told the
father of seven they might now have to amputate the leg.
``If they cut off my leg, there's no one else to provide for my
family,'' said Mr. Rahman, a laborer, age 37. ``What will happen to my
little children?''

Mr. Clyde. Thank you.
I see my time has expired. I have one more question if you
will allow me.
Mr. Correa. If it is a quick one, go ahead, sir.
Mr. Clyde. All right. For Ms. Marcos.
According to the International Rescue Committee's website,
your organization has helped resettle more than 16,000 SIVs
since 2006.
So you obviously have seen the extent of the paperwork and
the burdensome regulations that have hindered our allies'
ability to have their SIV applications processed in a timely
manner.
So in an attempt to reduce some of this red tape, the House
passed the bipartisan ALLIES Act of 2021. Yet this bill has not
passed the Senate. The problems associated with the SIV process
have reared their ugly head during the evacuation process in
Afghanistan.
Our Nation ended up leaving thousands of people who
supported our coalition's mission in Afghanistan while
evacuating many who did not. Those left behind now are being
targeted by the Taliban.
Can you provide the committee with your thoughts, very
briefly, on how Congress could better improve the SIV program
and better support our future allies who have risked all to
help us achieve our strategic goals?
Ms. Marcos. Thank you.
In my testimony I did offer correcting the P2 program,
expanding it, to make it eligible for more folks that do not
qualify for the time limits under the SIV.
But all the programs could be made more streamlined to get
more people timely relief.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you very much.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Clyde.
Ms. Jackson Lee for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Jackson Lee.
It looks like everybody is busy voting, doing something.
Very busy place. So I will make some comments and maybe
entertain adjourning of the committee hearing.
My thoughts were just, drawing a parallel again to the
Vietnam experience, a couple things come to mind.
No. 1, how important it is the Afghan community--Afghan
immigrant community and their contributions to this country,
how valuable I anticipate they will be, to make sure that
people understand who the community is and that you have come
in to help us at a time when we do need employees and workers
in this country.
Second of all, just to make sure that your contributions
and your history are not forgotten. I would ask you to think
about creating a program like Writing on America. Let me
explain to you.
The Vietnamese community, there is an organization that
every year has competitions on essays by refugees, to tell
their story, to tell their trials and tribulations as they came
to America. Then those essays, essentially the top ones, are
essentially compiled and published in a book for generations to
come.
I think it is important that the Afghan community do the
same thing, for a couple of reasons. No. 1, lessons learned for
Americans. No. 2, for the legacy that your children will
inherit. They need to know the experience that you have gone
through. They need to know the history so they can better
understand who they are in the context of being American.
So I would ask you, as a suggestion, to think about doing
that.
Finally, in terms of our work on this committee, I started
out by asking you if you had a go-to person, a go-to----
Ms. Jackson Lee. I am on, Mr. Chairman. Sorry.
Mr. Correa. OK. Ms. Jackson Lee, give me a few seconds here
to finish my sentence.
Ms. Jackson Lee. No problem.
Mr. Correa. [Inaudible] that you have immediate answers to
your concerns. I think addressing the issues, from getting a
green card to getting a response to your needs, is essential
for full integration, immediate integration into the greater
part of America. So I would ask you to think about that.
If you have any questions, like my colleagues have said,
our offices are here to help, and we have been helping answer a
lot of the questions from the community in the last few weeks.
With that being said, I am going to introduce, or I should
say recognize, Ms. Jackson Lee for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Jackson Lee, welcome.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, thank you so very much. I
was only trying to let you know that I had weaved my way back
in or wormed my way back in to the session that I had been on.
It seems like I am on a double screen.
But in any event, let me thank the witnesses and the
Chairmen, the two Chairmen and Ranking Members, for this very
important hearing.
Let me also thank Mr. Breen, Ms. Marcos, and as well, Ms.
Bahram, and certainly Art delaCruz. I have heard all of your
testimony. It is moving.
All of us were called by our constituents to help Afghans
who had helped us. I want to pay tribute to retired Navy
Commander Lisa Tonar. We were on late-night calls, 2 and 3 in
the morning, to help families in particular that were
interpreters and were trying to get out.
One was able to get out before the United States left
Afghanistan, but we were left with an interpreter who had a
family of 9, including 9 children, more than a family of 9.
In any event, and in addition, we had my constituent,
Miriam, who is a doctor, they were stranded and had to make
their way near the Uzbekistan border.
The good news was that the doctor was in fact able to have
her family take care of those as they just stood by the
Uzbekistan border. Ultimately, they were transferred to the
United Arab Emirates, where they stay.
So here are my concerns.
First of all, I have heard your concerns about food. I
assure you, as a founder and co-chair of the Afghan Caucus
since the Afghan war, a bipartisan caucus, having gone to
Afghanistan many, many times, we will again assert our concern
about these issues to be able to be collaborative and helpful.
But I want to raise the question. I want Miriam to get out.
She is in the United Arab Emirates along with the other
interpreter and his family with so many children. We have not
been able to be out. They are in the UAE's Humanitarian City
awaiting admittance into the United States.
Whoever will answer it, No. 1, would it be helpful if we
took an inventory of where Afghans who are waiting to come to
the United States are, those that are not on American soil? We
need to know where they are, if they are in Afghanistan.
I heard the tragedies of what happened. Miriam, this young
doctor, had the same thing. She had to escort some women out of
a hotel while the Taliban were searching in other rooms. It has
been a nightmare.
But I will say to you that I believe that democracy has
been planted, it is a seed in the hearts of the Afghan people.
I do believe that we are going to see democracy take hold and
overcome those who are despots in the government now.
But I do want to know whether an inventory would be helpful
and whether we should raise that with all of the departments,
from DHS to State.
The other is, anyone wants to comment on those that are
being still stationed, if you will, in United Arab Emirates, in
the Humanitarian City? Any thoughts on how Congress can help to
facilitate them getting back into the United States? I
understand there are more than.
Then last, anyone want to comment about the best way to
ensure that adequate food is at the variety of facilities?
I will yield to anyone. There are three questions that I
asked, the inventory, getting out of the UAE, and food
distribution.
Thank you.
Mr. Breen. Thank you, Congresswoman. Those are outstanding
questions. Thank you so much for raising them.
Very briefly, there are many thousands of families in the
situation you have described all over the world, in Afghanistan
and hiding, in neighboring countries, in the UAE, in the Gulf.
That inventory would be extremely helpful.
We in the NGO community are doing our very best to track
all of these families. We need a whole-of-government plan to
move those folks to the United States.
Many of us have recommended humanitarian parole on a
categorical basis with fee waivers, that would allow that to
happen relatively quickly, combined with an Adjustment Act that
would meet the [inaudible] requirements for the individuals
once they reach the United States.
I think that is a critical need, and thank you so much for
raising it again, about the tens of thousands of people who
have yet to be evacuated and are at this moment running for
their lives.
Ms. Jackson Lee. We will be in touch. Thank you so much.
Ms. Bahram, I feel your emotion and pain. Do you want to
talk about trying to help those with food and other needs?
Ms. Bahram.
Ms. Bahram. Our staff in Afghanistan also work in units--
with units here with displaced--internal displaced people, and
the conditions are not good.
We also, as I mentioned earlier, that not being able to
access money or send money. Many of the staff are not able to
take their paychecks from their bank account. That has been
challenging.
We are, as an organization, we have been searching for
answers and looking and reaching out to people to find out a
way to do that, but, unfortunately, have been unsuccessful.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Should we reach out to the UAE and the
State Department, to at least those who are there, to try and
get them moving toward coming to the United States?
Ms. Bahram. We definitely should, yes. I just heard that
Pakistan will reopen its border as of tomorrow with
Afghanistan. So hopefully that will make it a little bit easier
for aid to go inside Afghanistan.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Very good.
Well, let me thank you, Mr. Chairman. I see a number of
individuals that I will be reaching out to. The Afghan Caucus
stands ready to work on a number of these issues, I know, with
a number of our other committees. These are two very important
subcommittees, and this is a very important hearing.
Thank you to both Chairmen and Ranking Members for allowing
me to participate today and your courtesies extended. Thank you
again.
We must solve this. These are people who have served on the
front lines for us.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Ms. Jackson Lee.
I want to also echo Ms. Jackson Lee's comments about
counting on our support in addressing some of these issues. We
recognize our Afghan allies, we recognize the suffering of the
people in Afghanistan, and are here to try to help as much as
we can to make sure that these issues are not forgotten and
that you are relegated to a memory somewhere. Let's work
together to make sure we address these issues.
Thank you very much.
With that, I would like to call on Mr. Langevin for 5
minutes of questions.
Welcome, sir.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank both
Chairs and Ranking Members for allowing me to participate in
today's hearing, and I want to thank our witnesses for their
testimony.
So some of the testimony from today's witnesses reflects
concerns I share about backlogs in processing humanitarian
parolee applications. USCIS recently reported to my staff that
they were adjudicating 14,000 humanitarian parolee applications
with just 6 of their officers. I want to say that again, 14,000
humanitarian parolee applications with 6 officers.
That is completely and utterly unacceptable, and I call
upon USCIS to address this shortcoming immediately.
I am similarly concerned about possible backlogs forming at
other points in the resettlement processes, as other Government
installations face surges in demand for their services.
So I am thinking, for example, of a surge in demand for
driver's licenses which could cause backlogs at, say, for
example, Departments of Motor Vehicles, and complicate the
resettlement process for many Afghans.
So aside from the humanitarian parolee process, are you
seeing other choke points where Afghan refugees face
significant backlogs in applications for critical documents and
services?
Based on your experience, do agencies providing critical
documents and services have adequate linguistic and cultural
competencies to account for the large number of Afghan refugees
they will be serving?
Are there opportunities for Congress to help alleviate
these issues, for example, by providing resources necessary to
hire additional staff?
This is for all the witnesses. If you could answer that,
address those questions.
Ms. Bahram. I think there is definitely a need of more
staff in USCIS. There has been definitely a backlog. We have
applied for many people, for humanitarian parolees, and not
have gotten any approved yet.
There is also another issue with that for people who left
Afghanistan and are in a third country. None of the countries
are processing Afghan humanitarian visas.
So if folks got out through charters and were able to be,
for example, in Pakistan, Islamabad, the U.S. Embassy in
Islamabad are not being processing any Afghan visas.
So the challenge outside as well as inside has been the
same.
Mr. Langevin. OK. Other witnesses, if you would care to
comment. Again, particularly, do you see other choke points and
backlogs that we need to address?
Mr. Breen. Thank you, Congressman.
I think you have hit on one of the big ones, which is
humanitarian parole. Requiring individual applications versus
categorical humanitarian parole with fee waivers creates a huge
burden on the system. As you say, that is underresourced at
this time. It is a huge, critical need.
I would just also underscore very quickly, there are many
foreseeable backlogs coming unless an Adjustment Act is passed,
primarily in the asylum system, but kind-of across the
immigration system. That is foreseeable, that will go on for
years and place a huge burden on the whole system unless that
Adjustment Act is passed.
Ms. Marcos. We would also like for 765s, the employment
authorizations, to be available digitally, please.
Mr. Langevin. OK. Thank you.
Anybody else?
I had another question. Given that we are getting close to
the end of October, it is an unfortunate reality that Afghan
children will be missing school time as they live temporarily
on U.S. bases.
Will these children and their families need additional
educational assistance to make up for this lost time?
What resources will be provided to address that need? Is
there an opportunity for Congress to assist in providing such
resources?
Then my last one for witness Ms. Marcos.
Are eligible refugees enrolling in Medicaid, the Children's
Health Insurance Program or Refugee Medical Assistance? Are
they, in fact, eligible?
Remember, these are Afghans that helped U.S. forces, in
many ways saved lives of U.S. troops. Providing the right
resources and help is important.
Are eligible refugees enrolling in Medicaid, the Children's
Health Insurance Program or Refugee Medical Assistance?
Do you believe that refugees are aware of the health care
options available to them? If not, how could Congress support
efforts to increase awareness and enrollment in health care
services?
Ms. Marcos. I am not well-placed to answer the education
question, but the resettlement agencies absolutely will be
helping enroll both children and adults in health care
benefits.
Ms. Bahram. With the education question, I would like to
answer, because we have experienced this when the start of
Special Immigrant Visa families have arrived in 2014-2015. Many
of those kids have never been to school in Afghanistan and were
placed in fifth and sixth grade.
So our organization has provided an intensive tutoring
program with an amazing group of volunteers, retired teachers
who came forward and gave extra time to make sure that these
kids will be able to catch up.
I think it is important for us now that we are having a
larger number of children out, it is important that we have to
think of after-school programs that will specifically address
this need.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you very much. I know my time is
expired.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your indulgence and for
allowing me to participate, you and the other Chair and the
Ranking Members. I yield back.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Langevin.
Do we have any other Members that wish to ask questions of
our witnesses?
If not, then I want to thank the witnesses for their
valuable testimony and for all our Members for the questions.
Before I adjourn, I want to ask unanimous consent to submit
a statement to the record from the Church World Service.
Hearing no objections, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
Statement of Church World Service
October 21, 2021
As a 75-year old humanitarian organization representing 37
Protestant, Anglican, and Orthodox communions and 24 refugee
resettlement offices across 17 States, Church World Service (CWS) urges
the committee to affirm the need for the United States to take urgent
action to save at-risk Afghans--and invest in our Nation's capacity to
welcome and help our new Afghan neighbors integrate and thrive.
CWS urges the Biden administration to process vulnerable Afghans to
the United States, including Afghans who remain in Afghanistan and
those in other host/third countries, for as long as it takes to get
people to safety. Right now, countless vulnerable Afghans remain in
imminent danger. The humanitarian crisis is far from over for
potentially 1 million at-risk Afghans, including hundreds of thousands
of Afghans who assisted the U.S. mission, U.S. citizens, and legal
permanent residents who have been left behind, prevented from accessing
life-saving services. The Biden administration must have a clear,
efficient, and transparent strategy to evacuate Afghans in danger--
including women and girls, religious and minority groups, people with
disabilities, and others; create safe pathways out of Afghanistan; and
establish a process to vet and welcome Afghans to the United States. We
are disappointed by the Biden administration's overly narrow list of
priority stakeholders for evacuation, which currently includes only:
American citizens, legal permanent residents (LPRs), immediate family
members of American citizens and LPRs, U.S. Embassy staff, and Special
Immigrant Visa (SIV) applicants with Chief-of-Mission approval. While
these individuals are undoubtedly deserving of evacuation, thousands of
other Afghans face immediate needs for protection. The failure to
prioritize them too imperils lives.
CWS urges the Biden administration to establish a categorical
parole program for Afghan nationals, waive humanitarian parole
application fees for Afghan nationals, and ensure transparency and
interagency collaboration in the U.S. humanitarian response to
Afghanistan. The administration should create a categorical parole
program for Afghans and ensure that at a minimum, the program covers
Afghans with U.S. ties. Many categorical parole programs have been
established in our histories, such as the Cuban Family Reunification
Parole Program in 2007 and the Filipino World War II Veterans Parole
Program in 2016.
The administration should further waive humanitarian parole
application fees for Afghan nationals, as many have paid exorbitant
fees for loved ones overseas without clarity on processing times for
reunification. CWS urges Congress to provide our Afghan allies and
friends with the chance to apply to become lawful permanent residents.
As many Afghans were advised to destroy documents associating them to
the U.S. mission, this is particularly imperative. Many of the Afghans
are or would have been eligible for processing through the SIV program,
which grants visa holders immediate lawful permanent resident (LPR/
green card) status on arrival. Virtually all of the Afghans arriving
via humanitarian parole meet the legal definition of a refugee and, had
they been admitted through USRAP, they would have been eligible to
adjust to LPR status after 1 year. As Afghans are welcomed to their new
homes, and their new communities--integration is essential to stability
and a clear future.
CWS urges the Biden administration provide virtual and expedited
screening and processing for all at-risk Afghans, including those who
have applied for the SIV, humanitarian parole, and family reunification
(such as follow-to-join/I-730) programs, as well as those who are
referred to USRAP, including P-1, P-2, and P-3 referrals while in
Afghanistan or host countries. Further, the administration should
identify additional pathways to safety for at-risk Afghans who do not
qualify for the SIV or USRAP program. This includes, but is not limited
to, individuals who do not have a verifiable U.S. affiliation and are
not known to the U.S. Embassy (and therefore do not qualify for P-1),
but who were engaged in activities that make them targets of Taliban
reprisals. Such individuals include civil servants, women's rights
advocates, election workers, human rights lawyers, academics, and
journalists. We strongly recommend including individuals who worked on
U.S.-funded sub-contracts or sub-grants as well.
CWS welcomes vulnerable Afghans arriving in our communities and
asks for your support to help them fully integrate and thrive as they
adjust to their new homes. At no other time has our moral
responsibility to uphold these principles been greater.

Mr. Correa. The Members of the subcommittee may have
additional questions for the witnesses. We will ask the
witnesses to, if you do get the questions, to respond
expeditiously in writing to those questions.
I also remind the Members that the committee's record will
remain open for 10 days.
Without objection, the subcommittees stand adjourned. Thank
you very much.
[Whereupon, at 4:31 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

[all]
