- TAKING THE HELM: THE COMMANDANT'S VISION FOR THE U.S. COAST GUARD

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TAKING THE HELM: THE COMMANDANT'S VISION
FOR THE U.S. COAST GUARD

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND
MARITIME SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 14, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-65

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
49-364 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            John Katko, New York
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island      Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Clay Higgins, Louisiana
J. Luis Correa, California           Michael Guest, Mississippi
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri            Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Al Green, Texas                      Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
Yvette D. Clarke, New York           Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Eric Swalwell, California            Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
Dina Titus, Nevada                   Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey    Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Peter Meijer, Michigan
Val Butler Demings, Florida          Kat Cammack, Florida
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California    August Pfluger, Texas
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          Andrew R. Garbarino, New York
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Mayra Flores, Texas
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey
Ritchie Torres, New York
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Daniel Kroese, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Clerk

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey, Chairwoman
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida,
Dina Titus, Nevada                       Ranking Member
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex  Mayra Flores, Texas
officio)                         John Katko, New York (ex officio)
Alex Marston, Subcomittee Staff Director
Kathryn Maxwell, Minority Subcomittee Staff Director
Alice Hayes, Subcomittee Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Bonnie Watson Coleman, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New Jersey, and Chairwoman, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable Carlos A. Gimenez, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Florida, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     5

Witness

Admiral Linda L. Fagan, Commandant, United States Coast Guard:
Oral Statement.................................................     6
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

Appendix

Questions From Chairwoman Bonnie Watson Coleman for Linda L.
Fagan..........................................................    23
Questions From Honorable Jefferson Van Drew for Linda L. Fagan...    27

TAKING THE HELM: THE COMMANDANT'S VISION FOR THE U.S. COAST GUARD

----------

Thursday, July 14, 2022

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Transportation
and Maritime Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:07 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Bonnie Watson
Coleman [Chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Watson Coleman, Gottheimer,
Gimenez, Miller-Meeks, and Flores.
Also present: Representative Jackson Lee.
Chairwoman Watson Coleman. Good morning. The Subcommittee
on Transportation and Maritime Security will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare this
subcommittee in recess at any point.
Welcome to the Transportation and Maritime Security
Subcommittee's hearing entitled ``Taking the Helm: The
Commandant's Vision for the U.S. Coast Guard''. With us today
is the Commandant of the Coast Guard, Admiral Linda L. Fagan.
As the first female service chief in the history of our
Nation, your leadership shows service members across the globe
that the highest ranks of military service are no longer
reserved solely for men. You have said you hope to make work
force issues a central tenet of your leadership over the next 4
years. I hope you will share more about what the Coast Guard is
doing to attract a modern work force that fully represents the
diversity of this great Nation. It is my hope that the next 4
years will be a time of growth and success for the Coast Guard,
with more women, people of color, and members of the LGBTQ
community rising through the ranks and building off of your
success.
This committee and subcommittee have long been dedicated to
developing a diverse and inclusive environment in the Coast
Guard, in which every service member is free from harassment
and retaliation. A safe and welcoming culture that celebrates
our differences is vital to creating a work force that responds
to new challenges and meets the diverse needs of the American
public.
Currently, the demographics of the Coast Guard fail to
reflect the diversity of our Nation. For example, only 6
percent of active-duty members are Black, compared to about 14
percent of the U.S. population, and women make up just 15
percent of the active-duty force. I am particularly concerned
that diversity decreases with rank, leaving little opportunity
for women and minorities at the top, with the immediate
exception here today.
Admiral Fagan, your leadership as the first female service
chief will be essential for expanding opportunities for all
women in the Coast Guard. Today, women struggle to secure
limited opportunities for deployments on ships not outfitted
for a 21st Century work force inclusive of all genders. Some
women report being forced to choose between raising their
families and earning promotions. For people of all genders,
races, and ethnicities, in the Coast Guard and throughout the
armed forces, there remains a tragically common experience of
sexual harassment and assault.
Additionally, any instance of retaliation against a service
member who brings forward allegations of wrongdoing is illegal
and reprehensible. The Coast Guard still needs to make progress
toward improving reporting procedures, protecting
whistleblowers, and holding those in leadership positions to
account.
Admiral, I hope you will give us your commitment today to
improve the diversity and the equity within the Coast Guard and
root out harassment, assault, and retaliation. I also hope you
will discuss your vision for the future of the Coast Guard's
mission. An ever-changing geopolitical landscape and new
challenges from climate change mean that the Coast Guard has
never been more essential to America's National security. Ice
levels in the Arctic have begun to recede drastically, creating
both environmental catastrophe and conflict over trade routes,
natural resources, fishing rights, and global power.
In the far North, the Coast Guard's ice-breaking
capabilities are outmatched by our enemies and the rising
threat from China and Russia poses a serious risk to American
prosperity and security.
In the Indo-Pacific, the Coast Guard is increasing its
efforts to maintain freedom of movement in international
waters. Here at home, the Coast Guard is working tirelessly to
secure our maritime borders and interdict illegal drug
trafficking.
These are just a few pieces of the global, multifaceted
mission of the Coast Guard that you must execute, even as it
faces an aging fleet and challenges in recruiting top talent
amid stiff competition in the labor force.
The Coast Guard and Congress must work together to ensure
the service has all the funding and resources it needs.
Admiral Fagan, I thank you again for your service and for
appearing before us today. I congratulate you and look forward
to working with you and to hearing from you directly on your
vision for the next 4 years of the U.S. Coast Guard and the
future of the service.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Gimenez, for an opening statement.
[The statement of Chairwoman Watson Coleman follows:]
Statement of Chairwoman Bonnie Watson Coleman
Good morning.
Today the committee is meeting for a hearing titled ``Taking the
Helm: The Commandant's Vision for the U.S. Coast Guard.''
With us today is the Commandant of the Coast Guard, Admiral Linda
L. Fagan.
Admiral Fagan, I am pleased to have you appearing here today at the
start of your historic tenure as the 27th Commandant of the United
States Coast Guard.
As the first female service chief in the history of our Nation,
your leadership shows service members across the globe that the highest
ranks of military service are no longer reserved solely for men.
You have said you hope to make workforce issues a central tenet of
your leadership over the next 4 years.
I hope you will share more about what the Coast Guard is doing to
attract a modern workforce that fully represents the diversity of this
great Nation.
It is my hope that the next 4 years will be a time of growth and
success for the Coast Guard, with more women, people of color, and
members of the LGBTQ community rising through the ranks and building
off your success.
This committee and subcommittee have long been dedicated to
developing a diverse and inclusive environment in the Coast Guard, in
which every service member is free from harassment and retaliation.
A safe and welcoming culture that celebrates our differences is
vital to creating a workforce that responds to new challenges and meets
the diverse needs of the American public.
Currently, the demographics of the Coast Guard fail to reflect the
diversity of our Nation.
For example, only 6 percent of active-duty members are Black,
compared to about 14 percent of the U.S. population, and women make up
just 15 percent of the active-duty force.
I am particularly concerned that diversity decreases with rank,
leaving little opportunity for women and minorities at the top.
Admiral Fagan, your leadership as the first female service chief
will be essential for expanding opportunities for all women in the
Coast Guard.
Today, women struggle to secure limited opportunities for
deployments on ships not outfitted for a 21st Century workforce
inclusive of all genders.
Some women report being forced to choose between raising their
families and earning promotions.
And for people of all genders, races, and ethnicities, in the Coast
Guard and throughout the armed forces, there remains a tragically
common experience of sexual harassment and assault.
Additionally, any instance of retaliation against a service member
who brings forward allegations of wrongdoing is illegal and
reprehensible.
The Coast Guard still needs to make progress toward improving
reporting procedures, protecting whistleblowers, and holding those in
leadership positions to account.
Admiral Fagan, I hope you will give us your commitment today to
improve diversity and equity within the Coast Guard and root out
harassment, assault, and retaliation.
I also hope you will discuss your vision for the future of the
Coast Guard's mission.
An ever-changing geopolitical landscape and new challenges from
climate change mean that the Coast Guard has never been more essential
to America's National security.
Ice level in the Arctic have begun to recede drastically, creating
both environmental catastrophe and conflict over trade routes, natural
resources, fishing rights, and global power.
In the far North, the Coast Guard's icebreaking capabilities are
outmatched by our enemies and the rising threat from China and Russia
poses a serious risk to American prosperity and security.
In the Indo-Pacific, the Coast Guard is increasing its efforts to
maintain freedom of movement in international waters.
And here at home, the Coast Guard is working tirelessly to secure
our maritime borders and interdict illegal drug trafficking.
These are just a few pieces of the global, multifaceted mission the
Coast Guard must execute, even as it faces an aging fleet and
challenges in recruiting top talent amid stiff competition in the labor
force.
The Coast Guard and Congress must work together to ensure the
service has all the funding and resources it needs.
Admiral Fagan, I thank you again for your service and for appearing
before us today.
I look forward to hearing from you directly on your vision for the
next 4 years of the U.S. Coast Guard and the future of the service.

Mr. Gimenez. Thank you so much, Chairwoman Watson Coleman,
for holding this hearing today. I thank Admiral Linda Fagan for
being here--congratulations, Admiral--to discuss her vision for
the Coast Guard as she takes over at the helm as the 27th
Commandant of the Coast Guard.
Coast Guard has an increasingly complex difficult mission
and faces a number of critical homeland security challenges. I
work closely with Admiral Karl Shultz and his initiatives to
strengthen the service and look forward to doing the same with
Admiral Fagan.
As a former mayor of Miami Dade I have seen first-hand what
an integral role the Coast Guard plays in protecting our
Nation's ports, our waterways, and our harbors. The Coast Guard
is vitally important to facilitating lawful trade and travel
and protecting the marine transportation system. The Coast
Guard continues to face evolving threats of drug and human
smuggling stemming from an on-going crisis at our Southwest
Border. In addition, the number of undocumented migrants that
the Coast Guard interdicts at sea continues to grow year after
year.
Illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing has replaced
piracy as the leading global maritime security threat,
resulting in tens of billions of dollars in economic losses for
legal fishing enterprises. I am interested to hear from Admiral
Fagan on how she will position the service to counter this
challenging threat environment.
It is critical that you also recognize the growing
strategic importance of the Arctic to U.S. interests. Russia
and China are making significant investments in the Arctic. I
am pleased that there is funding in the fiscal year 2023
President's budget request for long lead materials for the
Coast Guard's third polar security cutter. These heavy
icebreakers are long, long overdue and I am interested to hear
details on the acquisition and the delivery time lines on this
critical infrastructure.
The new polar security cutters will greatly improve our
capabilities and presence in the polar regions.
I look forward to hearing today from Admiral Fagan on her
plans for her term as Commandant. Her extensive experience and
impressive background positions her as the right person to take
on this critical job.
I thank Admiral Fagan for her continued service to our
Nation.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I will yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Gimenez follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Carlos Gimenez
Thank you, Chairwoman Watson Coleman, for holding this hearing
today.
I thank Admiral Linda Fagan for being here to discuss her vision
for the Coast Guard as she takes over the helm as the 27th Commandant
of the Coast Guard. The Coast Guard has an increasingly complex,
difficult mission and faces a number of critical homeland security
challenges. I worked closely with Admiral Karl Schultz in his
initiatives to strengthen the service and look forward to doing the
same with Admiral Fagan.
As the former mayor of Miami-Dade, I have seen first-hand what an
integral role the Coast Guard plays in protecting our Nation's ports,
waterways, and harbors. The Coast Guard is vitally important to
facilitating lawful trade and travel and protecting the Marine
Transportation System.
The Coast Guard continues to face evolving threats of drug and
human smuggling stemming from the on-going crisis at our Southwest
Border. In addition, the number of undocumented migrants that the Coast
Guard interdicts at sea continues to grow, year over year. Illegal,
Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing has replaced piracy as the leading
global maritime security threat, resulting in tens of billions of
dollars in economic losses for legal fishing enterprises. I am
interested to hear from Admiral Fagan on how she will position the
service to counter this challenging threat environment.
It is critical that we also recognize the growing strategic
importance of the Arctic to U.S. interests. Russia and China are making
significant investments in the Arctic. I am pleased that there is
funding in the fiscal year 2023 President's budget request for long-
lead materials for the Coast Guard's third polar security cutter. These
heavy icebreakers are long overdue, and I am interested to hear details
on the acquisition and delivery time lines. The new polar security
cutters will greatly improve our capabilities and presence in the polar
regions.
I look forward to hearing today from Admiral Fagan on her plans for
her term as Commandant. Her extensive experience and impressive
background positions her as the right person to take on this difficult
job. I thank Admiral Fagan for her continued service to our Nation.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I yield back.

Chairwoman Watson Coleman. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Members are also reminded that the subcommittee will
operate according to the guidelines laid out by the Chairman
and Ranking Member in their February 3 colloquy regarding
remote procedures.
Additional Member statements may be submitted for the
record.
[The statement of Chairman Thompson follows:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
Thank you to Chairwoman Watson Coleman and Ranking Member Gimenez
for holding this hearing, and to Admiral Fagan for appearing before
this subcommittee as she embarks on her historic tenure as the 27th
Commandant of the United States Coast Guard.
Admiral, I would like to echo my colleagues' congratulations on
your more than three decades of service leading up to becoming our
Nation's first female service chief.
What you have achieved to this point is evidence of your unwavering
service to our country and the men and women of the Coast Guard.
As you have come up through the ranks, you have undoubtedly
experienced the enormous challenges facing the Coast Guard--challenges
you will now lead the service through as Commandant.
Russia's invasion of Ukraine, unprecedented cybersecurity threats
to the Marine Transportation System, and accelerating climate change
mean that the Coast Guard's ability to adapt to dynamic circumstances
is more important than ever.
To respond to emerging threats and the increased demand for its
services, the Coast Guard is undergoing a massive effort to
recapitalize its aging fleet.
I was pleased that the fiscal year 2023 budget request includes
proposals for continued investments in new cutters, including National
security cutters and polar security cutters built in my home State of
Mississippi.
Beyond investing in vessels, aircraft, and infrastructure, this
moment must be a turning point for investing in the Coast Guard's
people.
I have long-standing concerns about diversity, equity, and
inclusion within the Coast Guard, as well as the Service's treatment of
whistleblowers and failure to hold offenders accountable.
I am pleased that the Coast Guard has increased the number of
women, people of color, and members of the LGBTQ community in its
ranks, but more work remains to be done.
The Service has major problems retaining and advancing these
individuals due to deep-seated cultural issues and policies in dire
need of improvement.
The Committee on Homeland Security has heard from many
whistleblowers in recent years who have sounded the alarm about rampant
discrimination, sexual assault, and retaliation that erode the Coast
Guard's cohesion and mission-readiness.
Admiral, at your nomination hearing in April, you stated that you
will prioritize building a diverse, welcoming Coast Guard that gives
members ``a strong sense of belonging, so every individual is valued,
safe, and able to deliver their best service to the Nation.''
I am grateful to you for making that commitment--and I fully intend
to hold you to it.
I look forward to hearing today about your plans to ensure that our
United States Coast Guard lives up to its reputation as the best in the
world.
I congratulate you again on your confirmation, and I thank you for
your service to our Nation.
With that, I yield back.

Chairwoman Watson Coleman. I will now welcome our witness.
Admiral Linda Fagan was nominated by President Biden to be
the 27th Commandant of the United States Coast Guard and
assumed that command on June 21, 2022. She is the first woman
to serve in her role and as a service chief in the United
States Armed Forces. Prior to becoming Commandant, Admiral
Fagan served as the 32nd Vice Commandant of the Coast Guard and
in numerous prestigious leadership roles across the service,
including as Specific Area Commander, Coast Guard Defense Force
West Commander, and Deputy Commandant for Operations Policy and
Capability, among others. She has spent more than 3 decades in
uniform on all 7 continents and is the Coast Guard's first-ever
Gold Ancient Trident, an honor given to the officer with the
longest tenure in the Marine Safety Program.
We welcome you, Admiral Fagan.
Without objection, the witness' full statement will be
inserted in the record.
I now ask you, Admiral, if you would summarize your
statement for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ADMIRAL LINDA L. FAGAN, COMMANDANT, UNITED STATES
COAST GUARD

Admiral Fagan. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairwoman Watson Coleman and Ranking Member
Gimenez and distinguished Members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for entering my written testimony into the record.
Thank you for the opportunity to describe the state of the
Coast Guard today and share my vision for the service. I also
would like to thank Congress for your enduring support of the
United States Coast Guard.
For nearly 232 years the Coast Guard has provided safety,
security, and economic prosperity for the American people. Our
work force lives and serves in communities along the Atlantic,
Gulf, Pacific, and Arctic coasts and on the Great Lakes and
along our inland rivers where we are trusted to perform
essential missions. Around the world the racing stripe on our
ships and aircraft is a symbol of professionalism, good
governance, and hope for those nations striving to protect
their own sovereignty and prosperity. Our blend of authorities,
capabilities, and leadership are in demand around the globe to
help protect American interests.
However, the world we operate in is changing rapidly.
Advances in technology, pressures on maritime supply chains,
and threats to the global rules-based order are changing demand
for Coast Guard missions and changing the communities where our
people live and work.
The Coast Guard must keep pace with these changes to uphold
our proud tradition of service. The heartbeat of the Coast
Guard is our work force and without them we cannot execute our
missions. My highest priority as Commandant is to transform our
talent management system. We will recruit people from across
our great Nation who are service-oriented and have a high sense
of purpose. Our leaders will provide an increasingly diverse
work force, a strong sense of belonging, so every individual is
valued, safe, and able to deliver their best service to the
Nation.
Once a person has joined the Coast Guard we will retain
them by providing them and their family the support they need
and deserve, including access to high-quality housing, health
care, and child care. We will provide greater career
flexibility, eliminating policy barriers that deter people from
continuing to serve. To keep our competitive edge we must
provide the right tools, including a modern fleet of vessels
and aircraft, as well as the resilient shore facilities that
support them. Applying new technologies, we will incorporate
data systems into our operations so our leaders can make the
best decisions across every mission. We will advance our
mission excellence and we will continue to be brilliant at our
core missions at home while we meet global demand for the Coast
Guard by deploying where we provide the American people the
greatest benefit.
From the Arctic to Antarctica, throughout the world's
oceans, and along the entire coastline of the United States, we
will protect the Nation's safety, security, and prosperity.
As Commandant of the United States Coast Guard I am humbled
to have the responsibility for operating and advocating for
this incredible service. I am committed to the service, our
work force, and the Nation.
I look forward to working with Congress as we navigate the
Coast Guard into the future together.
Chairwoman Watson Coleman, Ranking Member Gimenez,
distinguished Members, it is a privilege to appear before you
today and I thank you for the opportunity to testify and I look
forward to your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Fagan follows:]
Prepared Statement of Linda L. Fagan
July 14, 2022
introduction
Good morning Chairwoman Watson Coleman, Ranking Member Gimenez, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity
to testify today and thank you for your enduring support of the United
States Coast Guard. I am humbled and grateful for the confidence and
trust of President Biden, Secretary Mayorkas, and the Congress.
I appreciate the opportunity to describe the state of the Coast
Guard today, share my vision for the Service and describe how the
administration's fiscal year 2023 budget request best positions the
Coast Guard to advance our National, economic, and environmental
security interests in an increasingly complex and connected world.
The Coast Guard makes significant contributions to global maritime
safety, security, and economic prosperity by applying our unique blend
of authorities and capabilities. The Service's broad authorities and
collaborative approach are increasingly vital to National objectives in
a broad spectrum of strategic challenges. The racing stripe on our
ships is a symbol of professionalism, good governance, and hope. Coast
Guard presence abroad creates security at home and strengthens partners
and allies as they counter threats to their sovereignty and prosperity.
This past year, the Coast Guard's cutters operated with partners and
allies across the globe. Coast Guard Cutter MUNRO participated in
cooperative at-sea exercises with the Royal Australian Navy in the
South China Sea, while BERTHOLF enforced regional fisheries management
with maritime law enforcement entities from Canada, the Republic of
Korea, and Japan during Operation North Pacific Guard. In the Atlantic,
the cutter MOHAWK will conduct law enforcement exercises with 6 African
nations to help them strengthen their own maritime governance.
Last year the Coast Guard commissioned and fielded 3 new 154-foot
Fast Response Cutters which now operate from Coast Guard Forces
Micronesia/Sector Guam. These new assets are strategically placed to
support the Indo-Pacific Strategy of the United States, which details
the need for an expanding Coast Guard presence in the region to work
collaboratively with partners and bolster Indo-Pacific security.
In the Arctic, Coast Guard Cutter HEALY transited the Northwest
Passage and circumnavigated North America. On this important
deployment, scientists on-board HEALY mapped the seafloor and analyzed
meltwater from Greenland's glaciers. This work improved navigation
routes, and advanced the scientific understanding of the ways the
ocean, atmosphere, and ice interact in a changing climate. In
Antarctica, the Nation's only heavy polar icebreaker, the Coast Guard
Cutter POLAR STAR, created a navigable path through ice as thick as 21
feet to enable the annual replenishment of America's McMurdo Station.
As America's maritime first responder, the Coast Guard is woven
into communities along the Pacific, Atlantic, Arctic, and Gulf Coasts
as well as the Great Lakes and navigable inland rivers. We provide
essential services to the American public: We rescue mariners in
distress, protect vital marine natural resources, break ice to
facilitate commerce, inspect ships to verify safety and pollution
controls, deliver aid after a disaster, mark navigable waterways to
keep mariners safe from hazards, secure our ports and harbors, and
interdict illegal drugs. In 2021, the Coast Guard saved 4,747 lives in
search-and-rescue cases, interdicted 380,000+ pounds of cocaine,
responded to 11,000+ pollution incident reports, surged forces in
response to domestic natural disasters such as Hurricane Ida, and
facilitated the free flow of commerce worth $5.4 trillion across the
Marine Transportation System (MTS).
readiness to meet the challenges of the future
Today, the Coast Guard faces both new challenges and new
opportunities. My vision for the Service is responsive to this changing
world and includes three tenets: Transform our Total Workforce, Sharpen
Our Competitive Edge, and Advance Our Mission Excellence.
Transform the Total Workforce.--The Coast Guard workforce is my
highest priority and requires innovative tools, inclusive policies,
trustworthy technology, modernized training, and exceptional support to
meet demand today and tomorrow. The world's most capable and talented
Coast Guard has over 57,000 active duty, reserve, and civilian
personnel, supported by 21,000 Auxiliary volunteers. Moving forward, we
will continue to pursue policies and practices that enable us to
recruit, train, and retain a workforce representative of the American
public we serve. We will build an inclusive culture that enables a
sense of belonging, empowering all to deliver their personal best while
serving as part of the world's best Coast Guard.
We will seek improved opportunities for our workforce and their
families to access high-quality health care, housing, and child care.
We will remain relentless in our effort to eradicate harmful behaviors,
such as sexual assault and sexual harassment, from our Service, and
continue our work to implement the military justice reforms from the
2022 National Defense Authorization Act. We will continue to revisit
policies that deter otherwise qualified members from continuing their
careers, and instead we will actively encourage our brightest talent to
stay. Similarly, we will pursue new training designs to engage our
workforce in meaningful learning, whether in a classroom or in the
field. These actions will improve quality of life for our workforce and
strengthen our operational readiness.
The fiscal year 2023 budget requests $170 million for pay and
benefits and $53 million to enhance recruiting and retention
initiatives, further expand diversity, equity, inclusion, and
accessibility efforts, modernize training, and better support the needs
of our workforce. These new initiatives will attract the mission-ready
total workforce we need today and into the future, and enable our field
leaders to bolster the resiliency of our people and their families.
Sharpen our Competitive Edge.--The Coast Guard must lean forward to
remain the world's best Coast Guard. Constantly evolving technology
requires the Service to develop new capabilities to keep pace. The
Coast Guard is in the midst of our largest recapitalization effort
since World War II--an effort critical to ensuring our Nation has the
capable, modern assets it needs to meet the unprecedented growth in
demand for Coast Guard services. However, until fully recapitalized,
the Coast Guard continues to conduct missions with legacy assets, some
of which are over 50 years old.
Surface Assets
With the continued strong support of both the administration and
Congress, we are acquiring the Nation's first new heavy polar
icebreakers in almost half a century. The polar security cutters (PSCs)
will provide the global reach and icebreaking capability necessary to
ensure U.S. presence in the Arctic and Antarctic regions in support of
the National Security Strategy and the National Defense Strategy.
The fiscal year 2023 request also includes the acquisition,
modification, and operation of a commercially available polar
icebreaker to add near-term National capability in the Arctic, train
icebreaker sailors, and help inform capability requirements for the
future acquisition of Arctic security cutters (medium icebreakers). As
melting sea ice creates new routes in the High Latitudes that
increasingly attract human activity, scientific discovery, and economic
prospects, the Nation needs year-round surface access to the critically
important geo-strategic Polar Regions.
Continued progress on the Offshore Patrol Cutter (OPC) program is
absolutely vital to recapitalizing the capability provided by our
legacy fleet of 210-foot and 270-foot Medium Endurance Cutters (MECs).
The OPCs are assets our crews deserve and our Nation needs. The fiscal
year 2023 request provides $650 million for construction of the fifth
OPC and long lead time materials for the sixth. Last month the Coast
Guard awarded a contract for the construction of the second phase of 11
OPCs, a vital step as we progress toward our program of record of 25
hulls. The legacy assets the OPCs will replace have been workhorses for
decades and have served the Nation with distinction, but the MEC fleet
is becoming more difficult and expensive to maintain, and we continue
to see degradation in its operational availability.
The fiscal year 2023 request also includes $77 million to support
the detailed design and construction of the Waterways Commerce Cutter
(WCC) program. Recapitalization of our fleet of inland tenders--some of
which have been in service since the 1940's--is essential to
maintaining both the fixed and floating aids that enable safe
navigation on the MTS. This system includes over 25,000 miles of rivers
and navigable channels that connect America's consumers, producers,
manufacturers, and farmers to domestic and global markets, with an
annual economic impact of $4.6 trillion. The marine highways are
critical to American prosperity.
Aviation Assets
The fiscal year 2023 request continues the Coast Guard's transition
of our rotary wing fleet with $100 million for an additional four MH-
60T helicopters. Our current fleet includes 98 MH-65 Dolphin and 48 MH-
60 Jayhawk helicopters. Both helicopters are undergoing essential
Service Life Extension Programs (SLEP) to push current capabilities
into the late 2030's. Growing the Coast Guard's fleet of MH-60's via
the purchase of new hulls, or the conversion of low-hour former Navy
air frames at our Aviation Logistics Center, is crucial to sustaining
Coast Guard air operations and meeting mission demands.
Cybersecurity and C5I Modernization
Evolving cyber threats continue to present challenges to the
security of the Coast Guard's network and of the MTS. The fiscal year
2023 request promotes continued efforts to modernize and protect the
Coast Guard's networks pursuant to Executive Order 14028 on Improving
the Nation's Cybersecurity, while positioning the Service to have the
robust suite of cyber tools and professionals necessary to keep pace
with technological advances and increasing cyber threats.
Additionally, we are leveraging the momentum of recent
Congressional support for our ``Technology Revolution''--a ``Whole-of-
Service'' effort to ensure our workforce has reliable, mobile, and
integrated information systems to leverage data and empower operations.
Shore Infrastructure
Every Coast Guard mission begins and ends at a shore facility. Our
facilities, piers, and runways are as critical for operations as our
ships and aircraft, and the buildings where our people eat and sleep
while standing duty are as important to workforce retention as our
talent management policies. Additionally, the Nation's reliance upon
the Coast Guard to serve as a first responder after man-made and
natural disasters underscores the importance of resilient facilities.
Coast Guard shore infrastructure is located in areas prone to
hurricanes, flooding, earthquakes, and other natural disasters. We
greatly appreciate the $434 million provided by the Congress as part of
the Infrastructure and Investment and Jobs Act, and the $355 million
provided in fiscal year 2022 to support critical shore facility
investments.
The Coast Guard continues to focus on recapitalizing our shore
infrastructure, updating and where possible replacing legacy military
housing and support facilities, and modernizing waterfront facilities
to be ready for new assets. Despite these efforts, substantial backlogs
for both the recapitalization of infrastructure and asset maintenance
remain. While we are making consistently strong headway on
recapitalizing our cutters and aircraft, that progress requires making
tough annual tradeoffs that continue to impact shore infrastructure
investment needs. The fiscal year 2023 request includes targeted
investments to improve the condition of our aging shore facilities, and
to prepare for the Coast Guard's future fleet. Given the scope of the
challenge, additional investments and a modern approach to project
planning, prioritization, and execution are necessary to ensure the
Service has the adequately maintained and resilient infrastructure
required to meet operational demands into the future.
Advance Our Mission Excellence.--The Coast Guard thrives in the
increasingly complex and unforgiving maritime environment by continuing
our tradition of exceptional service in our core missions, while
innovating to meet the changing needs of the American people.
The Coast Guard is committed to the Secretary of Homeland
Security's priorities, including maritime border security, full
participation in crisis response, and the protection of critical
infrastructure, including in the cyber domain. In 2021, Coast Guard
responders provided critical health care and other logistical support
to meet surging demand on the Southwest Border. With our unique
authorities and capabilities, the increasing demand for Coast Guard
services comes from all levels of government and from abroad. As the
sole military service within the Department of Homeland Security, the
Coast Guard is uniquely positioned to support coordination with the
Department of Defense across the full spectrum of integrated National
Security, National Defense, Homeland Security, and Homeland Defense
missions.
The Coast Guard will continue to be a leader in global maritime
governance. We are ideally positioned as the preferred maritime partner
for many nations. We will use our unique authorities and capabilities
to uphold America's long-standing commitment to a stable and open
international system that adheres to the rule of law and good maritime
governance. The fiscal year 2023 request provides the Coast Guard $118
million to expand the Service's operations in regions vital to
America's National security and prosperity--the Arctic, Indo-Pacific,
and the Atlantic Basin.
conclusion
As we look to fiscal year 2023 and beyond, we must continue to
resource the Coast Guard to maintain a ready and resilient force.
Funding provided in the fiscal year 2023 President's Budget will enable
the Service to protect the homeland, save those in peril, enhance our
economic prosperity by supporting the maritime industry, protect our
National resources, adapt to climate change, and strengthen the
international rules-based order. I look forward to working with this
committee to be a more adaptive and connected Coast Guard that
generates sustained readiness, resilience, and capability in new ways
to enhance our Nation's maritime safety, security, and prosperity.
With the continued support of the administration and Congress, your
Coast Guard will live up to our motto--Semper Paratus--Always Ready. I
thank the committee for your dedication and support of the Coast Guard
and its workforce.
FISCAL YEAR 2023 BUDGET HIGHLIGHTS
Budget Priorities:

Restore Readiness.--The Coast Guard must maintain momentum
restoring Service readiness. More than ever, the Nation needs a
ready Coast Guard with the personnel, tools, and support
systems to operate in an increasingly complex, interconnected,
and technologically advanced maritime domain.

Build the Coast Guard of the Future.--The Coast Guard is in
the midst of the largest recapitalization effort since World
War II--an effort critical to ensuring the Service has the
capable, modern assets it needs to meet the unprecedented
growth in demand for Coast Guard services.
The fiscal year 2023 budget requests $9.62 billion for Operations
and Support (O&S) and $1.65 billion for Procurement, Construction, and
Improvements (PC&I). Budget highlights include:
Restore Readiness (O&S):
Support the Mission Ready Total Workforce

$170 million for requisite military pay and allowances per
National Defense Authorization Act requirements, maintaining
parity with the military branches within the Department of
Defense, and $49 million for civilian pay and benefits (O&S).

$53 million for workforce readiness, including recruiting,
retention, diversity, equity, inclusion, accessibility,
training, and support.
Modernize Operational Capability

$100 million for new assets including: Operations and
maintenance for OPC #2; crew for OPC #3; operations and
maintenance for National Security Cutter (NSC) #10 and crew for
NSC #11. Additionally, the budget provides funding for
operations, maintenance, and crew for three C-27J aircraft.

$11 million for marine safety capacity to modernize and
oversee the merchant mariner credentialing program, and
additional personnel to conduct timely and thorough marine
inspections and investigations to enable commerce and maritime
security.
Expanding Operations: Arctic, Oceania, and the Atlantic
Basin

$30 million to crew a commercially-available polar
icebreaker to expand Coast Guard capacity, and near-term
enhanced capability to conduct Arctic operations, grow High
Latitude sailors, and inform Arctic strategy.

$48 million to expand operations in the Indo-Pacific in
order to promote economic prosperity, combat IUUF, promote
environmental resilience, and ensure unrestricted lawful access
to the region's maritime environment.

$40 million to support activities in the Partnership for the
Atlantic Basin initiative to address maritime security issues.
Cybersecurity and C5I Modernization

$47 million to operate, maintain, secure, and protect Coast
Guard IT networks, enhance the cybersecurity of maritime
critical infrastructure, and conduct cyber effects operations
to deter and respond to cyber attacks on the Marine
Transportation System (MTS).

$7 million to transition to modern software and provide
mobile solutions for the workforce.
Recapitalize Legacy Assets and Infrastructure (PC&I):

$1.2 billion for vessels, including: $650 million for
construction of OPC #5 and long-lead time materials for OPC #6;
$167 million for the PSC program, including project management
and construction of PSCs #1-2 and long-lead time materials for
PSC #3; $60 million for post-delivery activities for NSCs #9-
11; $77 million for the Waterways Commerce Cutter (WCC)
program, including project management and long-lead time
materials; and $125 million to acquire a commercially-available
polar icebreaker.

$182 million to recapitalize and sustain fixed and rotary-
wing aircraft including: Sustainment of the current MH-60T
helicopter fleet and funding for fleet expansion; modernization
and sustainment of MH-65 helicopters to extend service lift
into the 2030's; and continued missionization of HC-27J medium-
range fixed-wing surveillance aircraft.

$180 million for shore infrastructure improvements to
support new acquisitions and the execution of Coast Guard
operations including: PSC homeport in Seattle, Washington; FRC
homeport in St. Petersburg, Florida; WCC homeports; continued
buildout of the consolidated Goperational base in Charleston,
South Carolina; and other infrastructure repairs and upgrades.

Chairwoman Watson Coleman. Thank you, Admiral, for your
testimony.
I am going to remind the committee that we will each have 5
minutes to question the witness.
Without objection, Members not on this subcommittee shall
be permitted to sit and question the witness.
I will now recognize myself for questions.
Admiral, there is so much I am interested in with regard to
the Coast Guard. I have kind-of three quick questions I would
like to just pose to you at one time, asking that you recognize
we have got 5 minutes in total to respond to them.
First, with this being your first hearing before Congress
since you took command, could you express for us what you hope
to achieve during these next 4 years of tenure and what you see
being your greatest challenge?
Also I would like to know--I would like you to know I and
other Members are very interested in Coast Guard Arctic mission
and how that mission continues to expand and grow in importance
as climate changes. So I would like to know from you how has
Russia's attack on Ukraine changed the state of play in the
Arctic at all? What do you view as the future of our encounters
with Russia and China in the Arctic? Are there any ways in
which Russia and China cooperate or will cooperate with the
international community on scientific research initiatives or
other opportunities for cooperation?
Finally, the question that you and I spoke about the other
day has to do with the LGBTQ community and the Rand
Corporation's study that did not look into this issue. We are
very much concerned about that issue and issues facing women
and racial minorities. I believe those studies were
tremendously valuable and hope that you will be able to commit
to continuing that endeavor to uncover these issues.
Admiral Fagan. Thank you, Chairwoman.
There are a lot in those three questions and I am mindful
of time.
First, with regard to what I hope to achieve as Commandant.
I have published the Commandant's Strategic Intent with three
tenets. Of the three, the most significant and most critical to
the service is transforming our talent management system and
addressing work force issues.
As I shared with you, recruiting is an immediate focus area
to ensure that we are drawing the best talent into the service
that we can. We then need to get after policies that have
served us well but do not continue to serve us well as we move
forward in a way that is reflective of society and the work
that we are asking our work force to do. That work is under
way. I am excited about the transformative change that we have
an opportunity to make. Making it easier for people to enter
the service and stay in the service directly gets at exactly
the opportunity that you have asked us to make available to any
and all who choose to service.
With regard to the Arctic mission and Russia and China, as
we know, China has declared themselves as a near-Arctic nation.
We are an Arctic nation. We are not a near-Arctic nation, we
are an Arctic nation. So getting the capability and capacity to
create enduring presence in the Arctic, in the waters off of
Alaska, are absolutely a priority. I am thankful for the
support we received from Congress with regard to money to begin
building polar security cutters. As you said, we are working
detail design for the first polar security cutter. We have
purchased long lead time materials for the second. I have a
sense of urgency for the Nation that we need to get that
capability fielded as soon as possible.
With regard to Russia and the Coast Guard's interaction
with Russia, we continue--you know, we operate in and along the
maritime boundary line that we share, you know, in the Bering
with Russia. We continue to operate in--those engagements
continue to be professional. We two winters ago had the Polar
Star up above 65 degrees and had some interactions with the
Russians there. You know, actual presence matters, and so
getting that capability--and then the Coast Guard is really
excited about fielding that and operating that for the Nation.
There are a number of multi-lateral forums that help get at
the kind of dialog and discussion I think are important for us
as a Nation, the Arctic Coast Guard Forum, North Pacific Coast
Guard Forum. It is unclear to me where we will sort-of end with
those Forums or what form they will take moving forward,
particularly with regard to Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
Finally, on the LGBTQ community and the Rand Study. I am
committed to creating a safe, fair environment for everyone
that serves in the Coast Guard. I am committed to ensuring
where that does not happen--and we have reports that there has
been retaliation or harassment, that we investigate those, that
they are done fairly, swiftly, and in compliance with all the
laws and policy and that we cannot afford to not continue to
seek the best environment for our work force.
Thank you, Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Watson Coleman. Thank you, Admiral. It is
incredible how timely you are in your responses and in your
testimony.
I now recognize the Ranking Member of the subcommittee, the
gentleman from Florida.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Admiral, how many icebreakers do the Russians operate right
now?
Admiral Fagan. They operate in varying size and numbers,
but most estimates put it at greater than--somewhere greater
than 40 icebreakers.
Mr. Gimenez. I am sorry, how many?
Admiral Fagan. Something north of 40.
Mr. Gimenez. Forty? How many does the United States
operate?
Admiral Fagan. We currently operate one heavy icebreaker,
the Polar Star, which I had an opportunity to visit last week
in the yard. When she is done with the yard with Vallejo we
will send her south to Antarctica for the Deep Freeze mission.
The Coast Guard cutter Healy is a medium icebreaker that we
continue to operate. Healy just left Seattle a couple of days
ago to conduct science operations in the Arctic.
To your point, sir, this is why it is so critical that we
get the polar security cutter fielded and operational as soon
as possible.
Mr. Gimenez. The 40 you talked about, are they different
sizes? Are they heavy and medium, light, et cetera? I mean what
constitutes their fleet?
Admiral Fagan. They are of varying sizes. We can certainly
get you the details on the--you know, from small to large
nuclear icebreakers and what that breakdown is for the
Russians.
Mr. Gimenez. How many of them will have the same capability
as our new icebreakers, the ones that you are designing right
now?
Admiral Fagan. I do not have that number. It is a much
smaller number of the large heavy icebreakers. Be happy to
provide you that exact breakdown with regard to Russian
capabilities. We would also offer you the Canadians have some
icebreaking capacity, as do some of our other Arctic nations.
Happy to provide a more complete breakdown on what that
capability looks like.
Mr. Gimenez. All right. You said the Chinese are also now
saying they are a near-Arctic nation. Are they constructing or
do they have icebreakers in the region?
Admiral Fagan. The Chinese have two icebreakers, ice-
capable research vessels, the Xue Long 1 and the Xue Long 2,
and they regularly operate those vessels either in the Arctic
or Antarctica.
Mr. Gimenez. Do you have any intelligence that they are
building more?
Admiral Fagan. I would be happy to get you that information
if they have got plans for more. I don't have it off-hand.
Mr. Gimenez. Fair enough.
OK, what is your strategic interest in the Arctic? What do
you think? Is there a strategic interest in the Arctic?
Admiral Fagan. You know, as we watched the Chinese as they,
you know, operate around the world, you know, presence and
access I believe is their interest, which is why it becomes so
critical for us as an Arctic nation to have a presence on the
water in the Arctic to ensure our own national sovereignty.
Mr. Gimenez. Fair enough. How long is it going to take for
us to get these new icebreakers on-line?
Admiral Fagan. So we are on contract with Halter to build
the polar security cutters. We are working with the yard to get
to the level of maturity on detailed design to begin cutting
steel, which we are hopeful will occur soon. Once we get to the
level of detail design, we will have better time lines and
updates on when we will actually see that cutter operational.
We have not built a polar security cutter since the mid-
1970's, when both the Polar Sea and the Polar Star were
constructed. We have not done this as a Nation since then. It
is going to be--it is a complex ship to build. We are excited
about the opportunity. Halter will absolutely deliver a quality
product for us, but we have got to get the detail designed.
Mr. Gimenez. Can you give me a guesstimate of when you
think these things will be operational?
Admiral Fagan. Right now, the program of record has us into
mid-2025. Again, once we get the detail design and begin
cutting steel, we will have a better update on what the actual
time lines are.
Mr. Gimenez. How many of these cutters do you think you
need? How many cutters does the United States of America need?
Admiral Fagan. We have been consistent with regard to that
we need six icebreakers, at least three of which are heavy and
we need one now, which is why the polar security cutter at
Halter is so critical. We continue to work, you know, on what
an Arctic security cutter might look like, a medium-capable
icebreaker and are, you know, excited about the conversation in
support around the potential for a commercially-available
icebreaker.
Mr. Gimenez. I am concerned about the time it takes to
procure things around here. I am not just talking the Coast
Guard, I am talking about everything, all right. The time it
takes to procure and the amount of money it takes to procure.
Can you come up with some recommendations for us to--maybe as
Congress to start cutting some of this tape so that we can
start procuring stuff a lot quicker?
I mean how long do you think that it takes the Russians to
build a cutter and the Chinese to build a cutter versus us?
Admiral Fagan. I don't have estimates on their time line.
Be happy to work with you and Congress on, you know, the
Federal Acquisition Rules that we abide by. We do do all our
acquisitions in compliance with the Federal Government.
Mr. Gimenez. I understand. No, I think it is our problem
actually. We put more red tape in front of it. We need to
acquire stuff, we need to acquire equipment much quicker than
we are doing right now because our adversaries are doing it
much quicker than we are doing. So we need to react to that and
that is just a plain fact.
So thank you, ma'am. I think my time is up.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Watson Coleman. Thank you to the Ranking Member.
The Chair will now recognize other Members for questions
that they may wish to ask of the witness.
In accordance with the guidelines laid out by the Chairman
and the Ranking Member in the February 3 colloquy, I will
recognize Members in their order of seniority, alternating
between Majority and Minority. Members are also reminded to
unmute themselves when recognized for questions.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Texas, Ms.
Sheila Jackson Lee, for 5 minutes.
The Chair will now recognize Representative Miller-Meeks
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Madam Chair, and Ranking
Member Gimenez, and thank you so much, Admiral Fagan, for being
here. You have got an illustrious career. As a veteran of the
United States Army, I thank you for your service.
In fiscal year 2021 the Coast Guard interdicted over 3,500
undocumented migrants at sea, almost double the number from
fiscal year 2020. What role does the Coast Guard play in
protecting our border security from human and drug smuggling,
which we know has rapidly increased in the past 18 months?
Admiral Fagan. Thank you, Representative.
We play a critical role in the maritime migration vectors.
This is life-saving work. The journey to attempt migration by
sea is particularly perilous and the potential for loss of life
significant. So we remain postured with both our cutters and
small boats and aircraft to detect early when a migration
attempt has begun and then move to intercept so that we don't
experience a loss of life. But your statistics are correct, the
flows are higher this year than they have been in the past, but
we are postured to prevent a loss of life in those vectors.
With regard to, you know, counter-narcotics in the counter-
narcotic mission, we as well are postured both, you know, in
the Caribbean and in the Eastern Pacific to interdict and
counter those illicit activities at sea. This is a 365, 24/7
mission for the Coast Guard. We do it in conjunction with other
interagency partners, you know, with SOUTHCOMM, Joint
Interagency Task Force--South, Customs and Border Control. It
is truly a team effort, certainly in the counter-narcotics, as
well as in the maritime migration realm. It is to my mind a
great example of a unity of effort approach with regard to our
National resources against those threat streams.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. You mentioned this briefly, but
transnational crime organizations and drug cartels are
leveraging capability gaps and the gaps in our Southern Border
to enhance their operations. What trends has the Coast Guard
observed related to ships and smuggling routes in the Caribbean
as Pacific maritime domains?
Admiral Fagan. Thank you.
We honestly follow the trends and flows closely and, you
know, would be happy to give you details on, you know, what has
changed. There is increased flow in the Caribbean at this point
this year we have seen in previous years.
We have done a lot as well--and, again, in a Classified
setting we would be happy to share some of the analysis we have
done on the network, on, you know, the TCO networks and how
they operate to then, you know, put a vessel at sea with
illicit narcotics on it.
You know, I would add that the counter narcotics and the
interdiction work we do, this too is life-saving work. These
are drugs that do not get into our cities and overdoses that
are avoided. We would be happy to give a much more detailed
assessment on the flows, what shifted, and how we are
encountering the TCOs.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Yes, if that is something permissible, I
think it would be valuable for all of us. We know that these
gaps in our Southern Border have led to increased drugs,
especially synthetic Fentanyl coming across. We recently voted
on legislation in order to protect our CBP agents, Coast Guard
agents, our Coast Guard members, and others who handle these
drugs--law enforcement officers--from touching them. It could
lead to deadly overdose.
You are correct, it is not only life-saving for those
members coming across, but for those people in the United
States that receive drugs, but also for our Coast Guard itself
when there is increased trafficking, increased people trying to
come across into this country.
So I want to thank you for your testimony and would love to
have a further briefing on the trends that you are noticing as
well too.
Thank you so much. Thank you for your leading this.
Chairwoman Watson Coleman. The Chair recognizes Mr.
Gottheimer from the great State of New Jersey.
Mr. Gottheimer. Great State indeed, Madam Chairwoman. Thank
you very much. Thank you for holding this important hearing and
thank you to Admiral Fagan for being here today and for your
service to our great country. I am joining my colleagues in
congratulating you on your historic appointment. The Coast
Guard plays a critical role in securing our ports, our
waterways, our coastlines from all types of National security
threats.
I have called for a National carjacking and car theft task
force as a result of a rising number of car thefts impacting my
district, the State of New Jersey, and of course across our
country. However, this threat reaches our ports as well, deep
into them, with thousands of stolen vehicles bound for
countries overseas being recovered by our Federal law
enforcement at our ports. I have called on this subcommittee to
hold a hearing to examine this matter closer and how it impacts
our port security, especially as we have seen a significant
surge in New Jersey in recent months of car theft in
particular. The U.S. Coast Guard, along with other Department
of Homeland Security agencies, has an important role, as I
know, in port security. But if I can ask, what if anything is
the U.S. Coast Guard to combat the use of American ports for
transnational trafficking of stolen cars and other products?
Admiral Fagan. So I am very familiar with the Port of New
York and New Jersey from my previous time as the captain of the
port in New York and I am well acquainted with the--you know,
the host of agencies that help ensure the lawful and, you know,
safe and secure movement of cargo, both into and out of that
port. While the captain of the port plays a really critical
role in bringing agencies together, I am certain that they are
having those conversations within the port with all of the key
players who have authority and opportunity to address the
problem that you have raised.
You know, obviously ensuring safe cargo movement, secure
cargo movement, is a key. We play a role in that, but we are
not the sole agency that ensures that that is occurring.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you.
Admiral, does the Coast Guard--will they interdict if they
see--and working with either the CBP or other Department of--
DHS agencies to increase port security? If you see outgoing
traffic of stolen or illicit goods, is that something the Coast
Guard gets involved with? Are you trying to be more attuned to
that? Because we are seeing a significant number of vehicles
moving into Port of Newark in New Jersey and then things
shipped overseas, big surge into Western Africa of stolen
vehicles. You know, what role can the Coast Guard play there?
Admiral Fagan. So we would be engaged with those other
enforcement and law enforcement entities. Again, there are some
great and very mature coordinating mechanisms within New York
for that to happen between CBP, the Coast Guard, you know,
NYPD--pick the host of enforcement agencies that would have a
role in addressing the problems that you have raised. We would
absolutely be part of those interagency conversations. I am
aware of several, you know, joint Coast Guard-CBP interdictions
where you have had illegal cargo coming into the port and,
again, good mature process to bring those--all of the
authorities together to address the problems.
Mr. Gottheimer. Can you board? So if you see a ship that is
suspicious, is that something you board? What is the best way
that that happens? How does the Coast Guard--you see it work
obviously with Homeland, but it gets off the coast, are you
focused more on egress versus ingress or vice versa?
Admiral Fagan. So our part, we screen every vessel that is
bound to enter the United States. You know, there is both cargo
and cruise screening 96 hours in advance. Those coordination
centers, a lot of that screening happens right here in the
District of Columbia. It is a joint effort, the Coast Guard and
Customs and Border Patrol. Where a vessel is identified as
being at risk for having illicit cargo, then the type of
coordination we talked about occurs well before that ship
arrives in the United States and then, you know, decisions on
where the boarding occurs, who is on the boarding, all
coordinated in advance.
You know, the----
Mr. Gottheimer. Is that less so from going out and more
coming in?
Admiral Fagan. So that is the inbound.
Mr. Gottheimer. Yes.
Admiral Fagan. The egress problem set that you have raised,
right, that again these same agencies, law enforcement agencies
with authorities work in collaboration to address, you know,
where the illicit cargo may be and then work to coordinate who
has got primary authority for the boarding.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you, Admiral Fagan. Congratulations
again on your distinguished career and service to our country
and on your new appointment. Congratulations.
Admiral Fagan. Thank you.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thanks for being here.
Thank you, Chairwoman. I yield back.
Chairwoman Watson Coleman. I am sorry, Congresswoman Sheila
Jackson Lee.
Well, I have a few more questions for a second round. I
think my Ranking Member does, and I am sure Mr. Gottheimer has
some.
I want to ask you a general question. I know you have only
been there a month, but you know what you know and you have
been there in the Coast Guard for a very long time. If I ask
you what are your three greatest challenges to getting what you
need to get done? I would like to know what you would tell me,
because I am asking.
Then I would like you to specify what is it that you would
be happy to have Congress work on on behalf of the Coast Guard.
Admiral Fagan. Thank you. Thank you for the question,
Chairwoman.
As I have said, the biggest issue at hand centers around
people and work force. As I shared with you yesterday, the
recruiting challenge for the service is real. It is here now.
It is not unique to the Coast Guard. I have a real sense of
urgency around what we need to do to surge into the recruiting
challenge that we face. We are moving to do that.
Chairwoman Watson Coleman. Let me ask you a question about
that real fast. Do you think you have the resources to compete
with other entities recruiting the very best that you would
like to have?
Admiral Fagan. So we have the recruiting resources that we
have right now. One of the things I have asked the team to do
is to answer exactly that question, do we have our recruiting
enterprise appropriately resourced, are we in the right places,
do we have the right tools. That is work that is on-going.
You know, some of the other services are paying significant
bonuses to recruit folks into the organization. I don't believe
that that is an adequate long-term strategy. That is why the
work force transformation in policy is so critical. We will get
after the problem of drawing people into the Coast Guard.
People stay in the Coast Guard, we retain people at a high
rate, but we need to make it easier to retain and even bring in
the number of people. That gets at policy and support that
makes it easy for people to come, stay, and serve successfully.
That will require us to unpack some of the assumptions of
service that we have used for so long. You know, for example,
opportunities to lateral into the service at a mid pay grade
point where you have got full credentials on the civilian side,
opportunities to opt out of promotion for a year because you
are in a place that you and your family are happy and stable,
and then an ability to opt back in without penalty or impact.
That is all work in front of us.
Chairwoman Watson Coleman. Mm-hmm. OK.
Admiral Fagan. This is transformational, this is cultural
change with regard to work force policy and talent that we are
going to need to get after as a service. As you know culture
change is difficult. I have challenged the team though to be
bold, be transformative. The red flag for me is if someone
says, well, we have always done it that way. That generally
indicates it is an area we need to make progress in.
Chairwoman Watson Coleman. So, you know, I thank you for
your delving into this whole issue of the work force.
Hopefully, you know, the policies and procedures in place and
the accountabilities and making sure the investigations take
place and that the results of the investigation are reflective
of what actually happened and the consequences of those
infractions are appropriately addressed.
I want to ask you this question. I think it is following up
on what my colleague and my friend here asked. That is about
how do you get to build your ships and boats and things like
that more quickly. I wanted to ask you this the other day when
I talked to you, because you were talking about purchasing an
already existing cutter from a commercial owner. I am wondering
what is so different now, even though we haven't built any,
other folks have built them, that it is so complicated that we
can't quite, as you say, cut the steel until we do this
reimagine what it should be. What is so different now that
would necessitate that kind of possibly delay?
Admiral Fagan. Right. So, you know, as I indicated, all of
our acquisition capabilities are done in accordance with the
Federal acquisition rules and there are significant controls
and checks and balances on how that happens. You know,
commercial industry, you know, other countries have different
rules with regard to building----
Chairwoman Watson Coleman. Yes, but I know you are not
going to buy something that doesn't meet your needs. So I think
my question is more to, you gave me the impression that what we
were trying to build is so complex now that it is taking a long
time to get all the little plans together and the designs
together.
I know I am running out of time, so if you could just kind-
of quickly----
Admiral Fagan. So the commercially-available icebreaker is
not a heavy icebreaker. It will not be as capable as the polar
security cutter and likely less capable than the Arctic
security cutters.
Chairwoman Watson Coleman. OK.
Admiral Fagan. What it provides is capability now, you
know, in a way that we can field much quicker than new
construction. We are excited for the support and, you know, all
of the on-going conversation around what it would take to give
both funding and authority for the Coast Guard to purchase a
commercially-available icebreaker. Again, sense of urgency for
getting operating capability into the Arctic so we can create a
more enduring presence.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Watson Coleman. Thank you. Thank you.
I would like to yield to the Ranking Member for 5 minutes
and 46 seconds.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
This is something that I learned a long time ago when I was
a fire chief before I was a mayor, and the firefighters always
wanted a certain kind of fire truck. Then we were at a point
where we really needed a new fire truck, so I just bought some
commercial stuff. Guess what, it put out fires too, OK. So it
is the nature of the beast that you want a specific thing that
has got--it has got to be just for us and all that, but I think
we need to do something better, we need to procure things a lot
quicker.
I want to get back to interdiction at sea and the policy.
If somebody is interdicted at sea, if a migrant is interdicted
at sea, say in the Caribbean, what happens to them?
Admiral Fagan. When we encounter migrants at sea, they are
brought onto--you know, onto the Coast Guard vessel and, you
know, processed and then, you know, over the course of the
processing time, which is not--is done by another agency, but
eventually they are then returned to their country of origin.
Mr. Gimenez. Do you have any idea why a migrant who is
coming by sea is treated any differently that somebody who is
crossing the Southern Border?
Admiral Fagan. I can just speak to the role we play with
regard to, you know, ensuring that there is not a loss of life
with regard to migrants attempting to enter the United States
by sea.
Mr. Gimenez. So your policy--the policy as given to you by
this administration is to return them to their country of
origin and yet somebody coming through the Southern Border just
comes into the United States? So if you are at sea you are
treated one way, if you are coming by land you are treated a
different way?
Admiral Fagan. As I----
Mr. Gimenez. That is not for you to answer, it is a
political statement.
Thank you. OK.
Let us go back to a much easier subject for you. On the
issue--again I want to get back to this issue of procurement. I
really do want to see how we can speed things up and also want
to see how you can make sure that you are not over-engineering
the heck out of everything, just to your specifications.
Because I think not only the Coast Guard, but this entire
Government as a whole, it may be over-engineering stuff to the
point that it becomes incredibly expensive and incredibly long
time to acquire stuff.
I will give you an example, not in your area. The Orion
Spacecraft. It has been under development for like 15 years,
still not capable of sending, you know, people up. They are
going to do a test flight now. It took the United States less
than 10 years to get from zero to the moon and we can't even
build a spacecraft anymore. Thank god for, you know, private
enterprise who do things a lot faster than we do.
So, again, if you can work on that, I appreciate it. It is
just not your agency, it is something that I would really--I am
going to try to work on in the future to see how we can speed
things up around here because it is getting to be too expensive
and way, way too complicated.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Watson Coleman. Thank you to the Ranking Member.
Admiral Fagan, we don't have any more members here. I kind-
of indicated to you when we first encountered one another here,
this is like a crazy busy day, so--but please do not take that
as any indication of not interested in the important work that
you do or welcoming you and congratulating you.
I am going to yield to my--the 46 second he didn't use, I
am going to----
Mr. Gimenez. I am sorry, there is one more point that I
would like to make. Something that I have seen. It is not just
the Coast Guard, but the Armed Services in general. People
having to move around all over the place and whether they get
promoted or whatever and you have got to go from here to there.
It may be OK for people that may be single or not attached, but
people who have families, that is a really tough thing. That
may be something that we need to look at culturally that we
change, that you can stay in a place. It is not bad to be in a
place, to, you know, have roots in a community. So that may
help you out--it may help us out in recruiting more and more
people. Some people may just not want to move around all over
the place, all over, you know, the world to have a career. I
know that I wouldn't, OK. I want to be close to my family, to
my kids, to my grandchildren. Something that would tear me
away, it is something that I just would not do.
So thank you and I just want you to consider that.
Chairwoman Watson Coleman. Yes. As an extension of that,
thank you for having mentioned the fact that individuals who
make those decision to stay in place, opt out of the promotion
for the moment, but can opt in at some other point. Maybe that
happens in a place that is more suitable for them.
So we thank you for the things that you have acknowledged
here and the vision that you have shared with us and certainly
for the valuable questions that my Members and my colleagues
have asked you today.
The Members of the subcommittee may have additional
questions for you and we ask that you would respond
expeditiously in writing to those questions.
The Chair reminds Members of the subcommittee that the
committee's record will remain open for 10 days.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned. Thank
you very much.
[Whereupon, at 10:56 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Chairwoman Bonnie Watson Coleman for Linda L. Fagan
arctic operations and icebreakers
Question 1a. The Coast Guard's budget request for fiscal year 2023
includes a proposal to purchase a commercially-available icebreaker.
What market research has the Coast Guard conducted on commercially-
available icebreakers?
Question 1b. How many icebreakers are available on the market today
that fit the Coast Guard's needs?
Question 1c. What type of modifications does the Coast Guard expect
to make to a commercially-available icebreaker to make it mission-
ready?
Question 2a. Has the Coast Guard considered seeking a waiver to
purchase an icebreaker built outside the United States?
Question 2b. What market research has the Coast Guard conducted on
foreign-built commercially-available icebreakers, and what are the
results of such research?
Question 2c. What are the potential benefits and risks of
purchasing an icebreaker built outside the United States?
Question 3. How quickly does the Coast Guard believe it could
acquire and put an icebreaker into operation, should the budget request
be approved?
Answer. The Coast Guard conducted market research through two
Requests for Information (RFI) to industry. The first RFI was released
on 8 January 2021 by the Navy's Military Sealift Command to identify
commercial polar icebreakers available for demise charter by the U.S.
Government. The second RFI was released on 3 May 2022 to identify
commercial vessels available for purchase that were constructed at a
U.S. shipyard and capable of operating in or around the Arctic. Current
market research indicates that there is one domestic commercially-
available polar icebreaker.
The Coast Guard's minimum requirements for the purchase of a
commercially-available polar icebreaker include the capability to break
3 feet of ice at 3 knots and International Association of
Classification Societies Polar Class-3 (or equivalent) certification,
which would provide the capability to support the following Coast Guard
missions in the Polar Regions at Initial Operating Capability (IOC):
Ice Operations, Living Marine Resources, and Other Law Enforcement
(deter illegal fishing and Exclusive Economic Zone incursions). To
attain IOC, the vessel must demonstrate compliance with its original
specification, attain certification to its current classification, bear
Coast Guard markings, and be commanded by a commissioned Coast Guard
Officer.
Additional modifications to attain Full Operating Capability would
enhance the vessel's ability to operate in a multi-mission capacity
comparable to legacy assets and include items such as a Coast Guard
standard small boat and davit; Command, Control, Communication,
Computer, Cyber, and Intelligence systems; law enforcement equipment;
and flight deck certifications and hangar. As these modifications are
completed, the commercially-available polar icebreaker will gain
capability to exercise authority in the following mission areas: Ice
Operations; Living Marine Resources; Other Law Enforcement; Ports,
Waterways and Coastal Security; Search and Rescue; and Defense
Readiness.
Statutory provisions in 14 U.S.C.  1151 prohibit the Coast Guard
from acquiring a foreign-built icebreaker without a Presidential
waiver. The Coast Guard has not previously requested a Presidential
waiver and is working with the Navy to better understand the process.
The Coast Guard conducted research on two foreign-flagged commercial
icebreakers that responded to the January 2021 RFI. Since both of these
foreign-built vessels were constructed between 1992 and 1993, both are
approaching the end of their designed 30-year service life. The Coast
Guard conducted a 7-day assessment of the two vessels, which revealed
that while operationally capable, they posed support challenges due to
differences in foreign manufacturing processes and standards,
incompatible electrical systems (including the installed 50 Hertz
European standard electrical distribution system), and translation of
technical data and publication packages. These differences would
necessitate major overhaul, resulting in high operating costs and
associated training and operational challenges. A domestically-
constructed vessel provides the greatest degree of sustainment
efficiency including maintenance support, parts availability, and
logistics integration.
With relief from specific statutory acquisition requirements, the
Coast Guard estimates a commercially-available polar icebreaker could
be acquired and modified to achieve IOC within 18-24 months of an
enacted appropriation.
global operations
Question 4. How has the Coast Guard's stance toward Russia changed
since the onset of the conflict in Ukraine?
Question 5. How is the Coast Guard working with allies in the
Arctic, the Indo-Pacific, and around the globe to counter Russia's
aggression?
Answer. Following Russia's February invasion of Ukraine, the Coast
Guard adjusted its engagement policy with Russia across all mission
areas in accordance with the U.S. Department of State guidance. In
coordination with other U.S. Government agencies and our international
partners, the Coast Guard temporarily paused participation in the
Arctic Coast Guard Forum when hosted by Russia. When hosted outside of
Russia, bi-lateral and multi-lateral engagements are reviewed on a
case-by-case basis. Emergent operational engagement may continue for
active law enforcement, protecting the safety of life at sea, search
and rescue, and transboundary maritime environmental response purposes.
The Coast Guard has a unique role in preserving the free flow of
commerce, responding to natural disasters, enhancing regional stability
and resilience, and supporting National strategic objectives around the
globe. The fiscal year 2023 President's Budget expands the Coast
Guard's presence in the Arctic, the Indo-Pacific, and the Atlantic
Basin. Peace, prosperity, stability, and resilience depend on the
adherence to the rules-based international order. The Coast Guard is an
ideal partner to build capacity among our regional counterparts to meet
maritime security challenges. Whether supporting enforcement of laws in
our partner nations' Exclusive Economic Zones through our robust
bilateral shiprider agreements, enhancing partnership with Allies and
partners through joint training and exercises, or supporting the U.S.
Department of Defense (DoD) Combatant Commanders in fulfilling theater
security cooperation plans, the Coast Guard is optimally suited to
enhance partner collaboration and models the rules-based order.
climate change
Question 6a. What are some of the immediate and anticipated
challenges that climate changes poses to Coast Guard operations?
Question 6b. What steps is the Coast Guard taking to prepare for
the increasing relevance of the changing climate?
Question 6c. What resources does the Coast Guard need to respond to
climate change, both in the short and long term?
Answer. The Coast Guard is actively incorporating resilience into
requirements and capabilities development. To support our statutory
missions, we must continually build resiliency in our workforce,
training, infrastructure, and resources. Further, the Coast Guard works
continually to expand expertise in incident and emergency management,
and train our partners to ensure a coordinated, swift, and capable
response to any disaster.
The Coast Guard is committed to ensuring the safety and resiliency
of our facilities to meet mission demands. Based on the nature of those
missions, Coast Guard facilities are often located in areas prone to
hurricanes, flooding, earthquakes, and other natural disasters. The
Nation trusts that the Coast Guard will continue to serve as a first
responder after these disasters, which underscores the importance of
our facilities remaining always ready for operations. The Coast Guard
is proactively addressing climate-related risks by ensuring new
construction is built to environmentally resilient standards.
drug interdictions
Question 7. How do the amounts of drugs entering the United States
by water and air compare to the amount of drugs entering through land
borders?
Question 8a. What percentage of suspected movements of illegal
drugs is the Coast Guard currently able to interdict given current
resources?
Question 8b. What additional tools or resources would have the
greatest impact in enabling the Coast Guard need to interdict a greater
share of illegal drug movements?
Answer. The Coast Guard's drug interdiction mission supports
National and international strategies to deter and disrupt the market
for illegal drugs, dismantle Transnational Criminal Organizations, and
prevent transnational threats from reaching the United States. The
Coast Guard is the lead Federal agency for drug interdiction on the
high seas, and shares the lead in U.S. territorial seas with U.S.
Customs and Border Protection (CBP). While the Coast Guard maintains
data on illicit drug flow via maritime routes, data on illicit drug
flow via U.S. land borders is maintained by CBP. In fiscal year 2021,
the Coast Guard in cooperation with our partners interdicted 381,399
pounds of cocaine and 71,392 pounds of marijuana.
In fiscal year 2021, the Coast Guard interdicted 59 percent of
detected targets of interest. There is potential to increase both the
number of detections and the interdiction rate by acquiring and
operationalizing our future fleet of ships and aircraft. The Coast
Guard is acquiring a fleet of 25 Offshore Patrol Cutters (OPCs) to
replace the Service's legacy medium endurance cutters. The OPC is
critical to the Coast Guard's capacity to conduct drug interdiction and
once complete will represent 70 percent of the Coast Guard's offshore
capacity. Advanced electronics, communications, and operational
capabilities of the OPC will increase the Coast Guard's ability to
identify, target, and successfully interdict illicit narcotics at sea.
The transition from a MH-65 fleet to a much more capable MH-60T fleet
will also significantly enhance these efforts.
whistleblower retaliation and accountability
Question 9. In 2018 and 2019, the Department of Homeland Security's
Office of Inspector General issued several findings substantiating
instances of retaliation against whistleblowers, in violation of the
Military Whistleblower Protection Act.'' How has the Coast Guard
responded to each of the Office of Inspector General's (OIG) findings
in terms of holding perpetrators accountable for retaliation, making
victims whole, and protecting whistleblowers from retaliation in the
future?
Please provide the committee with documentation of the Coast
Guard's response to each individual finding of whistleblower
retaliation, including specific actions taken to hold each individual
perpetrator accountable.
Question 10a. Admiral Fagan, under your leadership as Commandant,
how will you promote a culture of accountability within the Coast Guard
that makes clear reporting misconduct is not just tolerated but
encouraged?
Question 10b. Admiral Fagan, How will you communicate to the entire
workforce, and especially those in leadership positions, that
retaliation against those who make such reports is unacceptable?
Question 11. In 2019, the committee on Homeland Security and the
Committee on Oversight and Reform issued a joint Majority staff report
regarding incidents of harassment, bullying, and whistleblower
retaliation at the Coast Guard Academy and the Coast Guard's failure to
ensure that investigations into complaints were carried out
appropriately.
Commander Kimberly Young-McLear, Ph.D., who testified before the
joint committees, and other whistleblowers and complainants whose
complaints have been corroborated by investigations have long asked for
written apologies from the Coast Guard to serve as evidence that
leadership is committed to providing accountability for failures within
the service. Admiral Fagan, will you commit on behalf of the Coast
Guard to send written apologies to whistleblowers and complainants
whose complaints have been substantiated, including Commander Young-
McLear? If so, please provide a copy of each such apology for the
record.
Question 12. Admiral Fagan, as Commandant, will you commit to
meeting regularly with whistleblowers and other survivors who are
willing, such as Commander Young-McLear, to listen to their stories and
hear their suggestions for actions needed to create accountability for
their cases and across the Coast Guard?
Answer. The Coast Guard took action on each recommendation issued
by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Office of the
Inspector General (OIG). Additional actions included updating the Civil
Rights Manual, updating the Discipline and Conduct Manual, creating and
promulgating Anti-Harassment Hate Incident (AHHI) training and tactics,
techniques and procedures, and creating reference guides and training
for Unit Commanders. Taking action on DHS OIG recommendations to make
policy changes regarding documentation, training, and clarification of
a member's right to file complaints has better positioned the Coast
Guard to protect whistleblowers from retaliation.
Retaliation against whistleblowers violates the Coast Guard's core
values and has no place in our Service. I am committed to ensuring that
accountability for wrongdoing is swift, fair, and in accordance with
Coast Guard policy and Federal law. The Coast Guard promulgated revised
policies and improved the training and resources available to enhance
the efficacy of our AHHI program and procedures. The Coast Guard also
issued guidance and job aids to ensure Unit Commanders respond more
quickly to whistleblower complaints, improve the quality of the
investigations, and increase oversight by the Civil Rights Directorate
and superiors in the chain of command. There is progress to be made and
I am committed to strengthening accountability within our Service so
that all members are empowered and valued.
In order to implement the recommendations from the Righting the
Ship report, the Coast Guard formed an interdisciplinary team to
develop and execute an action plan to address all recommendations. This
plan was provided to Chairman Thompson via letter on 4 March 2020.
After implementation of the recommendations, the then Commandant,
Admiral Karl Schultz, sent a letter to various committee Members
detailing the steps taken, and the Coast Guard briefed committee staff
members via teleconference.
Retaliation against whistleblowers violates the Coast Guard's core
values and has no place in our service. I am committed to moving
forward and building a Coast Guard where all members are treated with
the highest level of respect and inclusion. I am committed to
transforming our personnel management policy and system to ensure the
Coast Guard empowers, values, and protects its workforce. These steps
will serve as evidence of our commitment to holding those who violate
our core values accountable.
In consultation and alignment with our Service Secretary and
consistent with the Service Chiefs of the other Armed Forces of the
United States, the Office of the Commandant will explore an engagement
framework for Senior Leaders to learn from the experiences of Coast
Guard whistleblowers. I am committed to ensuring the fair and equitable
treatment of all members in accordance with Federal law, including
those laws which protect whistleblowers and respecting the independence
of whistleblower investigative services such as the DHS OIG.
diversity, equity, and inclusion at the coast guard academy
Question 13. What is the status and time line for completing and
issuing a comprehensive, long-term diversity and inclusion action plan
for the Coast Guard Academy, as recommended in the Congressionally-
mandated assessment of cultural competence at the Academy issued by the
National Academy of Public Administration (NAPA) earlier this year?
Question 14. What other actions is the Coast Guard taking to
improve diversity, equity, and inclusion at the Academy?
Question 15a. How will the Coast Guard measure the effectiveness
and success of the actions it is taking to improve diversity, equity,
and inclusion at the Academy?
Question 15b. Will you commit to commissioning additional studies
in the future from outside entities that have previously studied these
issues at the Academy, such as the Center for Urban Education and the
National Academy of Public Administration, to measure the Academy's
progress?
Answer. The Coast Guard Academy Diversity and Inclusion Action Plan
(DIAP) was published on 17 August 2022. In concert with the Service-
level DIAP, we will advance these important initiatives to ensure the
Coast Guard reflects the society we serve.
The Coast Guard will continue to recruit, train, and retain a
diverse workforce and grow the Coast Guard's Recruiting Corps in
efforts to access new markets and talent. The Coast Guard is committed
to representing the best of our Nation's diverse talent and providing
an inclusive environment for all who serve. There is still work to be
done to improve diversity, equity, and inclusion across all of our
accession sources. The Coast Guard recently formed a dedicated Officer
Recruiting Corps focused on recruiting at Historically Black Colleges
and Universities and other Minority-Serving Institutions. Regional
offices in New Orleans, LA; Miami, FL; Atlanta, GA; and Hampton Roads,
VA will conduct outreach throughout the country. I am proud to share
that the Coast Guard Academy class of 2026 is 43 percent female and 37
percent underrepresented minorities.
The Coast Guard is committed to evaluating and assessing the
effectiveness of actions taken to improve diversity, equity, and
inclusion at the Academy. The Service remains committed to taking
action and commissioning additional studies as needed to best recruit
and retain our Nation's diverse talent and provide an inclusive
environment for all who serve.
sexual assault
Question 16. What specific changes do you believe need to be
implemented to eradicate sexual assault from the U.S. Coast Guard? How
will the Coast Guard go about implementing these needed changes?
Answer. Sexual assault is a crime and not tolerated in the Coast
Guard. We will continue to evaluate policy, training, prevention, and
response programs in order to hold offenders accountable, support
survivors, and work to stop sexual violence before it starts. When
these crimes do occur, I am committed to ensuring an environment where
victims feel safe, are supported, and are empowered to report
harassment or assault. In August 2021, the Coast Guard expanded access
to Sexual Assault Prevention Response and Recovery services, to include
Coast Guard civilians and all former members of the Coast Guard who
were sexually assaulted while serving on active or reserve duty.
Civilians and former members now have the option to meet with a Sexual
Assault Response Coordinator or Victim Advocate to receive information,
discuss reporting options, and receive referrals for care. The Coast
Guard continues to seek ways to expand the availability of these
critical support services. We are also working to release our annual
report to Congress in a timely manner and more in alignment with the
other Armed Services. The Coast Guard is also working, in coordination
with the DoD, to implement military justice reform from the 2022
National Defense Authorization Act.
culture of respect report
Question 17. ``Culture of Respect'' report that found serious
cultural issues within the service. However, the report and its
findings were never released service-wide or publicly, limiting the
workforce and the public's visibility into the problems that were
identified and the recommended solutions. In addition, the report
recommended that the analysis behind the report be repeated every 3 to
4 years. However, while the RAND Corporation and others have studied
related issues, no updated study with the scope of the Culture of
Respect report has been carried out.
Will the Coast Guard commit to the completion of a new ``Culture of
Respect'' study and to releasing this new ``Culture of Respect'' Study
to the public?
Answer. The recent third-party studies such as the Coast Guard
Academy-focused NAPA study and the broader RAND Underrepresented
Minorities and Women's Retention studies have provided valuable and
actionable recommendations and highlight the benefit of an outside view
of the Service's policies and practices. We will continue to seek
external subject-matter experts to conduct studies to help us
understand how the culture of our Service is viewed and guide the
necessary changes to remove barriers and improve experiences for those
who serve.
Questions From Honorable Jefferson Van Drew for Linda L. Fagan
Question 1. Admiral Fagan, thank you for testifying before the
committee today and congratulations on your confirmation as the first
female Commandant of the United States Coast Guard. Your position is
well-deserved, and I look forward to working together on strengthening
the readiness and responsiveness of the service. My question relates to
the personnel issues facing the Coast Guard. I understand recruitment
levels are down, which poses great challenges. We can have all the
helicopters and cutters in the world, but they won't be of any use if
we don't have Coast Guard members to operate them. As you know,
Training Center Cape May is located in my district. It serves as the
sole accession point for every enlisted recruit, which accounts for
roughly 85 percent of all active-duty Coast Guard service members. The
current barracks at the training center are in dire need of
replacement, as they were built roughly 60 years ago before women were
allowed to enlist and do not offer the Coast Guard the necessary
infrastructure to grow and evolve. I was glad to see Phase 1 of the
barracks recapitalization funded in last year's appropriations and look
forward to helping secure funding for the subsequent phases. Can you
please explain how future phases of the Coast Guard's ``Training Center
Cape May--Barracks Recapitalization'' project will help the Coast Guard
become more resilient and fulfill its mission to increase recruitment?
Answer. I am committed to ensuring that Training Center (TRACEN)
Cape May is a state-of-the-art training facility, with the capacity to
meet future needs, and worthy of the young women and men who have
chosen to serve their nation. To meet the challenges of the future, we
have developed a holistic campaign plan for TRACEN Cape May. This plan
will be instrumental in improving resiliency, supporting greater
diversity for today's Coast Guard, and enhancing the training program
for our enlisted workforce. I would like to thank Congress for your
support and advocacy for TRACEN Cape May. The Infrastructure Investment
and Jobs Act included $10 million for initial planning and survey and
design for the multi-phase modernization project. The fiscal year 2022
Omnibus included $55 million to begin recapitalization of the recruit
barracks facilities. The Coast Guard's fiscal year 2023 Unfunded
Priorities List requested $60 million for Phase 2, which would
construct the second of three recruit barracks. The Coast Guard is in
the planning stage to determine scope and phasing of future
construction with a focus on expanding capacity and building resiliency
into TRACEN Cape May.
Question 2. I have consistently heard from Coast Guard members
stationed at sites in my district that they struggle to find housing
that they can fully pay for using their Basic Allowance for Housing
(BAH). It is no secret that coastal areas generally have a higher cost
of living, but it does not appear that housing allowances for Coast
Guard members account for this.
Please share any plans or initiatives the Coast Guard is working on
to address affordable housing within the service?
Answer. Many of our service members are facing difficulties when
making housing decisions due to inventory shortages and high costs in
certain areas. The Coast Guard's workforce is especially susceptible to
changes in the housing market because a significant portion of our
workforce is stationed in high-cost metropolitan areas or remote
locations with limited housing inventory. Additionally, the Coast Guard
has limited Government-owned housing, so the vast majority of our
workforce is directly impacted by rising housing costs. We continue to
work with our DoD partners, who determine Basic Allowance for Housing
(BAH) rates annually, to ensure we support our Coast Guard families and
evaluate our own policies for changes we can make on behalf of our
workforce. Our local Coast Guard commands and housing offices will
continue to identify specific geographic areas that do not accurately
represent military costs and work with DoD to ensure local expertise is
included in the data collection process. We have also temporarily
extended temporary lodging expenses for up to 60 days to provide our
service members additional time to locate housing in certain locations
with housing shortages. Finally, we are aligned and coordinating with
DoD in their ``Taking Care of Our Service Members and Families''
effort, which supports specific improvements in pay, BAH, Permanent
Change of Station move challenges, and family support.

[all]
