- COMBATING RANSOMWARE: FROM OUR SMALL TOWNS IN MICHIGAN TO DC

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

COMBATING RANSOMWARE: FROM OUR SMALL TOWNS IN MICHIGAN TO DC

=======================================================================

FIELD HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INTELLIGENCE AND
COUNTERTERRORISM

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 28, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-64

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-963PDF            WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            John Katko, New York
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island      Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Clay Higgins, Louisiana
J. Luis Correa, California           Michael Guest, Mississippi
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri            Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Al Green, Texas                      Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
Yvette D. Clarke, New York           Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Eric Swalwell, California            Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
Dina Titus, Nevada                   Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey    Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Peter Meijer, Michigan
Val Butler Demings, Florida          Kat Cammack, Florida
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California    August Pfluger, Texas
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          Andrew R. Garbarino, New York
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Mayra Flores, Texas
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey
Ritchie Torres, New York
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Daniel Kroese, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Committee Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND COUNTERTERRORISM

Elissa Slotkin, Michigan, Chairwoman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            August Pfluger, Texas, Ranking
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island          Member
Eric Swalwell, California            Michael Guest, Mississippi
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey           Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex  Peter Meijer, Michigan
officio)                         John Katko, New York (ex officio)
Brittany Carr, Subcommittee Staff Director
Adrienne Spero, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
Joy Zieh, Subcommittee Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS

The Honorable Elissa Slotkin, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Michigan, and Chairwoman, Subcommittee on
Intelligence and Counterterrorism:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

WITNESSES
Panel I

Mr. Iranga Kahangama, Assistant Secretary for Cyber,
Infrastructure, Risk, and Resilience, Office of Strategy,
Policy, and Plans, U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................    10
Mr. Matt Hartman, Deputy Executive Assistant Director for
Cybersecurity, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency, U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    14
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................    10

Panel II

Ms. Laura Clark, Chief Information Officer, Department of
Technology, Management & Budget, State of Michigan:
Prepared Statement.............................................    29
Mr. James C. Ellis, Detective First Lieutenant and Cyber Section
Commander, Michigan Cyber Command Center, Michigan State
Police:
Oral Statement.................................................    32
Prepared Statement.............................................    34

FOR THE RECORD

The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Article, TechNewsWorld, June 14, 2016..........................    18
Article, Channel 13 Eyewitness News, April 15, 2021............    20
Article, CNET, November 15, 2021...............................    38

COMBATING RANSOMWARE: FROM OUR SMALL TOWNS IN MICHIGAN TO DC

----------

Tuesday, June 28, 2022

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Intelligence
and Counterterrorism,
Lansing, MI.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:01 a.m., at
MSU Federal Credit Union, 3777 West Road, East Lansing,
Michigan, Hon. Elissa Slotkin [Chairwoman of the Committee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Slotkin, Jackson Lee, and Demings.
Chairwoman Slotkin. The Subcommittee on Intelligence and
Counterterrorism will come to order.
The subcommittee is meeting today on ``Combatting
Ransomware: From Our Small Towns in Michigan to Washington,
DC''.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare the
subcommittee in recess at any point.
Good morning, everybody. Thank you for joining us. I am
happy to be here in my Congressional district in East Lansing,
Michigan bringing Congress and the subcommittee that I chair to
the people that I serve. The purpose of today's hearing is to
bring some of the District of Columbia's best minds on
cybersecurity to my district to detail the critical work that
they are doing to keep ordinary Americans, like Michiganders,
safe from an increasingly disruptive threat, and that threat is
ransomware. Ransomware is a National security threat that has a
direct impact on the lives of Michiganders.
Before I get into the details here, I just want to say we
are live streaming. If you are behind our witnesses you are on
camera. So let us keep your funny faces and pointing to a
minimum since that will be recorded for posterity. We will have
a number of Members from my subcommittee appearing virtually
from their home districts, and I just really appreciate the
opportunity to hold this here in Michigan and thank our leaders
from Washington for flying in and doing this event.
So just a couple of definitions so we are all on the same
page. A ransomware attack is defined as a digital form of
traditional ransom, whereby computer systems, data, and
electronic devices are held hostage by a criminal or group
seeking a ransom payment in order for an organization to regain
access to their own systems. They are often carried out by a
criminal or criminal groups with the support or tacit approval
of a state government, known as a state actor. Think about
criminals who are acting out of places like Russia and China.
We have seen state actors and adversaries, Russia and China,
but also North Korea and Iran, permissible territories. Other
times these attacks are carried out by criminals purely for
their own behalf. These are called non-state actors. According
to a 2022 Cyber Threat Report by SonicWall, an internet
cybersecurity company, ransomware attacks in the United States
rose by 98 percent last year to record-high levels. I think in
the State of Michigan we have heard from the State officials in
our last hour that ransomware attacks in the State have doubled
since last year. A separate report by the CyberEdge Group found
that nearly two-thirds of ransomware victims actually went
ahead and paid their ransom in order to regain access to their
own systems and their own data. Often it is cheaper for a small
or medium-size business or organization to pay the ransom than
to pay an IT and cybersecurity company to regain all that
access that they lost.
In Michigan alone we have heard from the State's chief
information officer that hackers have tried more than 90
million times a day to get into the State servers. Let me say
that again, that is 90 million times a day. Ransomware has
become a kitchen-table issue for Michiganders. Often these are
automated, right. It is not 90 million individuals, it is an
automated process. But that is the number of times that there
has been attempted infiltrations to our State every single day.
Every Michigander in this room has their data held by the
State. So that is our data.
Ransomware has become very much a kitchen table issue for
us. It affects the people and organizations we rely on
everyday, our schools, particularly our K-12 schools, our small
businesses, our hospitals and third-party vendors that work
with our hospitals, and other organizations, like our farmers,
have been threatened and have even fallen victim to ransomware
attacks.
I was really taken by this issue when I began as a Member
of Congress. I was sworn in 2019 and I started making the
rounds with our town supervisors, our mayors, our
superintendents, folks who are in many cases very small rural
communities and I expected--you know, I just said, what are you
worried about, what are you concerned about, and I expected it
to be about money and fixing the roads and some very concrete
things. All of these folks started raising with me how
concerned people were about cybersecurity for the 1,200
residents that they were responsible for.
It is an issue that I think I really--like lives in this
Venn Diagram of National security issues and local issues. It
is something that people are obviously rightly concerned about.
We just came from a panel where we heard from town supervisors
responsible for 1,200 people's data who were ransomed based on
a phishing email for $40,000. A small community does not have
$40,000 to just throw at this problem.
As a Nation, you might remember two high-profile kind-of
newsworthy ransomware attacks last year. One was the Colonial
Pipeline and one on the JBS Meat Company. These events really
showed Americans how vulnerable we are, how our critical
infrastructure is vulnerable to these attacks, and then how
damaging the consequences can be. Many ransomware attacks have
been much more hyper-local though than these kind of high-
profile events.
In Michigan's 8th district, which I represent, we have had
a significant--as I said, a significant uptick in these
attacks, which is why I have pulled together this field
hearing. We have seen entire cities and townships targeted in
these new attacks. Local governments have had to create
entirely new websites, create new email addresses, buy new
software to resolve these attacks, all at great cost and time
and resources.
In a February Detroit Free Press article, Sgt. Matt
McLalin, who investigates cyber attacks in the State Police's
cyber command center, which is not far from here in Dimondale,
Michigan, said local and county governments make up the
majority of the center's victims. Every single week, he said,
we are getting multiple reports of local governments that have
been affected--every week. When an entire local government can
be taken off-line by a cyber criminal operating across the
world, we have a significant issue we need to address.
As I said, it is not just governments. Last fall I hosted
the superintendents from my district. The K-12 superintendents
came to Washington and I just sort-of on a whim said raise your
hand if you have ever been a victim of a ransomware attack, and
every single school superintendents hand went up. Some paid,
some didn't. There they are trying to get the kids' identities,
the kids' data.
We have seen schools come under direct attack in Walled
Lake, Michigan; Monroe, Richmond, Michigan; and across the
State. Last month, people may remember that classes at Kellogg
Community College were canceled for 2 days as school officials
noticed some issues with the computer systems related to a
ransomware attack. Two years ago, Michigan State University,
very close to here, was targeted by this increasingly prevalent
type of attack, and it cost the university more than $1 million
to recover.
Cyber criminals operate in permissive environments, like
Russia and China, as we said. The governments at best turn a
blind eye to these actors operating on their soil, at worst
they know what they are doing and don't do anything about it.
They have launched attacks, particularly for our kids, on their
school records. These are useful for future hostage situations,
ransomware situations because they presume that schools and
parents will pay virtually any cost to shield their children
from educational disruption.
As we have talked about, ransomware attacks have also
disrupted hospital systems. The uptick on ransomware attacks
during COVID was significant on our hospitals, but also on
third-party vendors that do a lot of work with our hospitals.
In addition, our gas pipelines, and, as the workers at JBS
processing plant in Plainwell know, it has threatened literally
our Nation's food supply and our farmers' livelihoods.
Further endangering our food supply, we have seen
ransomware attacks directly targeting the manufacturers of
agricultural equipment and the data they collect. Ransomware
attacks are a threat to people from the smallest family farm to
the biggest Fortune 500 companies, but it is the ordinary
American, the farmer, the schoolteacher, the business owner,
the parent, who bear the brunt of these attacks.
Just this past weekend, I heard from constituents in
Brighton, Michigan, not far from here, that were fundraising
for the owners of a local bookstore in Detroit which was hit by
a cyber attack and was forced to personally cover over $35,000
in losses. That business, still fragile from COVID and the
pandemic, is now facing the prospect of imminent closure as a
result of this attack.
We know that our computer systems are complex, we know that
small and medium-sized businesses, small and medium-sized
governments are already stretched thin. They don't have the
ability to hire fancy security firms to take care of everything
for them. Not everyone can afford cybersecurity insurance,
which is something I encourage all leaders to look into, and
many are not able to hire a cyber specialist, an IT specialist
on payroll to respond.
So this is why our hearing is so important today. We have
designed the hearing to connect the average person with experts
who can help them protect themselves. To our witnesses, people
want to know where do they go when they are the victim of a
ransomware attack. Literally, what is the 9-1-1 number that
they call? Do they call the FBI? Do they call the State Police?
Where should people turn the minute that they realize someone
is trying to steal their data. We know that we have an
increasing number of people who are just coming in for a normal
day of work, they realize that their computer or their cash
register is physically locked to them by hackers demanding
large sums of money. We know that they are now--this is no
longer sort-of asking that you drop a bag of cash at a
designated location, the use of cryptocurrencies has been
significantly on the rise. I have heard from constituents
across the district that they feel like they are on the front
lines of this threat and they do not know what their Government
is doing to protect to them.
[The statement of Chairwoman Slotkin follows:]
Statement of Chairwoman Elissa Slotkin
June 28, 2022
I am happy to be here in my Congressional district in East Lansing,
Michigan--bringing Congress and the subcommittee I chair to the people
I serve. The purpose of today's hearing is to bring some of the
District of Columbia's best minds on cybersecurity to my district to
detail the critical work they are doing to keep ordinary Americans,
like Michiganders, safe from an increasingly disruptive threat:
Ransomware. Ransomware is a National security threat that has a direct
impact on the lives of Michiganders.
First, some definitions: A ransomware attack is defined as a
digital form of traditional ransom, whereby computer systems, data, and
electronic devices are held hostage by a criminal or group seeking a
ransom payment in order for an organization to regain access to its
systems. They are often carried out by a criminal or criminal group
operating with the support or tacit approval of a state government,
known as a state actor. We have seen these state actors in adversaries
like Russia, China, North Korea, and Iran. Other times they are carried
out by criminals operating purely on their own behalf, known as non-
state actors.
According to a 2022 Cyber Threat Report by SonicWall, an internet
cybersecurity company, ransomware attacks in the United States rose by
98 percent last year to record-high levels. And a separate report by
the CyberEdge group found that nearly two-thirds of ransomware victims
paid the ransom to regain access to their systems and data. In Michigan
alone, we have heard from the State's chief information officer that
hackers try more than 90 million times a day to get into the State's
servers. Let me say that again: 90 million times a day.
Ransomware has become a kitchen-table issue for Michiganders. It
affects the people and organizations we rely on every day--as our
schools, small businesses, hospitals, and other organizations have been
threatened by--and have even fallen victim to--ransomware attacks. When
I first started as a Member of Congress, town supervisors, mayors, and
local officials all surprised me by raising protecting data as
something they were deeply concerned about. They were right to be
concerned. From my first day as your Congresswoman, we have seen
significant ransomware attacks against our critical infrastructure,
local governments, entire hospital systems and school districts, all
the way down to local mom-and-pop small businesses.
As a Nation, two high-profile ransomware attacks last year, one on
the Colonial Pipeline and one on the JBS Meat Company, showed Americans
how vulnerable our critical infrastructure can be to these attacks, and
how damaging the consequences can be. But many ransomware attacks have
been much more hyper-local to Michigan's 8th district, and that is why
I am hosting this hearing here in East Lansing as opposed to in
Washington. We have seen entire cities and townships targeted in these
attacks. Local governments have had to create entire new websites, new
email addresses, and new software to resolve the attack. All things
which cost time and resources.
In a February Detroit Free Press article, Sgt. Matt McLalin, who
investigates cyber attacks in the State Police's cyber command center,
said local and county governments make up a lot of the center's
victims. ``Every single week we are getting multiple reports of local
governments who have been affected,'' McLalin said. When an entire
local government can be taken off-line by a cyber criminal operating
across the world, we have a significant issue that needs to be
addressed. It's not just governmental entities that have been affected,
either.
Last fall, I met with school superintendents from across my
Congressional district in my office in the District of Columbia. I
asked them to raise their hands if they or their students had been hit
by a ransomware attack--and every single hand in the room went up. We
have seen schools come under attack in Walled Lake, Monroe, Richmond,
and across the State. Just last month, classes at Kellogg Community
College were canceled for 2 days as school officials noticed some
issues with the computer systems related to a ransomware attack.
Two years ago, Michigan State University was targeted by this
increasingly prevalent type of cyber attack, which cost the university
more than $1 million to recover from. Cyber criminals operating in
permissive environments like Russia and China have launched attacks
aimed at holding our kids' educations, their school records, and their
futures hostage because they presume that schools and parents will pay
virtually any cost to shield children from educational disruptions.
As I alluded to earlier, it is not just our schools and our kids
who are threatened. Ransomware attacks have disrupted hospital systems,
gas pipelines, and--as the workers at JBS's processing plant in
Plainwell know, it has threatened our Nation's food supply and our
farmers' livelihoods. Further endangering our Nation's food supply, we
have seen ransomware attacks targeting the manufacturers of
agricultural equipment and the data they collect. Ransomware attacks
are a threat to people from the smallest family farm to the biggest
Fortune 500 company, but it is the ordinary American, the farmer,
schoolteacher, and small business owner, who bears the brunt of these
attacks.
Just this past weekend, I heard from constituents in Brighton that
they were fundraising for the owners of a local bookstore in Detroit,
which was hit by a cyber attack and was forced to personally cover over
$35,000 in losses. That business, still fragile from the impacts of the
pandemic, is now facing the prospect of imminent closure as a result of
the attack. Computer systems are complex. Small businesses and local
governments are already stretched thin, and not everyone can afford to
have cyber insurance or an IT and/or cyber specialist on the payroll to
respond.
That is why today's hearing is so important. We designed this
hearing to help connect the average person with experts who can help
them protect themselves. People want to know where to go when they are
the victim of a ransomware attack. Do they call 9-1-1? Do they call the
FBI? Do they call the State Police? Where should people turn when they
realize someone is trying to steal data that they are responsible for
protecting? People want to know what to do when they turn on their
computer or cash register only to find out they are locked out by
hackers demanding large sums of money, often in the form of
cryptocurrencies, that they can't afford.
I have heard from constituents across many different industries
about how concerned they are about the threat of ransomware. They feel
like it's their business, their data, that is on the front lines facing
this threat. They are especially concerned because they don't know what
their Government is doing to protect them. I don't just want to draw
attention to the problem: I want to use this hearing to discuss the
ways that we are keeping Americans on the front lines of the ransomware
threat and their data safe.
I am pleased to welcome witnesses who I know are working hard to
combat ransomware and other cyber attacks every day, and who are eager
to help us answer these questions. Visiting us from Washington are two
representatives from the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)--Mr.
Iranga Kahangama and Mr. Matt Hartman. Mr. Kahangama--who was integral
to the Federal Government's response to the ransomware attacks on
Colonial Pipeline and JBS Foods--is responsible for cyber and
infrastructure protection strategic planning and analysis at DHS. At
DHS's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency or CISA, Mr.
Hartman works on the front lines with partners at the State and local
levels, as well as in the private sector, to defend against today's
cyber threats and build security and resiliency.
On our second panel we will be hearing from one of our State's best
cybersecurity experts--Mr. James C. Ellis, commander of Michigan State
Police's Cyber Command Center. I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses on the critical work they are doing to defend our local
communities, our State, and our country, from the rising threat of
ransomware and how they are partnering with the private sector to build
resilience to ransomware attacks before they occur, because we know
that the best way to defend against a ransomware attack is to take
steps to protect yourself before an attack occurs.

Chairwoman Slotkin. So, with that, I am pleased to welcome
our witnesses, who are working very hard on this threat and
other cyber attacks and threats every day. We are eager to get
to questions--I know we have members on screen visiting us from
Washington.
Our two representatives from the Department of Homeland
Security, Mr. Iranga Kahangama--can you say it for me so I say
it right?
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you. Kahangama.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Kahangama. And Mr. Matt Hartman. The
former was integral to the Federal Government's response to the
ransomware attacks on both Colonial Pipeline and JBS Foods. He
is responsible for cyber and infrastructure protection
strategic planning and analysis at the Department of Homeland
Security.
Mr. Hartman, he is DHS's cybersecurity and infrastructure
security--he is working on the front lines of CISA, which is
the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency. He
partners with State and local officials, as well as in the
private sector, to defend against today's cyber threats.
In our second panel, which will take place just after this,
we will be hearing from one of our State's best cybersecurity
experts, Mr. James Ellis, commander of Michigan State Police's
Cyber Command Center.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on their
critical work and what they are doing to defend our State and
local officials, because we know that the best way to protect
against a ransomware attack is to take steps to protect
yourself before the attack actually occurs.
Before I formally welcome our panel of witnesses, Members
on screen are reminded that the subcommittee will operate
according go the guidelines laid out by the Chairman and
Ranking Member of the full committee in their February 3, 2021
colloquy regarding remote procedures. Other Member statements
may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Chairman Thompson follows:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
June 28, 2022
I am pleased that Intelligence and Counterterrorism Subcommittee
Chairwoman Slotkin is holding this hearing on such a pressing issue, in
her district with her constituents.
It is so important for communities to be heard, and hearings like
these are a part of the Committee on Homeland Security's process to
safeguard the American people and the Homeland from all threats,
including cyber threats.
Cybersecurity is a topic that Chairwoman Slotkin has championed
since she came to Congress, and she has worked tirelessly to keep the
people of Michigan safe from cyber crime.
Given her extensive background in National security, she knows the
threats we face whether at home, abroad, or in cyber space.
Her leadership led to new legislation that would provide cyber
forensics training for State and local law enforcement and create an
program to help ensure the Government is prepared for a major cyber
attack.
Her work leading this subcommittee and as a Member of the
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and
Innovation has focused on emerging digital security issues that affect
all of us--from the way we use our banks to the safety of our
children's schools to how we can protect ourselves from criminals'
latest techniques.
The internet is wired into nearly every part of our life--our
homes, our cars, our schools, our businesses. It has become as
important a utility as water, gas, and electricity.
But it has also become perhaps the greatest tool for criminal
mischief and theft in history.
In what we call ransomware attacks, cyber criminals seize computer
systems, data, and electronic devices with the expectation that victims
will be willing to pay a ransom to regain access to their electronic
systems.
Ransomware attacks have surged both in frequency and in the amount
demanded by hackers. In 2020, an estimated 2,400 governments,
hospitals, and school districts in the United States were victims of
ransomware attacks, and the average payment was $312,493.
According to data from the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA), reported losses continued to increase last
year.
As ransomware tactics and techniques continue to evolve, we can
expect more incidents and more losses unless we do something to address
the root causes of the issue--both in Government and the private
sector.
Thanks to the Biden administration, we have a National cyber
director working to coordinate all of the Executive branch's work in
cyber space.
The administration has also ensured that CISA is working across
Government agencies to improve our collective defense and with the
private sector to ensure it has the tools to detect, disrupt, and
investigate cyber criminals.
In Congress, the Committee on Homeland Security has championed
several critical pieces of legislation to combat the ransomware threat,
including bills that:

provide $1 billion in grants to State, local, Tribal, and
territorial governments over the next 4 years to enhance their
cybersecurity preparedness;

make cyber incident reporting mandatory including the
disclosure to CISA of ransom payments within 24 hours;

direct CISA to conduct a study on K-12 cybersecurity and
provide cybersecurity recommendations to K-12 educational
institutions, which have faced numerous ransomware attacks in
recent years; and

authorize the Secret Service to continue training local,
State, Tribal, and territorial law enforcement on cybersecurity
investigations and responding to cyber incidents, including
ransomware.
I am grateful for Chairwoman Slotkin's leadership and that of her
committee colleagues on these important measures.
Although the Federal Government has made great strides in
bolstering our defenses, as the threat of ransomware continues to
disrupt many aspects of our daily lives, we must make sure that
Americans know what resources are available to them--at both the
Federal and State level.
It is imperative that the public knows how to keep themselves safe
from ransomware attacks, and if they do fall victim to an attack, who
they can reach out to for help.
If your car is stolen or your home is broken into, people know to
call the police or 9-1-1--but when it comes to cyber theft, that common
knowledge of who to call for help is not broadly known.
Today's witnesses--representatives from DHS and its cyber-focused
component CISA, and the State of Michigan--are in a position to help us
understand ransomware prevention best practices, and what to do and who
to call when catastrophe strikes.
Again, I thank Subcommittee Chairwoman Slotkin for convening this
hearing and for her leadership on this critical issue.

Chairwoman Slotkin. Without objection, Members not on the
subcommittee shall be permitted to sit and question the
witnesses.
Sorry for my Michiganders. This is a bunch of procedural
things that are important in Congress.
All right. I now welcome our first panel of witnesses.
Without objection, the full witnesses' statements will be
inserted into the record.
I now ask each witness to summarize his statement for 5
minutes, beginning, sir, with Mr. Kahangama. Please go ahead.

STATEMENT OF IRANGA KAHANGAMA, ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR CYBER,
INFRASTRUCTURE, RISK, AND RESILIENCE, OFFICE OF STRATEGY,
POLICY, AND PLANS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Kahangama. Thank you. Madam Chairwoman Slotkin,
distinguished Members of the subcommittee, and other Members of
Congress joining us today. Thank you for inviting me to testify
about the Department of Homeland Security's efforts to combat
ransomware.
On a personal note, this is my first time testifying. As
the son of immigrants from Shri Lanka, it is an honor to be in
front of you today.
With that, I recently passed the 1-month mark serving as
the assistant secretary for cyber infrastructure, risk, and
resilience at the Department of Homeland Security. My title,
while long, is reflective of the holistic approach that the
Department takes to ransomware and cybersecurity writ large. We
are focused on critical infrastructure. We want to minimize the
risk posed from cyber attacks, and we want to ensure the
resilience of critical services that are provided to this
country.
Today I will talk about the multi-pronged approach we are
taking to combat ransomware and apply this framework to
cybersecurity. As you mentioned, Chairwoman, ransomware
attackers lock up our critical computer systems and then demand
payment in order to regain access. They do not discriminate,
they target large and small targets, whether it is large
corporations, small and medium enterprises, hospitals, local
governments, or schools. As you mentioned as well, often the
cost of cleaning up an attack can be more expensive than paying
the ransom itself, or to provide mitigating services
beforehand.
I also want to acknowledge the downstream real-world impact
that these have on our everyday services. As you mentioned,
this happened with Colonial Pipeline where we had gas
shortages, this happened to our food production when JBS was
also attacked last year, and as you mentioned, a slew of
attacks on Michigan itself.
These are real issues and I want to make clear that the
Department recognizes these.
So today I want to talk a little bit about what the
Department does before, during, and after a ransomware attacks.
So before an attack, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, CISA, helps businesses and small business and
critical infrastructure owners increase their ability to
prevent a ransomware by rapidly sharing threat information and
sharing cybersecurity best practices. I am honored to be here
today with Matt, who will further provide information about
CISA's role.
Last year Secretary Mayorkas conducted a 60-day sprint on
combatting ransomware to shore up the Department's efforts on
this case. As a result, we now have stopransomware.gov, which
is a one-stop, holistic, centralized repository with all
information that you need before and during an attack to help
mitigate against ransomware incidents.
During an attack I want to highlight quickly the Department
of Homeland Security's investigative agencies, which include
the U.S. Secret Service and Homeland Security Investigations.
These agencies work side-by-side with victims, international
law enforcement, and domestic law enforcement to investigate
and mitigate the threat posed by ransomware actors.
I appreciate your mention of cryptocurrency as the
Department is rapidly increasing our ability to investigate
cryptocurrency because it is the preferred payment method for
ransomware actors. We are actively getting tools and learning
how to track and trace cryptocurrencies so we can better
disrupt and potentially claw back some of this money.
Of course, the Department also works in concert with the
Department of Justice to arrest and indict these individuals
when we can.
As you mentioned, Chairwoman, these actors are often in
permissive environments that do not cooperate with us,
including Russia. But that does not stop us from working with
international partners to seize and track these funds and
otherwise disrupt their criminal activity.
Finally, I want to hit on after an attack. I am excited to
mention that DHS is now standing up the Cyber Safety Review
Board, which is a unique combination of public-sector and
private-sector individuals charged with reviewing major cyber
attacks, including ransomware attacks, to provide
recommendations of how to better our cybersecurity.
DHS remains committed to improving our Nation's
cybersecurity, shoring up our defenses, improving the
resiliency, and then holding actors accountable.
Chairwoman Slotkin, by holding these types of hearings, it
is clear to us that you are committed to this issue. I also
want to thank you for passing legislation such as the K-12
Cybersecurity Act. It is evident that you are a partner with us
and we commend you for this. We look forward to working with
you.
With that, I would like to thank the committee and I look
forward to taking your questions.
[The joint prepared statement of Mr. Kahangama and Mr.
Hartman follows:]
Joint Prepared Statement of Iranga Kahangama and Matt Hartman
June 28, 2022
introduction
Chairwoman Slotkin, Ranking Member Pfluger, and distinguished
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting us to testify today
regarding the continued threat of malicious cyber activities,
specifically ransomware, and the constant risks posed to Americans, as
well as to our businesses and other institutions. Our testimony today
highlights the Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) efforts to
counter these risks. These efforts are made in coordination with the
Biden-Harris administration's counter ransomware initiatives, and our
partners in Federal, State, local, Tribal, and territorial governments
(SLTT), the private sector, and internationally.
Since Under Secretary Silvers and Executive Director Wales
testified before your subcommittee last November, DHS has continued to
combat the non-stop threat of cyber crime with several notable
successes. However, these cyber threats continue to evolve, and we must
therefore continue to evolve the methods that we use to investigate
cyber-criminal activity and increase our Nation's resilience against
future attacks. Our joint testimony today reinforces that our approach
to cyber crime must be multi-pronged. We must pursue a comprehensive
strategic approach that prioritizes close partnerships with law
enforcement, both domestic and foreign, as well as the private sector,
and combines our efforts to:

disrupt cyber-criminal activity;

increase resilience of entities and individuals to
ransomware incidents;

target those virtual currency exchanges and on-line dark
marketplaces that enable the ransomware threat through
obfuscation of illicit payments;

investigate transnational cyber crime and organized criminal
groups; and

strengthen foreign law enforcement partner capacity through
training and technical assistance.
Most cyber crime is transnational, including ransomware, with
criminal activity moving seamlessly across borders. These crimes impact
Americans in all 50 States, including Michigan's 8th Congressional
district. For example, in 2016, the Lansing Board of Water and Light's
administrative services were taken over by hackers as a result of a
ransomware attack. Furthermore, in 2020, Michigan State University was
a victim of a ransomware attack over Memorial Day. More broadly, DHS
does successfully investigate cyber crimes in Michigan. Recently, U.S.
Secret Service (Secret Service) agents from the Detroit Field Office
successfully investigated a business email compromise case where they
were able to return almost $5 million to the victim company.
DHS, in close partnership with the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI) and other law enforcement partners, prioritizes investigating
cyber crimes, arresting those responsible, and seizing illicit funds
and returning them to the victims. In addition, the Department engages
the private and public sectors on how to increase their cyber
resilience to fend off these attacks.
the biden-harris administration's approach to fighting ransomware
Ransomware threat actors' motives are clear--their goal is profit.
These opportunistic criminals go after a wide array of victims--
individuals, businesses, hospitals, police departments, and even
municipal governments. These criminals encrypt valuable data in an
attempt to force their victims to pay ransoms using virtual currencies,
with no guarantee the criminal actors will provide a decryption key to
restore the victims' files once the ransom is paid. Victims who choose
not to pay are saddled with the cost- and labor-intensive burden of
restoring their systems from backups and, increasingly, threatened with
the public release of their stolen data by the criminal actors. The
administration will not allow criminals to hold innocent American
citizens and businesses hostage for ransom, or to extort victims with
stolen private information, such as health records, without
consequence.
The landscape of ransomware actors has undergone several shifts
since the subcommittee's November 2021 hearing, driven in part by the
Russian-Ukraine conflict. We observed some ransomware groups adopting
political stances, such as the Conti ransomware group's initial pledge
of support to Russia at the outset of the invasion of Ukraine. We also
witnessed Conti become increasingly emboldened in their demands. For
example, in May, Conti threatened to overthrow the Costa Rican
government if ransoms were not paid, according to published reports.
These criminal actors are resilient and resourceful. When victims stop
agreeing to pay ransom, or a ransomware operation is the subject of a
law enforcement action, the actors move on to different victims and
stand-up new ransomware groups.
Therefore, the Department must be equally resilient and
resourceful, utilizing a whole-of-government counter-ransomware
initiative with domestic and international partners to go after
criminals while simultaneously promoting cybersecurity resilience
across our critical infrastructure and American businesses. DHS's
strategy is multi-pronged: Target and dismantle criminal ransomware
organizations; target the digital asset ecosystem that criminals use to
transfer illicit funds; and increase resilience in our Nation's
critical infrastructure and public sector, through education and
information sharing.
These partnerships continue to pay off in the fight against
ransomware as demonstrated in March when an Estonian national was
sentenced to 66 months in prison and $36 million in restitution for his
role in exploiting stolen financial account information and use of
ransomware.\1\ The arrest and subsequent indictment were the result of
the international partnership between the Secret Service, Latvian State
Police, and Estonian Police.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See, ``Cybercriminal Connected to Multimillion Dollar
Ransomware Attacks Sentenced for Online Fraud Schemes'' at, https://
www.justice.gov/usao-edva/pr/cybercriminal-connected-multimillion-
dollar-ransomware-attacks-sentenced-online-fraud.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Last year Secretary Mayorkas commenced a 60-day sprint as a call
for action to tackle ransomware.\2\ As a result, DHS, along with
colleagues across the U.S. Government, launched
``StopRansomware.gov,''\3\ our official central website for resources
from across the Federal Government community to tackle ransomware more
effectively. The purpose of this website is to help public and private
organizations defend against the rise in ransomware attacks by
providing guidance on protection, detection, and response all on a
single website. As of June 2022, StopRansomware.gov received over
280,000 visits.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See Secretary Mayorkas Outlines His Vision for Cybersecurity
Resilience (March 31, 2021), available at https://www.dhs.gov/news/
2021/03/31/secretary-mayorkas-outlines-his-vision-cybersecurity-
resilience.
\3\ See New StopRansomware.gov Website--The U.S. Government's One-
Stop Location to Stop Ransomware (July 15, 2021), available at https://
us-cert.cisa.gov/ncas/current-activity/2021/07/15/new-
stopransomwaregov-website-us-governments-one-stop-location.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the cybersecurity and infrastructure security agency efforts on
ransomware
One of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency's
(CISA) core functions is to foster resilience. It played a leading role
for DHS in launching ``StopRansomware.gov.'' In January 2021, CISA
launched a ``Reduce the Risk of Ransomware'' awareness campaign.\4\
This campaign promoted resources and best practices to mitigate the
risk of ransomware and focused on supporting COVID-19 response
organizations and K-12 institutions. Further, CISA expanded its
publicly available information to include a ransomware guide, fact
sheets, tool kits, on-line training resources, and educational
webinars.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See CISA Launches Campaign to Reduce the Risk of Ransomware
(Feb. 16, 2021), available at https://www.cisa.gov/news/2021/01/21/
cisa-launches-campaign-reduce-risk-ransomware.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CISA continues to take many proactive steps to prevent ransomware.
These efforts include hundreds of engagements focused on cybersecurity
and combatting ransomware. CISA routinely engages with SLTT partners,
including events specifically for Governors and county leaders, as well
as the private sector. In addition, CISA continues to release cyber
alerts containing technical details and mitigation measures. These
alerts, often issued jointly with interagency partners and increasingly
with foreign partners, provide timely information about current
security issues, vulnerabilities, and exploits. Several recent examples
include information on BlackMatter ransomware, Conti ransomware, and
on-going cyber threats to water and wastewater systems. Effective
confrontation of the ransomware threat relies on visibility and
awareness, which CISA provides through email and other subscription
services.
Visibility and awareness also require information sharing and
collaboration. In August 2021, CISA launched the Joint Cyber Defense
Collaborative (JCDC) to lead the proactive development of the Nation's
cyber defense plans, which outline activities to reduce the prevalence
and the impact of cyber intrusions, such as ransomware. JCDC promotes
National resilience by coordinating actions to identify, protect
against, detect, and respond to the malicious cyber activity targeting
U.S. critical infrastructure or National interests. Building on the
authorities included in the fiscal year 2021 National Defense
Authorization Act, the JCDC includes the joint cyber planning office,
but recognizes that that there is a full suite of capabilities
necessary to truly make a difference for our Nation's cybersecurity
posture. The JCDC brings together leading technology, communications,
and incident response companies, as well as all relevant Federal
agencies, to unify and integrate prevention and response planning. The
JCDC establishes a unique entity that can proactively provide
visibility into a common operating picture of the threat environment
through close partnership with the private sector and the Federal cyber
ecosystem.
The Nation's security and resilience in the face of the ransomware
threat relies on a collective, unified approach across the Federal
Government that combines the full suite of relevant interagency
authorities and capabilities. As designated in the Cyber Incident
Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2022 (CIRCIA), CISA will
establish a Joint Ransomware Task Force to coordinate an on-going
Nation-wide campaign against ransomware attacks. CISA and the FBI will
serve as co-chairs of this Federal task force, which will organize and
orchestrate the spectrum of U.S. Government activities to address the
ransomware threat, from protection and mitigation to intelligence
prioritization and disruption.
dhs investigative efforts to combat cyber crime
The world's economy is rapidly changing and becoming more
digitized. In partnership with international law enforcement partners,
the Secret Service has achieved notable successes in combatting cyber-
enabled financial crimes, including dismantling two early centralized
virtual currency providers that supported extensive criminal activity:
e-Gold Ltd.\5\ and Liberty Reserve.\6\ Additionally, in 2020, the
Secret Service, with domestic and international partners, successfully
investigated a Russia-based criminal scheme.\7\ The investigation led
to the seizure of millions in cryptocurrency and indictments of two
Russian nationals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See, U.S. Department of Justice: ``Over $56.6 Million Forfeited
In E-Gold Accounts Involved In Criminal Offenses,'' https://
www.justice.gov/usao-md/pr/over-566-million-forfeited-e-gold-accounts-
involved-criminal-offenses; Digital Currency Business E-Gold Indicted
for Money Laundering and Illegal Money Transmitting, https://
www.justice.gov/archive/opa/pr/2007/April/07_crm_301.html.
\6\ See, U.S. Department of Justice press releases: ``Founder of
Liberty Reserve Pleads Guilty to Laundering More Than $250 Million
Through His Digital Currency Business,'' https://www.justice.gov/opa/
pr/founder-liberty-reserve-pleads-guilty-laundering-more-250-million-
through-his-digital; ``Manhattan U.S. Attorney Announces Charges
Against Liberty Reserve, One of World's Largest Digital Currency
Companies, and Seven of Its Principals and Employees for Allegedly
Running A $6 Billion Money Laundering Scheme,'' https://
www.justice.gov/usao-sdny/pr/manhattan-us-attorney-announces-charges-
against-liberty-reserve-one-world-s-largest.
\7\ See, ``Russian Nationals Indicted for Conspiracy to Defraud
Multiple Cryptocurrency Exchanges and Their Customers,'' https://
www.justice.gov/usao-ndca/pr/russian-nationals-indicted-conspiracy-
defraud-multiple-cryptocurrency-exchanges-and; ``Treasury Sanctions
Russian Cyber Actors for Virtual Currency Theft,'' https://
home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm1123.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Central to these successes is the global network of 44 Secret
Service-led Cyber Fraud Task Forces (CFTFs). The mission of these CFTFs
is to partner with SLTT and foreign law enforcement agencies, private
and public sectors, and academia for information sharing and conducting
joint investigations. The Secret Service also operates 19 international
attache offices around the world, partnering with the global law
enforcement community to combat transnational financial crimes.
Participation in these task forces is bolstered through Secret
Service-led law enforcement training programs at the National Computer
Forensics Institute (NCFI). At NCFI, the Secret Service trains SLTT law
enforcement personnel, prosecutors, and judges on preventing,
mitigating, and responding to malicious cyber activities, including
ransomware. Personnel who receive training serve as force multipliers
complementing Secret Service CFTFs. Currently the NCFI's authorizing
legislation (6 U.S.C.  383) limits NCFI to training SLTT law
enforcement officers. Congress is currently considering legislation to
re-authorize NCFI, which could incorporate an authorization to train
foreign partners.\8\ In addition, Homeland Security Investigations
(HSI) and Secret Service agents regularly participate in capacity-
building workshops delivered through the U.S. Transnational and High-
Tech Crime Global Law Enforcement Network (GLEN), a U.S. State
Department Bureau for International Narcotics and Law Enforcement
Affairs (INL)-funded initiative where digital forensics experts and
long-term Federal agents deliver training and technical assistance to
foreign partners that enables them to better cooperate with U.S.
authorities, including on ransomware and criminal misuse of
cryptocurrency investigations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ H.R. 7174--National Computer Forensics Institute
Reauthorization Act of 2022. Available at: https://www.congress.gov/
bill/117th-congress/house-bill/7174.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Today, the Secret Service coordinates, integrates, and shares
information on ransomware cases through the FBI-led National Cyber
Investigative Joint Task Force (NCIJTF), where a Secret Service agent
leads the Criminal Mission Center. Through the NCIJTF, the Secret
Service works hand-in-hand with partners from the Departments of
Justice, including the FBI, State, Treasury, and other domestic and
foreign partners. The Illicit Virtual Asset Information Notification
system, a joint effort between multiple agencies, operates from the
NCIJTF and, once fully operational, will enable increased partnership
between Federal law enforcement and the private sector to detect and
disrupt ransomware and other illicit virtual currency payment flows.
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement's (ICE) Homeland Security
Investigations (HSI) has 80 offices in over 50 countries and works to
combat cyber crime, including ransomware, through its Cyber Financial
Section of the Financial Crimes Unit, which provides training to
international partners and analytical assistance in tracing digital
assets. In addition, HSI's Cyber Crimes Center (C3) has led numerous
cyber-related trainings with foreign law enforcement partners. In 2020,
HSI, working with the Departments of Justice and the Treasury,
dismantled three terrorist financing cyber-enabled campaigns--involving
al-Qaeda, Hamas's al-Qassam Brigades, and ISIS.\9\ Since January 2020,
HSI C3 conducted in-person and virtual training covering on-line
investigations, dark web, and cryptocurrency investigations for law
enforcement partners in over 20 countries. Some of this training was
conducted in coordination with the HSI Financial Crimes Unit. For
example, in May 2022, HSI C3 provided network intrusion investigations
training to law enforcement officials in Panama.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ See, ``Global disruption of 3 terror finance cyber-enabled
campaigns,'' Global disruption of 3 terror finance cyber-enabled
campaigns/ICE.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, HSI initiated Operation Cyber Centurion, a cyber
threat intelligence initiative that proactively detects vulnerabilities
in critical infrastructure and works with victims to remediate the
vulnerabilities before they are exploited. These vulnerabilities are
often used to enable the theft of sensitive data or the disruption of a
functioning system and are commonly used in ransomware attacks. Cyber
Centurion is designed to significantly disrupt adversary plans to
exploit the internet to subvert U.S. laws and threaten the economic
integrity, public safety, and National security of the United States.
The initiative is in alignment with CISA's priorities for the
protection of critical infrastructure.
DHS is committed to strengthening the law enforcement capabilities
of Secret Service, HSI, and other law enforcement partners to
investigate all forms of cyber crime within our authorities and arrest
those responsible.
international partnerships
Cyber criminals and nation-state actors will continue to view
ransomware as an effective means to fund themselves and cause
disruptive effects in critical infrastructure. It will take a global
effort to stop them. To combat transnational cyber crime, including
ransomware, both the Secret Service and HSI maintain close partnerships
with a wide array of foreign law enforcement agencies. The Secret
Service is the first U.S. law enforcement agency to have permanent
representation at Europol with an attache assigned to the Joint Cyber
Crime Action Taskforce at Europol's European Cyber Crime Centre.
In March, DHS hosted the Cross-Border Crime Forum with our Canadian
partners to make our nations safer and committed to working together to
combat ransomware, strengthen security and resilience of critical
infrastructure against these threats, as well as increase reporting of
ransomware incidents. In May, DHS leadership attended the Ottawa 5
meeting in London, where discussions focused on combatting ransomware.
Last fall, the United States hosted a Counter-Ransomware Initiative
meeting with international partners from more than 30 countries.
Delegates discussed common challenges, approaches, and opportunities to
advance international cooperation to achieve shared goals. DHS serves
as the lead for the United States on the sub-group focused on
resilience. DHS, together with the Departments of Justice, State, and
Treasury, also recently participated in the initial meeting of the
U.S.-E.U. Ransomware Working Group.
The Department continues to work together with like-minded foreign
partners to target, identify, and prosecute cyber criminals, disrupt
their malicious IT infrastructure, and shut down financial networks
used to launder illicit proceeds. In April 2022, the Secret Service
announced that an international operation, organized by Europol and
conducted in partnership with the FBI, resulted in the seizure of the
RaidForums website--a popular marketplace for cyber criminals to
purchase and sell hacked data. This successful outcome was the result
of combined efforts between the Secret Service, other Federal agencies,
as well as international partners, including the United Kingdom's
National Crime Agency.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ See, ``U.S. Leads Seizure of One of the World's Largest Hacker
Forums and Arrests Administrator,'' https://www.justice.gov/usao-edva/
pr/us-leads-seizure-one-world-s-largest-hacker-forums-and-arrests-
administrator.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
conclusion
The Department commends Congress for passing the fiscal year 2022
Omnibus Appropriations bill, which passed in March and included the
language from CIRCIA. In addition, we greatly appreciate Congress'
continued support for the cyber training of SLLT law enforcement.
Centers such as the NCFI provide critical cyber investigation skills
and tools to our partners needed to prevent, mitigate, and respond to
cyber incidents.
DHS is committed to countering the cyber crimes targeting our
country, our citizens, and our partners around the world. We are
grateful for the continued support of Congress and to our fellow
departments and agencies for their support in this effort. Together we
can ensure the success of DHS's multi-pronged mission to increase cyber
resilience, disrupt the ransomware ecosystem, and hold accountable
those who commit these crimes. Thank you again for the opportunity to
testify and we look forward to your questions.

Chairwoman Slotkin. Thank you for your testimony.
I now recognize Mr. Hartman to summarize his statement for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MATT HARTMAN, DEPUTY EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR
FOR CYBERSECURITY, CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY
AGENCY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Hartman. Excellent. Thank you. Chairwoman Slotkin and
Members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on behalf of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, or CISA, to discuss our efforts to elevate
America's security and resilience against ransomware attacks.
As the Nation's cyber defense agency, CISA leads the
National effort to understand, manage, and reduce risk to the
digital and physical infrastructure that Americans rely on
every hour of every day.
Here in Michigan, and in every State across the country,
ransomware and the threat of cyber attack are top-of-mind
concerns to schools, to hospitals, to businesses large and
small, and to so many other organizations. That is why it is
important that we empower organizations and Americans to help
us raise the cybersecurity baseline.
The administration's approach to countering ransomware is
focused on bolstering resilience. Strengthening resilience to
withstand ransomware attacks is arguably the most difficult
element of our collective efforts. I am pleased to testify
today on CISA's efforts to help tackle this problem.
Building resilience requires a long-term investment in
people, processes, and technology. Every organization that
wants to avoid being the victim of ransomware must continuously
invest in the practices that will keep their customers, their
systems, and their data secured.
The question that we need to ask ourselves is what can we
do right now to truly have an impact. I will point to two
things. First, we must give organizations tools and guidance to
increase their security and resilience. This is why CISA works
every day to raise awareness and to promote basic cyber hygiene
across tens of thousands of businesses and government agencies
throughout our country. Organizations need to raise their
cybersecurity standards and the guidance that CISA provides is
meant to provide real-time actionable information to help them
do so. For you, that means regularly update your software,
think before you click, avoid suspicious links and phishing
emails, use strong passwords, and, most importantly, implement
multi-factor authentication. Adding a second factor for log-in
makes you 99 percent less likely to be hacked.
Second, we need to partner with the American people,
organizations in both the public and private sectors to
identify threats and vulnerabilities, to develop guidance, to
conduct outreach, and to ensure that everyone has the
information that they need to make educated cyber risk
management decisions.
CISA is uniquely positioned to build and strengthen
partnerships with the private sector and with State, local,
Tribal, and territorial government organizations. A central
element of our ability to partner with you here in Michigan and
across the country is CISA's growing presence outside of
Washington, DC. CISA has cybersecurity advisors now in nearly
every State, including two here in Michigan, to provide boots
on the ground help to organizations of all sizes to address the
growing threat of cyber attack. Additionally, CISA's Joint
Cyber Defense Collaborative, or JCDC, was launched to drive
partnership between the Federal Government and private-sector
companies who possess tremendous visibility into domestic
networks to help us identify emerging threats and to provide
timely and actionable cybersecurity guidance to reduce the risk
of attack for everyone.
A great example of this guidance is CISA's Shields Up
messaging campaign which we launched in the lead-up to the
Russian invasion of Ukraine. Through more than 100 engagements
with different critical infrastructure sectors and
organizations, we showed organizations, regardless of size, how
to strengthen their cybersecurity and resilience. With
information from the intelligence community and the private
sector, we use CISA.gov/shields-up to provide evolving threat
information to serve as the hub for up-to-date technical
guidance to reduce risk. To date, this is one of CISA's most
visited pages on CISA.gov.
Additionally, last summer we launched stopransomware.gov, a
collaborative U.S. Government resource to help public and
private organizations tackle ransomware. The web page has had
more than 830,000 views and the ransomware readiness assessment
tool that has been downloaded and is available on that site has
been downloaded roughly 15,000 times. Please help us get the
message out that this tool is there for organizations across
America.
We are working closely with Federal partners to stand up
the Joint Ransomware Task Force, a new tool Congress gave us,
which is the governing body to combat ransomware attacks from
mitigation and protection to intelligence prioritization and
disruption. CISA is proud to serve as co-chair of the Task
Force, along with the FBI.
CISA has been leading this whole-of-Nation effort with
partners across the Government and private sector, but now more
than ever we need everyone, including the business and
government right here in Michigan to work with us to reduce
this threat because it impacts us all.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you. I
look forward to your questions.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Thank you for your testimony.
I thank all the witnesses.
I will remind the subcommittee that we will each have 5
minute for questions to question the panel.
I now recognize myself for questions.
Thank you for your testimony. You know, Mr. Kahangama, we
have, as I look around the room, some farmers in the room and I
know that you responded to both the attacks on the Colonial
Pipeline and the JBS meat processing facility. Can you describe
some of the specific lessons learned? I mean these are big
organizations who, you know--we certainly had the head of
Colonial Pipeline come and testify in front of us and talk
about some of the security vulnerabilities that they had in a
very large organization, but if you are a farmer in the State
of Michigan, you are dependent on some of these large
organizations to get your product out to market. Can you talk
about some of the lessons learned from those attacks?
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you for the question, Chairwoman.
Absolutely.
I think one of the lessons learned is that no matter how
big an organization you are, the smallest cyber vulnerability
can be quite damaging. I think it is also important to
understand the connection between regular systems that you may
use for H.R. or doing paychecks versus all the operational
components. I think in both of those instances with Colonial
and JBS we saw relatively small attacks that targeted like a
payroll system and then out of an abundance of caution the
entire enterprise shut down. So I think we are all susceptible
to the lowest common denominator of cybersecurity that is
provided.
The other thing that I want to mention is that ransomware
attackers are quite vigilant and they are looking for
businesses and services that they know will want to pay. I
believe the FBI put out an advisory in the wake of JBS not just
mentioning that vulnerabilities exist, but that ransomware
actors can and will look for opportune times in cyclical
seasons, right. With the agricultural and food process and
grain production for instance, there are certain times of year
where crops may be more valuable and you would be more likely
to pay because you need to plan the seed or grow the crops and
things like that.
So ransomware actors are actively looking at your business
time line and looking to target you at opportune times when
they know you may be more willing to pay.
So I think being vigilant 24/7 365 days a year, including
patching those vulnerabilities, were some of the big takeaways
I took from that.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Great. Thank you for that.
Mr. Hartman, a few years ago one of our local
infrastructure authorities ended up paying $25,000 in ransom to
unlock their internal communications systems. Responding to
that attack, in addition, cost them $2.4 million. Luckily the
attack did not disrupt our--literally our power grid or our
water distribution networks as they had insurance and provided
protection against network disruption. There are many
organizations who do not have that insurance, who do not have
that cushion. We heard in our previous roundtable from a local
town supervisor who represents I think less than 2,000
residents where the ransomware was $40,000, right. It is just--
and luckily they had insurance, or else that would have been
borne by a local government that just cannot afford it.
So how can you help--you know, the JBS and the Colonial
Pipeline, they are very wealthy companies that can hire their
own IT folks. Tell us what you can do for our smallest
businesses and who do they call the minute they walk into work
and there is a problem?
Mr. Hartman. Thank you for the question, Chairwoman.
You know, there are four things that I will point to that
every organization, large or small, should consider. This is as
applicable to farmers and schools as it is to the Colonial
Pipelines and the JBS Foods.
The first I touched on in my opening remarks, which is
implement multi-factor authentication. This is something that
every person, every organization should do. A password as a
sole identifier is no longer sufficient. But implementing a
second layer, whether that is a fingerprint, facial
recognition, a text message, email, again, you are reducing
your risk of being a victim of ransomware by 99 percent.
To your point, Chairwoman, with 90 million attempts a day
targeting state systems, we know that this is broad
indiscriminate and opportunistic scanning and targeting of all
of our domestic critical infrastructure.
The second piece is extraordinarily important. To your
point about not having the resources to pay, it is critical to
maintain off-line encrypted back-ups and to periodically and
regularly test that you are able to recover to these back-ups
so if your data is encrypted you are not forced with the
decision of whether to pay or not.
Third, all organizations should develop an instant response
plan; they should test this plan frequently. It is absolutely
paramount that cybersecurity starts at the top of the
organization, at the board level, at the CEO level. These plans
need to exist. I can speak from experience that organizations
who are working to develop incident response plans on the fly
are generally not particularly successful.
Finally, and to your last question, report your incidents
to CISA. This is important for two reasons. First, if we do not
know, we can't help. Secondarily, if we do not know the tactics
that are being used, if we do not know the infrastructure that
is being used, we cannot share that information in anonymized
fashion more broadly to protect the community. So get to know
your local cybersecurity advisors from CISA, get to know your
FBI field offices. The real important thing is that you contact
one of us and then on the back end we will work within the
Department of Homeland Security, with our peers at the FBI, to
make sure that we can provide all of the assistance of the
Federal Government.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Thank you for that.
The Chair will now recognize other Members for questions
they may wish to ask the witnesses.
In accordance with the guidelines laid out by the Chairman
and Ranking Member on their February 3, 2021 colloquy, I will
recognize Members in order of seniority, alternating between
Majority and Minority where possible. Members participating
virtually are also reminded to unmute themselves when
recognized for questioning.
The Chair recognizes for 5 minutes the gentlewoman from
Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Madam Chair, thank you so very much for
having me this--having this hearing in particular. Again, thank
you for your enormous leadership. As I have served on this
committee, it is clear that the importance of both the Homeland
Security Committee and the Department of Homeland Security, and
what you have done in this particular committee is to bring
this knowledge both to our local communities, but as well as to
listen to them.
Today we have the opportunity to listen in Michigan and
understand the growing cyber threats that impact businesses,
local communities, and of course school and other
organizations.
This is crucial and I am looking forward to the continued
testimony about the pay. ``Ransomware bosses make $90,000
annually.'' Just to read it, ``If crime doesn't pay, Russian
ransomware bosses wouldn't know it. The average Russian
ransomware boss makes $90,000 a year, or 13 times the average
income for citizens in the country.'' I ask unanimous consent
to introduce that into the record.
Chairwoman Slotkin. So ordered.
[The information follows:]

spotlight on security
Crime Pays: Ransomware Bosses Make $90K Annually
http://www.technewsworld.com/story/83603.html, By John P. Mello Jr.,
June 14, 2016 5 o'clock AM PT
If crime doesn't pay, Russian ransomware bosses wouldn't know it.
The average Russian ransomware boss makes US$90,000 a year--or 13
times the average income for citizens in the country who stick to the
``straight and narrow,'' according to a recent Flashpoint study.
What does a ransomware honcho do for those rubles? Basically, the
job calls for supporting and maintaining the malware.
``The software has to be constantly updated so that antivirus
systems won't recognize it as malware,'' explained Vitali Kremez, a
cybercrime intelligence analyst with Flashpoint.
``It's not a situation where you provide the malware and sit back
on a couch waiting for your payments. You have to work on it on a daily
basis,'' he told TechNewsWorld. ``The boss controls the source code for
the malware.''
Ransomware as a Service
The malware model is evolving, according to the Flashpoint study,
which focuses on the Russian ransomware scene.
``A new form of ransomware has been developed that is in effect
`Ransomware as a Service' (RaaS),'' notes the report. It ``enables
`affiliates' to obtain a piece of ransomware from a crime boss and
distribute it to victims as these affiliates wish.''
That's a departure from the past, when ransomware was available
only to criminals willing to make a hefty upfront payment for the
malware--$2,000 to rent or $5,000 to buy. That began to change last
November, Kremez noted.
``We started to see developers considering giving their malware
free of charge to criminals and keeping 40 to 50 percent of each
ransomware payment made,'' he said.
The new business model has lowered the barriers to getting into the
business. It is not particularly hard for newcomers to start spreading
ransomware quickly. They can attack corporations and individuals
through botnet installs, email and social media phishing campaigns,
compromised dedicated servers and file-sharing websites.
``It used to be a one-on-one business,'' Kremez said. ``At this
stage, it's all automated. We see marketplaces. We see services on the
dark web where you deposit your money and buy what you have to buy
without any direct communication with the seller.''
Malicious Infrastructure Growing
More evidence of the popularity of ransomware is evident in
Infoblox's latest quarterly report on malicious infrastructure building
globally.
To measure that kind of activity world-wide, Infoblox has created a
threat index. Upon its launch in the first quarter of 2013, the threat
index was 76. During this year's first quarter, the index reached it's
highest point ever: 137.
Activity related to ransomware has fueled the index's rise.
``While exploit kits remain a major threat, this latest jump was
driven in large part by a 35X increase in creation of domains for
ransom ware over the previous quarter, which in turn drove an increase
of 290 percent in the overall malware category,'' the report states.
The activity of malware kit developers is another indicator of
ransomware's attractiveness to criminals. Kits are used to infect
devices with a variety of malware programs.
``A number of exploit kits and threat actor gangs behind them have
started adding ransomware to their repertoire over the last few
months,'' said Sean Tierney, director of cyber intelligence at
Infoblox.
``These are gangs that were using their kits to deliver other kinds
of malware,'' he told TechNewsWorld, that ``have either started
including or switched entirely to ransomware.''
It's likely that the ransomware market will level off as security
software makers get better at detecting it and consumers get smarter
about avoiding it, suggested Tierney.
``Then the market will become saturated,'' he said, ``and the
return won't be able to support the amount of activity going on.
Expanding 2FA
Two-factor authentication, which requires both something you have
and something you know in order to access an account, has proven to be
a good way to thwart data thieves. One problem with the technology,
though, is that it isn't easy for many rank-and-file developers to
deploy. One authentication company aims to change that with a recently
launched program.
Centrify actually goes beyond 2FA to include single sign-in--which
allows the use of a single set of credentials to log into multiple
accounts--along with password reset and access control of a device.
Under the program, developers can plug into those features through
Centrify system APis.
``Developers who are building an application from a great idea
aren't necessarily expert in security,'' said Chris Webber, security
strategist at Centrify.
``We can give that to them,'' he told TechNews World.
``They can take advantage of all the user management and
multifactor authentication that Centrify's built, so they don't have to
learn about that world and can concentrate on their great idea,''
Webber pointed out. ``It's more and more critical that we need to
figure out how to put two-factor auth everywhere, because passwords
alone are just not a great way to do authentication anymore.''
Breach Diary

May 30. Troy Hunt, who maintains the data breach awareness
portal Have I Been Pwned, advises his subscribers that
information on 65 million Tumblr accounts is being offered for
sale on the dark web.

May 30. Twitter account of Katy Perry breached and her 89
million followers sent tweets filled with profanity and slurs,
TechCrunch reports.

May 31. MySpace announces it has reset the passwords of all
accounts created prior to June 11, 2014, due to a data breach.

May 31. A Federal district court in Pheonix, Arizona, rules
that insurance provider Chubb does not have to reimburse P.F.
Chang under a cybersecurity policy for payments to credit card
processors connected to a 2014 data breach.

June 1. U.S. Federal Reserve detected more than 50 breaches
between 2011 and 2015, including several incidents described in
internal documents as espionage, Reuters reports.

June 1. Medical information of thousands of NFL players is
at risk after backback [sic] containing the data was stolen
from an athletic trainer's car, Deadspin reports.

June 1. FBI alerts public that extortion attempts are being
made against victims whose personal information has been
compromised in recent large data breaches. Extortionists are
threatening to make victim's personal informtion public if not
paid two to five bitcoins.

June 1. TeamViewer reports it experienced a service outage
due to a DDoS attack, but its systems were not breached by
hackers.

June 2. Medical records of some 40,491 customers of the
Stamford Podiatry Group in Connecticut impacted due to a system
intrusion, HealthIT Security reports.

June 2. 2015 payroll tax data of employees of Verify Health
Systems in California at risk after an employee was duped by a
phishing scam, SC Magazine reports.

Ms. Jackson Lee. In addition, ``Houston Rockets targeted in
ransomware attack'', and the idea of it is their network is
attacked, a sports organization.
[The information follows:]

Houston Rockets targeted in ransomware attack, reports say
Channel 13 Eyewitness News, Thursday, April 15, 2021
https://abc13.com/houston-rockets-cyberattack-nba-ransomware-who-cyber-
attacked-attack-against-team/10517049/
HOUSTON, Texas (KTRK).--The Houston Rockets insist a recent
ransomware attack against their network has not impacted the NBA team's
operations, even though the party claiming responsibility says the
club's internal business data was stolen, according to reports.
As reported by Bloomberg News and Reuters on Wednesday, a Rockets
spokesperson said ``it appears that the unknown actors attempted to
install ransomware on certain internal systems . . . our internal
security tools prevented ransomware from being installed except for a
few systems that have not impacted our operations.''
Bloomberg reports the hacking group called ``Babuk'' claims on its
dark web page to have stolen 500 gigabytes of the team's data,
including contracts, non-disclosure agreements and financial data.
Babuk is reportedly threatening to publish that information if the team
declines to pay.
The Rockets spokesperson acknowledged the claims but wouldn't
comment further.
The team added the attack hasn't affected its ability to ``take
care of our fans, employees, and players.''
Still, it appears the Rockets are among many businesses rolled into
a recent spike in ransomware attacks. Check Point Research reports a 50
percent increase in the daily average of ransomware attack attempts in
the second half of 2020 compared to the first half.
In Houston, significant entities including Memorial Hermann and
Texas Children's Hospital have reported previous breaches.

Ms. Jackson Lee. So to Mr. Hartman and Mr. Kahangama, let
me ask you these questions please, and if both of you would
answer.
We understand that Michigan, along with other State laws,
does not require attorneys general to be notified of data
breaches and they may in fact receive their information by
media. I would be interested in CISA's status of publishing
rules about mandatory incident reporting.
Many of you know that I have introduced legislation on
zero-day activities and it is important that we protect our
local communities from that.
Finally, let me understand more on the work that has been
done by the administration, the hard work, to prevent
ransomware attacks from Russia and to find out whether or not
we have been able to see a decrease or what has happened with
respect to the ransomware attacks from Russia, particularly as
they intrude into local communities.
If you would start first, assistant secretary of policy,
and then CISA. Both of you can answer in the time that I have
left.
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you, Congresswoman. Happy to answer
those questions.
I will start with the last one first and speak a little bit
about the Russian engagement.
The U.S. Government, you know, did engage with the Russians
early last year to address the threat of ransomware. President
Biden has acknowledged it as a National security threat. While
we did see some arrests occur, the Russian invasion of Ukraine
has changed the calculus. We have seen some ransomware actors
declare loyalties or sympathies with the Russian government. We
have also seen them in Costa Rica target specifically
governments. I think whether or not the Russians take action,
we are willing to unilaterally continue the fight against these
actors. I think you have seen that through the administration's
approach, which has evolved to not just indictments and
arrests, but taking back money, disrupting the financial say of
the cryptocurrency ecosystem as well as using Treasury
sanctions to disrupt cryptocurrency services that are
essentially laundering a lot of these funds. We are going to
continue to take that fight to them, including law enforcement
actions, along with inter-agency partners.
Then to the Congresswoman's first question, I want to turn
it over to CISA.
Mr. Hartman. Thanks, Iranga, and thank you, Congresswoman.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. And your rules, potential
timing that they may be coming out.
Thank you.
Mr. Hartman. Absolutely. Thank you, Congresswoman.
With respect to the Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical
Infrastructure Act that was recently passed by Congress, thank
you. This is going to be monumental in terms of the Federal
Government being able to understand what is happening from a
ransomware and a broader cybersecurity perspective and cyber
incident perspective, as well as take action as a U.S.
Government to deter future attacks.
With respect to the implementation of the legislation, we
are in the process of a very thorough and rigorous rulemaking
process. We intend to really find the sweet spot in
implementation between, you know, defining the types of
incidents that need to be reported to the Federal Government
and when to allow victim organizations to focus on restoring
their systems and data, but also in sufficient time providing
the information to the Federal Government so we can limit the
impact of a potential campaign and help the broader community.
Within 24 months we intend to have--be complete with
rulemaking and work with our partners at the Federal Bureau of
Investigation to make sure that when CISA receives information
about ransomware or other cybersecurity incidents from all
sectors, that we are quickly sharing that information back with
the FBI, with the Sector Risk Management Agency from any of the
16 sectors, and with appropriate State and local authorities so
that we as a community can take action to combat this problem.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Great. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes for 5 minutes, the gentlewoman from
Florida, Mrs. Demings.
Mrs. Demings. Yes, good morning, everyone. Chairwoman
Slotkin, thank you so very much for this very important and
timely hearing. Regardless of what part of the country we are
in, this is a topic that is certainly important to all of us.
We all represent larger cities and smaller cities and towns and
rural areas, so thank you so very much for this.
I do not want to just slaughter the witness' name. I will
take a stab at it. Mr. Kahangama--if that is wrong, please
forgive me--you talked earlier about the cost of sometimes
cleaning up the attack can be less than the--paying the ransom
itself. As we try to get different organizations to, you know,
take steps to fight against cyber crimes, establish plans and
programs, do you find that that in and of itself is just a
major deterrent to actually developing plans? Or is that
something that you have, you know, actually looked into?
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
I think the more preventative measures that are taken in
the front end, the cheaper your overall experience is going to
be within cybersecurity. I think it is always going to be a
little bit more expensive to deal with the long tail of issues
that your organization needs to deal with afterwards. You have
to constantly----
Mrs. Demings. Do you find that organizations are open to
that though? That they understand that as opposed to just
wanting to move on quickly, pay the ransom, let us move on
quickly? Or are they really open to what you were saying and
practicing that policy?
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you.
I think they are open. I think it is a matter of us
educating them. I want to also bring in my colleague from CISA,
who is on the ground with a lot of these companies as well. But
I do think they are open and unfortunately a lot of them
discover after it is a little too late.
But I want to defer to Matt as well.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you.
Mr. Hartman. Absolutely. Thank you for the question,
Congresswoman.
To my colleague's point, I think that organizations do
understand and they are increasingly open to that concept. But
to his other point, they may not know where to begin. This is
where it is increasingly important that the Federal Government,
that CISA really help organizations prioritize their scarce
resources and prioritize their scarce time.
I will start by flagging that perhaps the most important
element of what we can do as CISA is our regional cybersecurity
forces. So for folks in Michigan, for folks across the country,
if you do not know your CISA regional cybersecurity expert, get
to know them. They can help you understand the services that we
have to offer, they can help you prioritize where to begin. One
service that we offer for free is a ransomware readiness
assessment that all organizations can use and our CSAs across
the 50 States can help organizations exercise these plans. We
also have a suite of services that we call our ``cyber hygiene
services'' that are scalable and available to all organizations
in the country. These focus on the most common vectors of
ransomware. So we have remote phishing campaign assessments, we
have web application scanning, vulnerability scanning. You can
sign up for this service for free, you can come to
stopransomware.gov or CISA.gov, you can contact your local
advisor and you will be emailed in an automated report every
week illustrating the biggest challenges that you have and
really helping your organization, no matter how small or how
large, begin to prioritize vulnerabilities that you are
closing, an investment that you are making in cybersecurity.
Mrs. Demings. Sounds like you have certainly taken the
steps to make sure that you have the resources and services
available to organizations. But I guess I am more interested in
are they taking advantage of it? What steps have you taken to
make sure they are aware of it?
You talked earlier about all organizations should have an
incident response plan. From a regional standpoint--and you can
pick any region that you want to--have you seen great success
with organizations developing that response plan? Or is there
still a lot more work to do?
Mr. Hartman. Good question, Congresswoman.
We are seeing increased success by the day, but there
remains work to do. There are so many organizations in this
country, many of which, the vast majority of which are owned
and operated by the private sector that are vital to our
Nation's critical infrastructure, to our National critical
functions. We are out there every day, we are increasing our
field presence every day, we are increasing our resources every
day. But it is through hearings like this, it is through every
opportunity that we can to come to the local jurisdictions,
come to States to talk about what we are doing every day to
educate on the resources that are available that will really
begin to, you know, make a big difference across the country.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Thank you.
I just want to pile on to Congresswoman Demings' question
because I think even for the businesses and organizations here
in Michigan in the room, they did not know that they could go
to their local CISA representatives and basically get--I mean
we won't call it an audit, but an assessment of their cyber
health. I just can't make it any more clear how important I
think that is, that if you wait until the moment when you have
an attack and you are not prepared, you have already kind-of
lost half the battle. I think one of the things that is most
useful is, one, getting that assessment and then testing it a
little bit. You know, and I always repeat the story that we did
at the Pentagon. When I was at the Pentagon they realized that
they had some vulnerabilities with phishing, right, with like
even senior three- and four-star generals clicking on a
phishing link that we got into our email system. So we did our
own fake phishing email and you could identify exactly which
individuals in your organization clicked on that link and
created a vulnerability. Surprise, surprise, it tended to be
some of our most senior folks. So they took it a lot more
seriously.
So I think getting sort-of an assessment of your
organization is--it is free, it is the most valuable thing that
CISA can do and they are here based in Michigan. Your
counterparts are here based in Michigan.
We will now move to a second round.
Mr. Kahangama, earlier this month I chaired a hearing on
cryptocurrencies and I think a lot of people are just--it is a
really new field for a lot of people. They don't understand how
cryptocurrency works. We know that terrorist and criminal
organizations can exploit these products and services to
advance their plots. Just last week, in response to the large
number of criminal acts involving cryptocurrency, an
organization called Chainalysis announced a new service focused
on crypto incident response to help their clients' response
when they have been asked to pay in cryptocurrencies.
Can you just, for the lay person, explain how this works
and kind-of the frequency with which cryptocurrency is now like
the currency of choice for these attacks?
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you for the question, Chairwoman.
Wholeheartedly agree. It is almost exclusively
cryptocurrency at this point. These are digital assets, digital
tokens that are created and then transacted on-line. The issue
that we are having with them is that they exist in ungoverned
space, right, whereas when you are taking cash or your paycheck
to the bank and depositing it, those institutions are required
to have Know Your Customer laws and identify who you are,
identify where the money is going. There are laws that if your
transactions are over a certain amount of money, that that gets
flagged to the Federal Government for suspicious activity
reporting. All these types of checks and balances are on those
transactions. Those don't exist with cryptocurrency. They are
generated through a number of technical means and then operate
in an unregulated environment.
From a law enforcement perspective, from our Secret Service
and other investigators, it can be difficult because on top of
the anonymity that exists with the cryptocurrency, there are
additional services that can mix up all those transactions and
obfuscate them further, so it becomes even more difficult to
track and trace. So without kind-of proper regulation and
oversight of a lot of these cryptocurrencies, we are going to
continue to be challenged by them.
Chairwoman Slotkin. So we heard from a local official in
our first roundtable this morning who talked about how, you
know, after the attack they went back and this malicious actor
had like gone in for a minute and tested their systems, then a
couple of weeks later went in for 12 minutes, tested the
system, and then was able to access it and ransom for $40,000,
asking the local officials to translate regular cash into
cryptocurrency in sending that over. The criminals did it as a
matter of course and they sort-of used volume as the way to get
as much money as possible.
So it is not that there is a live human being I guess on
the other end of that attack, that they are just like farming
out all these attacks at the same time.
Can you explain that a little bit, about how these like
ransomware farms are working in places, particularly overseas?
Mr. Kahangama. Sure. Thank you for the question,
Chairwoman.
I think it is appropriate to liken a ransomware
organization almost to a modern-day mob or mafia. It is very
large structures. There is something called ransomware as a
service, which you break up a ransomware attack into different
parts, right. There is initial access, there is deploying
malware, there is getting the money. These are kits that you
can literally buy on-line. As a result, anyone with very basic
technical knowledge can become a ransomware operator
unfortunately.
So with this lowest common denominator environment you have
a proliferation of individuals who are seeking to conduct these
attacks. The fact is that they like to do onesies and twosies
in very small increments in order to not go on the radar,
right, to be undercover a little bit.
So I think you have ransomware actors growing in terms of
their sophistication, but at the same time the tools they have
are becoming quite basic. So you have very low-level people
conducting these attacks at a much higher frequency with a wide
availability of these tools. So it is a growing issue.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Yes. We heard that these bad actors,
are sort-of cuing their ransom dollar amounts to the size of
the organization and what they think they can produce and even
sort-of looking at the revenue of a business, looking at, you
know, for our schools who have to be transparent about the
amount of money that they handle, that that helps them gauge
what to charge in a ransomware attack. I thought that was
disturbing that they sort-of know their victim and key the cost
of something that they could reasonably or of some form afford
so that they actually pay it.
Mr. Kahangama. That is a real reality. These people kind-of
want anything they can get. They will do their market research
on victims, who can afford it, they will look at people who
have cyber insurance to see if they are more susceptible to
paying it. They also look to opportune times when they know
they can't--they lock your system up and it is a week to
graduation, so someone may be more interested in paying, and
things like that. I wholeheartedly agree.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes for 5 minutes the gentlewoman from
Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me again emphasize my appreciation for
this hearing.
I can't emphasize enough the cruciality of the question of
local governments, local businesses. I would like both
witnesses to really focus on, one, the importance of that
individual assessment, but more importantly to say to local
entities, you are not immune from international ransomware
attacks. That is why this is such an important hearing.
Frankly, we should probably work to do this across the Nation
of the many Members' districts where people really think that
they may be immune.
How often should a small government, a tax office, a small
business, do their own self-analysis or their self-audit, as
the theme has been, frankly? As you are beginning, Mr. Hartman,
under our new legislation to develop the process for mandatory
incident reporting, there needs to be some interim way that our
local communities can be heard or that our State governments
can be notified. What would be--first question is the
importance of recognizing that no entity, no hamlet is immune,
no village, no city, no sports organization, no school
district. Then, second, what should they be doing in the
interim as you are proposing? Both can answer this question.
The protocols for mandatory incident reporting. Many of us have
had these large entities in our districts and we are reminded
of the Pipeline incident.
But I would appreciate you responding to those two
questions.
Mr. Hartman. Thank you very much for the questions,
Congresswoman.
First, to absolutely reiterate your point, no organization
in this country is immune from cyber attack emanating from
foreign nations. With that said, no organization in this
country should feel that they have to take on this challenge
alone. That is why we are here as CISA, to work together, to
work collaboratively every day, to make sure that all
organizations have the information that they need to make
educated risk management decisions and to strengthen their own
cybersecurity and their own resilience.
With respect to your second question on the frequency of
how organizations should continue to self-evaluate or self-
assess their cybersecurity, again, it really depends. There are
many elements of the cybersecurity program, like knowing your
exposed vulnerabilities that are externally facing, so that are
available to--that are facing the internet and can be accessed
by anyone across the world. Knowing your prevalence of
external-facing known vulnerabilities, particularly those that
we know our adversaries are exploiting. CISA recently developed
a catalog of known exploited vulnerabilities that is available
to all organizations to help them prioritize their
vulnerability management programs.
With respect to what organizations should do in the
interim, it is very simple. While there is no rule in place
today, organizations can voluntarily report cyber incidents to

[emailprotected]
. You can also report it to your field advisor
or to the FBI. It is extremely important, again, that all
organizations are aware of the services that the field support
from CISA offers, from assessments to evaluations of your own
organization's cybersecurity risk to education and
encouragement of best practices to building cybersecurity
communities of interest to quite frankly listening to our
stakeholders' concerns, to their challenges, and to their
requirements so we can work with Congress to increase the
services that we provide to all.
Thank you.
Mr. Kahangama. Congresswoman, I would just add in the
remaining time that we also have cyber fraud task forces
through the Secret Service. There are 44 of them globally. I
believe there is one in Houston, Texas as well. These are joint
task forces with local and State officials, as well as Federal
law enforcement, who work together to share information rapidly
and are also a resource for sharing information to and with the
public on ransomware attacks.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, let me conclude, in the time--my
clock has gotten away from me--but let me just simply say that
this is a frightening experience when you experience a
ransomware attack. From our experience with Colonial Pipeline,
I want to emphasize through this hearing, do not accept this
attack alone. There are resources. Do not I think engage in
ransom without engaging the government that is here and ready
to serve and to help you.
So I hope as we proceed we will see a new protocol, but
more importantly, don't experience or suffer the impact alone.
I hope this hearing evidences that, that we are here to provide
the assistance necessary.
Madam Chair, thank you so very much.
With that, I yield back.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Thank you, Congresswoman.
I just want to again foot stomp that for our local
businesses, our superintendents, our school officials, our
farmers, making an appointment to speak with our local
officials who do cybersecurity in the State of Michigan ahead
of need is always better than having that first call be an
emergency. I think what is not always known is that groups can
just--you know, if you are from a chamber of commerce and you
get together with your group and you want to have a meeting
with these folks, if they are available, they want to meet with
the public. So folks should avail themselves of that.
With that, the Chair recognizes for 5 minutes the
gentlewoman from Florida, Mrs. Demings.
Mrs. Demings. Again, thank you so much, Chairwoman Slotkin.
Just again, and I know we have spent a considerable amount
of time on this, but it is so very critical, having grown up in
a rural part of Florida, I just think about the unique
challenges that our smaller cities or smaller towns, our rural
areas have, No. 1, in receiving the information, but then also
if they receive the information, really being able to implement
recommendations due to lack of resources. So, you know, any
additional steps or assistance that we can give as Members of
Congress to make sure that the information is passed on, you
know, from the largest of municipalities down to the smallest,
please, to both of our witnesses, let us know how we can be of
greater assistance there. We have to be proactive as opposed to
reactive, as has been said numerous times, to these type of
attacks.
I would like to hear from both of our witnesses about--and
if you want to respond to that at all, that is fine--but some
of the challenges in recruiting a ready-for-the-moment work
force. We know that many of our Federal agencies are
experiencing challenges in recruitment and development. I also
know that the advisory committee's recommendation was to
prioritize, you know, our work force issues so that we could be
more competitive with the private sector.
So if both of our witnesses would just speak for just a
moment on how are we doing with our work force.
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
We agree there is a cyber work force shortage in this
country. It is an issue that the Government faces, the private
sector, State and local communities writ large. I think it is
important that we focus, you know, not just on traditional
educational pathways as well. Having a diverse background in
terms of what you may or may not have experienced, what kind of
certifications you have are important.
For our secretary, Secretary Mayorkas, this is a high
priority as well. He conducted a sprint on cybersecurity work
force hiring last year as well. Happy to report on that front
that we had a 60-day sprint last summer. I believe at least 500
job offers were given out in cybersecurity for the Department.
That was the largest single hiring event we had so far and we
have at least 300 of those on-board so far. But I also want to
share with Matt because I know that CISA is doing a lot of
great work in this space.
Mr. Hartman. Thanks, Iranga, and thank you very much for
the question, Chairwoman.
Up front, you know, this is a challenge for all of our
organizations. It is a challenge in the Federal Government. We
understand it is a challenge in State, local, Tribal, and
territorial governments, and it is a challenge in the private
sector right now to fill critical cybersecurity jobs.
Within CISA we are taking this extraordinarily seriously.
Similar to the Secretary, Director Easterly has really gone on
record to say that we need to not only rapidly close our own
cybersecurity work force gaps at CISA so we can better serve
our communities, but we need to use this opportunity to close a
significant diversity gap within our own organization. Director
Easterly has gone on record stating that by 2030 we need to
make sure that at CISA 50 percent of our cybersecurity jobs are
occupied by women. That would be up from about 25 percent
today. So that is a very strong goal and we are taking that
signal and we understand that we really need to use this
opportunity where we have a handful--a number of vacancies at
CISA due to rapid growth in recent years, to make sure that our
work force of tomorrow represents the diversity of our Nation.
With respect to specific actions, we are leveraging all of
the tools at our disposal, including the Cyber Talent
Management System, which we appreciate the support for. We have
a hiring event tomorrow actually, a virtual hiring even where
we are looking to bring in at least--I am targeting about 100
candidates tomorrow to be selected for the vacancies within my
organization within CISA so we can really continue to do better
for all of you, so we can provide the guidance that all
organizations can leverage.
Back to your initial question, Congresswoman, the faster
that we hire, the more diversity that we bring into our thought
at CISA, the better the guidance that we can bring out to our
diverse communities, to our diverse States.
Mrs. Demings. Great. Well, again, thank you so very much to
both of you for the work that you are doing.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Thank you, Congresswoman.
I want to thank our panel for appearing today. Our
witnesses flew out in order to join us here. Thank you for
answering our questions and bringing the Federal perspective
here to Michigan.
In just a second we are going to transition to our second
panel. Mr. James Ellis, he's the cyber section commander at the
Michigan Cyber Command Center at Michigan State Police
Headquarters, and brings this sort-of into an even more local
perspective.
Without objection, the subcommittee will recess for 5
minutes so that we can change the panel and folks can take a
quick break. For our live-stream folks, we will be back after a
brief break and come back and hear our second panel.
Thank you very much to our witnesses for making the effort
to come out here.
Have a good one.
[Recess.]
Chairwoman Slotkin. Welcome back, everyone. Thank you for
sticking with us and for those on the live stream, we will now
continue to the second portion of our panel today.
Our witness today is Mr. James C. Ellis. He is detective
first lieutenant and cyber section commander at the Michigan
Cyber Command Center for the Michigan State Police. That is in
Dimondale, Michigan.
Mr. Ellis leads a cyber team of over 100 Michigan State
Police members located throughout Michigan and oversees the
Michigan Cyber Command Center, or MC3, Computer Crimes Unit,
and the Michigan Region of the Internet Crimes Against Children
Task Force.
Mr. Ellis' team at the Michigan State Police Cyber
specializes in high-tech criminal investigations of all types,
proactive cyber investigations involving the on-line
exploitation of children, and evidential forensic data recovery
services.
Detective First Lieutenant Ellis is a 28-year member of the
Michigan State Police and holds multiple cybersecurity industry
certifications in addition to his Bachelor of Science degree.
I also want to note that we had planned for a second
witness, but due to COVID unfortunately our second witness was
unable to make it today. We wish her well.
Without objection, the written testimony of Ms. Laura
Clark, chief information officer of Michigan's Department of
Technology, Management, and Budget, will be inserted officially
into the record.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Clark follows:]
Prepared Statement of Laura Clark
June 28, 2022
Thank you, Congresswoman Slotkin, for inviting me to speak today on
the subject of cybersecurity. As the chief information officer and
chief security officer for the State of Michigan, I appreciate the
opportunity for me to discuss with the Members of this committee the
steps we are taking to secure our State.
cybersecurity in the state of michigan
In the State of Michigan, information technology (IT) and
cybersecurity are centralized under the Department of Technology,
Management, and Budget (DTMB). Several years ago, both cybersecurity
and physical security were consolidated into one area within DTMB known
as Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection (CIP), which serves to
secure the State and ensure the safety of the Executive branch. Within
CIP, there are several groups that provide external outreach to keep
those within Michigan safe, further strengthening the cyber
environment:

Michigan Cyber Security (MCS) manages information security
for the State of Michigan. The Michigan Security Operations
Center has several advanced security capabilities including
threat hunting, incident response, digital forensics, and
vulnerability management. The Risk, Compliance, and Delivery
division assumes responsibility for the process, tool, and
governance of security process plans and security awareness
campaigns, and developing and enforcing security policies,
standards, and procedures for the enterprise to follow.
Security architects establish the target security and
infrastructure architecture for security platforms,
implementing frameworks and solutions to keep the enterprise
secure.

Michigan Cyber Civilian Corps capitalizes on the
cybersecurity talent within Michigan to allow qualified
technical cybersecurity professionals and experts to volunteer
to respond to cybersecurity events and incidents on behalf of
the State. By participating in the MiC3, members receive
training to further increase their knowledge and skills and can
participate in State-wide exercises, encouraging outreach
between cybersecurity-minded individuals.

Michigan Cyber Partners is a collaboration between divisions
at the State of Michigan, local public entities across the
State, Federal agencies, and National non-profits to work to
strengthen and improve cybersecurity. Michigan Cyber Partners
offers members the ability to share information and threat
intelligence with one another, participate in State-wide
exercises and formal annual training offered to local
government and K-12, and offers program oversight for risk
assessments and Federal grant programs.

Michigan Secure is a first-of-its-kind, free State-wide
mobile protection app for residents. Michigan Secure protects
users from cyber criminals and potential dangers encountered in
the digital mobile world. The app was designed with security
and privacy at the forefront, collecting no user data or
identifying information.

Resident Tooling is an effort to elevate the existing State
of Michigan cybersecurity website and provide various
cybersecurity information and resources to equip residents with
the knowledge they need to stay safe in the on-line world.
Additionally, organizations that DTMB partners with who have a
critical role in maintaining a safe cyber environment across the State:

Michigan Cyber Command Center (MC3) is housed within the
Michigan State Police and coordinates cybersecurity-related
activities as they pertain to emergencies and computer-based
crimes, extending beyond government information to reach all of
Michigan.

National Guard has both Air and Army National Guard Units
with cybersecurity capabilities, in which the State of Michigan
works closely with the Guard to formalize the process of
working together in the event of a cyber emergency.
To aid in the distribution of roles and responsibilities between
MCS, MC3, and the National Guard, the State of Michigan has developed
the Michigan Cyber Disruption Response Plan (CDRP). The CDRP details
chain of command, responsibilities, and processes for escalation,
serving as a plan to weaken the unknown and panic that often coincides
with major incidents. To guarantee the effectiveness of the CDRP,
involved agencies and partners participate in workshops to review the
CDRP and relative responsibilities and engage in functional exercises
that simulate various scenarios and incidents that advance in severity.
In completing workshops and exercises, we can ensure that proper action
and best course of action is taken in the event of a cyber incident.
The Cyber Disruption Response Team (CDRT) is currently being
utilized as a result of on-going geopolitical situations, with several
meetings to share the latest information occurring throughout the week
that allows for the consolidation of information sharing and the
streamlining of sources while offering efficiency in the consumption of
information. The frequent communications have established clear
triggers for the escalation of an incident and the implementation of
primary and alternative communications plans through various platforms,
including Microsoft Teams and HSIN.
federal assistance to the state
Consistent working relationships within the State of Michigan
between MCS, MC3, and the National Guard are crucial to defend the
State's digital landscape, and the relationships we have with our
Federal partners is also highly valuable. The Department of Homeland
Security's (DHS) Cyber and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) has
brought forth several resources to assist in securing Michigan's
landscape. Through our CISA cybersecurity liaison, we have a direct
line of communication with DHS who offers the Federal perspective to
assist in the decision-making process. We also have contact with the
Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI), which shares valuable
information on cybersecurity events and topics to ensure we protect the
State.
Additionally, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA)
will be a major asset to cybersecurity efforts across the State to
further secure the digital environment. With an estimated $24 million
being allotted to Michigan over the course of 4 years, Michigan's
digital landscape has the ability to be transformed. The State of
Michigan has developed a cybersecurity planning committee comprised of
cybersecurity experts in various fields and locations to assist in
determining how the distribution and use of the allocation of funds
would best strengthen the digital ecosystem across the State while
securing the State and local governments, schools, and entities.
Federal partners have been directly engaged in the information sharing
surrounding IIJA, participating the meetings and communications plans
to provide key insight on the funding and state of cybersecurity.
beyond the state: securing the digital ecosystem
The transformation of the digital environment has resulted in
Federal, State, and local governments being intertwined and relying
upon with information sharing to help secure the ecosystem. Levels of
government interact daily to improve the digital security of various
environments while encountering challenges faced by human and financial
resource shortages. The diversity in resources within these levels of
government needs to be considered when addressing improvements to
Michigan's digital landscape. For example, Michigan has 83 counties,
276 cities, 257 villages, and 1,240 townships. The population and
available resources vary between these areas, resulting in an array of
differing needs, improvements, and focuses across each level.
To assist in addressing the needs of local public entities and
further secure Michigan's digital ecosystem, the State of Michigan,
through the Michigan Cyber Partners program, offers the ability to
contract for an independent cybersecurity risk assessment. The multiple
pre-qualified vendors offered by the State were selected through a
competitive request for proposal process, allowing entities to work
with a vendor to complete assessment, planning, and coaching services
to further strengthen their digital environments.
The findings of the risk assessments will assist in establishing a
baseline for Michigan's plan for IIJA cyber implementation, indicating
which improvements should be made with the funding to enhance security
levels. Recommendations of transitioning to .gov domains for county and
local governments, implementing multi-factor authentication across
entities, and offering security awareness programs are being considered
to further secure the State's digital environment. These items, among
other options, are associated with the funds appropriated through IIJA,
offering opportunities for entities beyond what they may typically have
the funds to support. This reveals the need for sustainable funding
post IIJA, as recipients may select a short-term benefit rather than
long-term due to lack of budgetary funds. Securing the ecosystem needs
to be a continuous effort, not a short-term solution.
The State of Michigan's external outreach programs also assist in
securing the ecosystem. The MiC3 and Michigan Cyber Partners programs
encourage discussion among cyber professionals, government entities,
and educators, equipping them with the community and information needed
to further secure the digital environment. The Michigan Secure app
ensures that residents are kept safe on their mobile devices, and the
elevation of the external cybersecurity website provides residents with
additional resources to keep them safe on-line. The Michigan Cyber
Summit, an annual cybersecurity conference available to the public,
also offers valuable information sharing through its speakers and
panels, providing insight on current cybersecurity topics from various
perspectives.
The digital ecosystem is dependent upon governments, entities, and
citizens working together to maintain and secure a safe environment. I
would like to thank the Legislature and Governor Whitmer for their
bipartisan support and recognition of the importance of cybersecurity,
as well as the members of our Michigan Congressional delegation who
continue to make cybersecurity a priority, especially those who voted
for IIJA and its funding support. With new threats emerging each day,
it is crucial that we strive to protect our State. The State of
Michigan greatly appreciates the Members of this committee highlighting
the importance of the digital ecosystem, and we look forward to
continuing to work with you to secure it and protect residents.

Mr. Ellis, I would ask you to first kind-of lay the
framework. We are now getting to the portion of our hearing
that is really focused on our Michigan viewers, our Michigan
businesses, our Michigan organizations and how they
specifically can be helped within the State. We heard from the
Federal level and I would ask you to now to summarize your
statement for 5 minutes please.

STATEMENT OF JAMES C. ELLIS, DETECTIVE FIRST LIEUTENANT AND
CYBER SECTION COMMANDER, MICHIGAN CYBER COMMAND CENTER,
MICHIGAN STATE POLICE

Mr. Ellis. Thank you subcommittee Chairwoman Slotkin and
the Members of the committee for gathering us here today, or in
this case just myself at this point in time, on the issue that
is of crucial importance to the State of Michigan and the
Nation.
My name is Detective First Lieutenant Jim Ellis and I am
the cyber commander of the Michigan State Police, Michigan
Cyber Command Center, or MC3, as we call it.
The first thing I want to do is establish a foundation of
how the MSP fits into cybersecurity as a State Police law
enforcement organization with Michigan critical infrastructure,
the public, and our close partners. MSP Cyber is a full-service
criminal investigation section. Members are in the field
pursuing active investigations from initiation to prosecution,
arrest, and court testimony. MSP Cyber supports all MSP
troopers and field members, along with the other 580+ law
enforcement agencies in the State and others nationally
requiring investigative assistance as cyber crime has no State
line boundaries.
It is becoming very difficult to name a crime that does not
involve technology of some kind that may contain digital
evidence supporting that crime. Some of the services, just to
give you an example, that we perform, obviously criminal
investigations. Thousands of cases per year. Last year alone we
assisted over 340 police agencies in Michigan. This includes
network intrusions, breaches of Michigan businesses, the
forensic recovery of digital evidence used for prosecution or
acquittal, hundreds of search warrants annually, receiving and
seizing thousands of devices typically per month that require
forensic examination, provide community outreach and
presentations covering cyber security, provide law enforcement
with education and training regarding cybersecurity,
collaborate with critical infrastructure regarding information
sharing and best practices. We conduct cyber assessments for
public and private industry businesses as well.
MSP Cyber, as you stated, is comprised of over 100 highly
specialized members consisting of uniformed and civilian
investigators. Cyber analysts, members from within the Michigan
Department of Corrections, Michigan National Guard as full-time
positions, and we all have members on the FBI Cyber Task Force,
Homeland Security Investigations, Dark Web Task Force, and I
can't leave out our two cyber-trained canine dogs, and many
other support staff.
MSP overall consists of three units. We have the Computer
Crimes Unit, known as CCU, which was created by necessity in
1999 when computer technology was being used in the commission
of crimes and the internet was thought to be a fad. The CCU
investigates high-technology crimes and provides digital
forensics data recovery, as stated.
The Internet Crimes Against Children Task Force. The ICAC,
as we call it, is a collection of State, local, and Federal
partners concentrating on child sexually abusive material,
known as CSAM, and exploitation crimes, including child
trafficking and investigations.
The third unit is the Michigan Cyber Command Center, which
has been established to coordinate cyber crime incident
response and investigative network information system-based
crimes affecting Michigan. The MC3 is a leading resource for
cybersecurity, cyber crime awareness and prevention, and
network-related investigations. Investigations do include
network intrusions, breaches, unlawful access, hacking, theft,
and exfiltration of data, extortion and cyber terrorism, as is
surrounding this today with cryptocurrency and other forms of
malware. We also do malware identification, research, and
analysis. Information sharing of breach notification,
development, and dissemination of various intelligence products
are also pushed out by the MC3 for Michigan businesses and
citizens.
Including in our State partnerships within the State of
Michigan government ecosystem, MSP Cyber, DTMB's Michigan Cyber
Security, Michigan Air and Army National Guard, and others have
a long-standing collaborative partnership with the purpose of
ensuring the cybersecurity posture through prevention and
response within the State of Michigan. Together we have been a
role model for many other States and major cities across the
United States who hope to replicate what we have done to assist
in better securing the State. Michigan is one of the first
States to create a State-level cyber disruption and response
plan that has been used across the Nation as a template.
Together we have partnered to develop and fuel many
initiatives. That includes the Michigan Cyber Civilian Corps,
know as the MiC3, Michigan Secure App that you can put on your
mobile devices, the Cyber Partners Group, the Chief Security
Officer Cabinet Meetings, and many others bringing everyone
together simply to discuss cyber best practices and to
reinforce information sharing.
We participate together in multiple cyber exercises,
workshops, and presentations every year and involve Federal
partners, critical infrastructure, and Government to assist in
ensuring the cybersecurity of our water treatment plants,
energy-producing facilities, financial institutions, academia,
election systems, and other. On almost a daily basis we are
sharing cyber-related information among the many partnerships
that have been developed to ensure the best possible
cybersecurity protections are in place.
Thank you for your time and this opportunity to share our
experiences in Michigan and I look forward to addressing any
questions you may have for me.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ellis follows:]
Prepared Statement of James C. Ellis
June 28, 2022
Thank you, Subcommittee Chairwoman Slotkin, Congresswoman Jackson
Lee, and the Members of this committee for gathering us here today to
discuss this issue of crucial importance to the State of Michigan and
the Nation. My name is Detective First Lieutenant James Ellis, and I am
the commander of the Michigan Command Center within the Michigan State
Police.
michigan state police--cyber section
The Michigan State Police (MSP) Cyber Section, referred to as ``MSP
Cyber'', is within the Intelligence Operations Division of the MSP and
works in conjunction with the Michigan Intelligence Operations Center.
Let me establish a foundation of how the MSP fits into cybersecurity as
a State police law enforcement organization, with Michigan critical
infrastructure, the public, and our close partners, the Department of
Technology Management and Budget (DTMB) and the Michigan National
Guard.
MSP Cyber is a full-service criminal investigation section
responsible for investigations spanning the entire criminal file class
hierarchy. MSP Cyber members are in the field pursuing active
investigations from initiation and investigation to prosecution,
arrest, and court testimony. MSP Cyber supports all MSP troopers and
field members along with the other 580+ law enforcement agencies in the
State and others nationally requiring cyber-related investigative
assistance, as cyber crime has no State line boundaries. As our case
load continues to increase year after year, it is becoming very
difficult to name a crime that does not involve technology of some kind
that may contain digital evidence supporting that crime.
Services performed by MSP Cyber include but are not limited to:

Criminal investigations both originating and assisting in an
undercover capacity--over 4,000 cases per year, assisting over
340 police agencies last year in Michigan

The forensic recovery of digital evidence used for
prosecution or acquittal

Street-level and electronic surveillance

Search warrants--over 400 hundred per year; both
administrative and on-scene with physical device and digital
evidence seizures

Often receiving and seizing over 1,000 devices per month for
forensic examination and recovery of digital evidence

Provide expert courtroom testimony

Provide community outreach and presentations covering all
cyber/computer-related topics from prevention and awareness to
incident response and cybersecurity best practices

Provide law enforcement with cyber, computer crime, and
digital evidence-related education and training

Collaborate with critical infrastructure regarding
information sharing and incident response

Conduct cyber assessments for public and private industry/
businesses

Conduct criminal investigations involving the sexual
exploitation and trafficking of children including the rescuing
of children from sexual predators

Investigate hundreds of cybersecurity-related network
intrusions and breaches of Michigan businesses annually

Sourcing new initiatives for the MSP and the State of
Michigan related to data security, privacy, policy, and
compliance

Develop and submit legislative language and provide
testimony for new and modified Michigan laws regarding
cybersecurity.
We work collaboratively with all other law enforcement, public/
private sectors, critical infrastructure, small/medium/large
businesses, local, State, and national government organizations, local
community groups, and citizens.
MSP Cyber is comprised of over 100 highly-trained and specialized
members consisting of both uniformed detective troopers and sergeants,
officers, cyber analysts, dark web analysts, digital forensic analysts,
incident response teams, an FBI Cyber Task Force member, a Homeland
Security Investigations (HSI) Dark Web Task Force member, Michigan
Department of Corrections staff members, National Guard members, two
cyber-trained K9 dogs, and many other support staff.
msp cyber organizational units
MSP Cyber consists of three organizational units that work in
collaboration and provide overlapping services that include the
Computer Crimes Unit (CCU), the Internet Crimes Against Children (ICAC)
Task Force, and the Michigan Cyber Command Center (MC3).
Computer Crimes Unit (CCU)
Created by necessity in 1999 when computer technology was being
used in the commission of crimes and the internet was thought by some
to be a fad. The CCU is the premier State-wide leader in responding to
and investigating high-technology crimes and providing digital forensic
evidentiary data recovery assistance to local, county, and State law
enforcement agencies. The CCU operates multiple digital forensic
offices throughout Michigan for the purposes of digital forensic
examination and analysis.
Internet Crimes Against Children Task Force (ICAC)
The ICAC Task Force is a collection of State, local, and Federal
partners concentrating on child sexually abusive material (CSAM) and
child sexual exploitation and trafficking investigations. MSP Cyber has
the responsibility to train local law enforcement in the proper
acquisition and examination of digital forensic evidence. Currently,
over 50 Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies supply
dedicated officers to investigate ICAC cases, with most of them working
directly out of MSP Cyber offices. MSP Cyber also receives all Michigan
cyber tip investigations that are reported by the National Center for
Missing and Exploited Children (NCMEC) located in Washington, DC. In
2021, the MSP Cyber received 11,416 cyber tips, averaging almost 1,000
investigations per month.
Michigan Cyber Command Center (MC3)
Established in 2013 by necessity to coordinate cyber crime incident
response and investigate the proliferation of networked information
system-based crimes affecting Michigan. The MC3 is a leading resource
for cybersecurity, cyber crime awareness and prevention, and cyber-
related network intrusion criminal investigations for critical
infrastructure; Federal, State, and local government entities; other
public and private sectors, and citizens of the State of Michigan.

Primary investigations include:

Network intrusions and breaches; unlawful access, hacking,
theft, and exfiltration of data

Extortion and Cyberterrorism

Dark Web and Cryptocurrency.

Malware identification, research, analysis, origin,
indicators of compromise for awareness/prevention

Provide cybersecurity assessments, industry best practices,
and recommendations

Information sharing; breach notifications, development, and
dissemination of various intelligence products; podcasts,
presentations, media events, news releases

Partnerships and collaborations--national, State, and local;
FBI, HSI, USSS, DHS, and others.
michigan cyber--state partnerships
MSP Cyber, DTMB's Michigan Cyber Security (MCS), Michigan Air and
Army National Guard, and many others along the way have had a long-
standing collaborative partnership of almost 10 years with the purpose
of ensuring the cybersecurity posture through prevention and response
within the State of Michigan. Together we have been a role model for
many other States and major cities across the United States, who hope
to replicate what we have done as a State when it comes to securing the
State through prevention and response, not only within State
government, but in addition to the many relationships we have created
within our public and private partnerships across Michigan.
Michigan was one of the first States to create a State-level Cyber
Disruption and Response Plan that contains the framework and details
related to responsibilities and roles that covers how to manage a
State-level cyber disruption, that has been used across the Nation as a
template, since the original version was finalized almost a decade ago.
We have partnered to develop and fuel many initiatives that include the
Michigan Cyber Civilian Corps (MiC3), Michigan Secure App, Cyber
Partners Group, chief security officer (CSO) cabinet meetings, and many
more, bringing everyone together to discuss cyber and reinforce
information sharing, creating multiple plans, exercising those plans,
education, awareness, prevention, compliance, knowing who to contact.
We participate together in multiple cyber exercises, workshops,
symposiums, and presentations, every year and involve Federal partners
DHS, FBI, others within Michigan from critical infrastructure sectors
including health care, finance, energy, water, education, and
Government to assist in ensuring the cybersecurity of our water
treatment plants, energy-producing facilities, financial institutions,
academia information systems, election systems, and others. On almost a
daily basis we are sharing cyber threat detection, prevention,
awareness, and recovery information among the many partnerships that
have been developed to ensure the best possible cybersecurity
protections are in place.
Thank you for your time and this opportunity to share our
experiences in Michigan, and I look forward to addressing any questions
you may have for me.

Chairwoman Slotkin. Great. I thank the witness for his
testimony.
I will remind the subcommittee that we will each have 5
minutes to question the panel.
I now recognize myself for questions.
So tell me, Mr. Ellis, you know I think one of the things
we talked about earlier this morning was kind-of that moment,
that moment that a superintendent or a business owner or a
local elected walks into his or her office and realizes that
they have been completely locked out of their data, that they
are a victim, and they have that moment of panic, right. They
are being ransomed, they are being threatened. If they are
seated in the State of Michigan, what should they do? Quite
literally, what is the--how do they figure out who to call and
then walk us through what the process will be like once they
call.
Mr. Ellis. Sure. The most important thing is to call. They
can certainly call the Michigan Cyber Command Center at the
Michigan State Police. They can call DHS. But that is probably
the No. 1 question we get is, who do we call? Really it comes
down to call whoever you are comfortable with on the law
enforcement side because when it comes to the investigation in
law enforcement your case is going to get to the agency that it
needs to get to.
Within the State Police, obviously, as I mentioned, we have
liaisons with Federal partners, including FBI, Secret Service,
Homeland Security. So they are going to be involved regardless.
But quite frankly they need to make a call. It really doesn't
matter which agency they call. Obviously we tell them to call
us.
Once they do, we will attempt to understand what has
occurred at their location, how many devices, what they think
they are seeing, whether it is malware, ransomware, or the type
of malware, if they have back-ups, that type of thing. We will
kind-of do an evaluation or an assessment on the phone. We will
get other partners involved if we need to. What is crucial for
us is we will typically instruct them how they can best provide
evidence to us, whether that is us coming on scene if we need
to image a system. Because one of the things we want to do,
even though we are talking cyber and we cannot always prosecute
on cyber crime because actors are in other places or they are
anonymous, is we want to get those indicators of compromise of
how this started on their systems so we can take that, research
it, and then push it back out for prevention and awareness to
all the other businesses to help them establish protections so
they don't have to go through the same thing this business just
went through.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Yes, I think that is something that
when I have talked to local businesses they are like, look, I
sort-of handled it myself. I said, you know, the trends and the
similarities between these attacks can help, you know, another
business from having to go through the same thing and that if
law enforcement isn't aware of what has gone on in your case,
they can't help another business, they can't identify those
bigger trends.
Then are you--what--how do you handle when someone says
they are asking me for a $40,000 ransom payment, should I pay
it, what should I do? How do you advise individuals and
companies how to respond?
Mr. Ellis. Yes. We typically will tell them not to pay
because it simply empowers or emboldens the bad actors to
continue with their ransomware. You know, we will obviously
prepare them to help establish if they are able to restore
data, if they have come to the point where they actually have
an encrypted data. A lot of times we will get calls when they
see some instances of ransomware before encryption. But, you
know, that is a call they have to make. We kind-of evaluate if
they have cyber insurance or not and we kind-of walk them
through those steps. But we try not to have them pay, but
obviously some businesses do because if they don't they may not
be back in business simply for the fact that they are going to
be down for an extended period of time or they cannot restore
their systems back to where they should be.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Right. But you certainly from the
Michigan State Police perspective are not going to do anything
punitive against an organization that decides to pay ransom,
because you can understand no one likes that idea, we don't
like to give money to bad guys and embolden them, but you can
certainly understand from a small local government's
perspective, a business perspective, if it is going to cost
$40,000 to pay a ransom versus $400,000 to recover your data,
you know, for your students who are a week from graduating, you
can understand how these awful choices, you know, this devil's
bargain that you have to make.
Mr. Ellis. Absolutely. They oftentimes do pay just for
those circumstances because that is--timing is what they weigh
and often times, like you stated in your example, if they can
be up and running in a short amount of time by paying the
ransom, they will do that.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Great.
The Chair will now recognize other Members for questions
they may wish to ask the witnesses.
The Chair recognizes for 5 minutes the gentlewoman from
Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much. Again, let me
emphasize the importance of the information this is being
generated and should frankly be emphasized as we interact with
local communities throughout the Nation.
So let me start. My questions will be to both the
gentleman, Mr. Ellis, First Lieutenant, and the chief
information officer, Ms. Clark.
I would be interested in--and I guess it is reaffirming
some of the points that you made earlier about the current
barriers that exist for small businesses and local communities
in the way of sufficient cyber fortification and what role
would educational initiatives and training play.
As you do that, let me ask, Madam Chair, to introduce into
the record a time line of the biggest ransomware attacks
dated--bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies have been a key tool
in on-line crime and I just, before the witnesses answer,
mention Colonial Pipeline--these are large entities--paid $4.4
million, CNN financial paid $40 million. So we know that the
big companies are paying dollars, we know that this is
difficult for smaller entities.
[The information follows:]
a timeline of the biggest ransomware attacks
Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies have become a key tool
in online crime.
CNET, Julian Dossett, Nov. 15, 2021 12:45 p.m. PT
The history of technology is riddled with unintended consequences.
As William Gibson wrote in Burning Chrome, `` . . . the street finds
its own uses for things.'' Though Bitcoin may not have been originally
conceived as a medium for ransom payments, it's quickly become a
central tool for online criminals.
Ransomware, a category of ``malware,'' blocks access to a computer
or network until a ransom is paid. Despite the evolving efforts of
governments to regulate cryptocurrency and mitigate its role in
ransomware payments, the attacks keep coming.
Cryptocurrency ransomware payments totaled roughly $350 million in
2020, according to Chainanalysis--an annual increase of over 300
percent from 2019. And because U.S. companies are legally required to
report cyberattacks only if customers' personal information is
compromised, that estimate may be far too conservative.
Below, we tally up the damage of some of the highest-profile
episodes.
Kaseya (2021)
On July 2, 2021, Kaseya announced its systems had been infiltrated.
Kaseya provides IT solutions for other companies--an ideal target
which, in a domino effect, ended up impacting approximately 1,500
organizations in multiple countries. REvil, a cybercriminal outfit,
claimed responsibility for the attack and demanded ransoms ranging from
a few thousand dollars to multiple millions, according to a Reuters
report.
It's unclear how many individual businesses paid up, but REvil
demanded $70 million in bitcoin from Kaseya. Kaseya declined to pay,
opting to cooperate with the FBI and the U.S. Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Agency. On July 21, 2021, Kaseya obtained a universal
decryptor key and distributed it to organizations impacted by the
attack.
JBS (2021)
On May 31, 2021, JBS USA, one of the largest meat suppliers in the
U.S., disclosed a hack that caused it to temporarily halt operations at
its five largest U.S.-based plants. The ransomware attack also
disrupted the company's Australia and UK operations. JBS paid the
hackers an $11 million ransom in Bitcoin to prevent further disruption
and limit the impact on grocery stores and restaurants. The FBI
attributed the hack to REvil, a sophisticated criminal ring well-known
in ransomware attacks.
Colonial Pipeline (2021)
On May 7, 2021, America's largest ``refined products'' pipeline
went off-line after a hacking group called Darkside infiltrated it with
ransomware. Colonial Pipeline covers over 5,500 miles and transports
more than 100 million gallons of fuel daily. The impact of the attack
was significant: In the days that followed, the average price of a
gallon of gas in the U.S. increased to more than $3 for the first time
in 7 years as drivers rushed to the pumps.
The pipeline operator said it paid the hackers $4.4 million in
cryptocurrency. On June 7, 2021, the DOJ announced it had recovered
part of the ransom. U.S. law enforcement officials were able to track
the payment and take back $2.3 million using a private key for a
cryptocurrency wallet.
Brenntag (2021)
On April 28, 2021, German chemical distributor Brenntag learned it
was the target of a cyber attack by Darkside, which stole 150GB of data
that it threatened to leak if ransom demands weren't met. After
negotiating with the criminals, Brenntag ended up negotiating the
original ransom of $7.5 million down to $4.4 million, which it paid on
May 11.
CNA Financial (2021)
On March 23, 2021, CNA Financial, the seventh largest commercial
insurer in the U.S., disclosed it had ``sustained a sophisticated
cybersecurity attack.'' The attack was carried out by a group called
Phoenix, which used ransomware known as Phoenix Locker. CNA Financial
eventually paid $40 million in May to get the data back. While CNA has
been tight-lipped on the details of the negotiation and transaction,
but says all of its systems have since been fully restored.
CWT (2020)
On July 31, 2020, U.S. business travel management firm CWT
disclosed it had been impacted by a ransomware attack that infected its
systems--and that it had paid the ransom. Using ransomware called
Ragnar Locker, the assailants claimed to have stolen sensitive
corporate files and knocked 30,000 company computers offline.
As a service provider to one-third of S&P 500 companies, the data
release could have been disastrous for CWT's business. As such, the
company paid the hackers about $4.5 million on July 28, a few days
before Reuters reported the incident.
University of California at San Francisco (2020)
On June 3, 2020, the University of California at San Francisco
disclosed that the UCSF School of Medicine's IT systems had been
compromised by a hacking collective called Netwalker on June 1. The
medical research institution had been working on a cure for COVID.
Apparently, Netwalker had researched UCFS, hoping to gain insights
into its finances. Citing the billions of dollars UCFS reports in
annual revenue, Netwalker demanded a $3 million ransom payment. After
negotiations, UCSF paid Netwalker the bitcoin equivalent of $1,140,895
to resolve the cyberattack. According to the BBC, Netwalker was also
identified as the culprit in at least two other 2020 ransomware attacks
targeting universities.
Travelex (2019)
On New Year's Eve 2019, London-based foreign currency exchange
Travelex was infiltrated by a ransomware group called Sodinokibi (aka
REvil). The attackers made off with 5GB of customer data, including
dates of birth, credit card information, and insurance details.
Travelex took down its website in 30 countries in an attempt to contain
the virus.
In the wake of the ransomware attack, Travelex struggled with
customer services. Sodinokibi initially demanded a payment of $6
million (
4.6 million). After negotiations, Travelex paid
the cybercriminals $2.3 million (285 BTC at the time, roughly

1.6 million) to get its data back.
WannaCry (2017)
In May 2017, a ransomware called WannaCry infected computers across
the globe by exploiting a vulnerability in Windows PCs. The WannaCry
vulnerability was revealed during a massive leak of NSA documents and
hacking tools engineered by a group called Shadow Brokers in April
2017.
Though the exact number of WannaCry victims remains unknown, more
than 200,000 computers around the world were infected. Victims included
Spanish telecommunications company Telefonica and thousands of
hospitals in the U.K. Computer systems in 150 countries were affected
by the attack, with a total estimated loss of around $4 billion
globally.
The attackers initially demanded $300 in bitcoin to unlock infected
computer systems. The demand was later increased to $600 in bitcoin.
However, some researchers claim that no one got their data back, even
if they met the demands.
WannaCry attacks continue to this day. In February 2021, the DOJ
indicted three North Korean computer programmers for their alleged role
in the WannaCry outbreak.
Locky (2016)
Discovered in February 2016, Locky is notable due to the incredibly
high number of infection attempts it's made on computer networks.
Attacks typically come in the form of an email with an invoice attached
from someone claiming to be a company employee. On February 16, 2016
analysis from Check Point identified more than 50,000 Locky attacks in
1 day.
Locky has many variants, but the goal is largely the same: Lock
computer files to entice owners to pay a ransom in cryptocurrency in
exchange for a decryption tool, which would allow users to regain
access to their locked files. The majority of Locky victims have been
in the U.S., and especially among health care companies, but Canada and
France experienced significant infection rates as well.
TeslaCrypt (2015)
Modeled on an earlier program called CryptoLocker, the earliest
TeslaCrypt samples were circulated in November 2014 but the ransomware
was not widely distributed until March of the following year.
TeslaCrypt initially targeted gamers. After infecting a computer, a
pop-up would direct a user to pay a $500 ransom in bitcoin for a
decryption key to unlock the infected system. Other sources report the
requested ransoms ranged from $250 to $1,000 in Bitcoin. In May 2016,
the developers of Tesla Crypt released a master decryption key for
affected users to unlock their computers.
CryptoWall (2014)
Widespread reports of computer systems infected from the CryptoWall
ransomware emerged in 2014. Infected computers were unable to access
files--unless the owner paid for access to a decryption program. Crypto
Wall impacted systems across the globe. The attackers demanded payment
in the form of prepaid cards or bitcoin. CryptoWall caused roughly $18
million in damages, according to Help Net Security. Multiple versions
of CryptoWall were released, with each version making the ransomware
more difficult to trace and combat.
CryptoLocker (2013)
The first time much of the world heard the term ``ransomware'' was
during 2013's CcyptoLocker outbreak. Discovered early in September
2013, CryptoLocker would cripple more than 250,000 computer systems
during the following 4 months. Victims were instructed to send payments
in cryptocurrency or money cards to regain access. The ransomware
delivered at least $3 million to its perpetrators.
A multinational law enforcement effort in 2014 succeeded in taking
down the Gameover Zeus botnet, which was a primary distribution method
for CryptoLocker. The DOJ indicted Russian hacker Evgeniy Mikhailovich
Bogachev, as the botnet's ringleader. Bogachev is still at large--and
the FBI is currently offering a reward of up to $3 million for
information leading to his arrest and/ or conviction.
AIDS Trojan/PC Cyborg (1989)
Widely considered the template for all subsequent attacks, the AIDS
Trojan (aka PC Cyborg) is the first known instance of a ransomware
attack. In 1989, more than a decade before the creation of bitcoin, a
biologist named Joseph Popp distributed 20,000 floppy disks at the
World Health Organization AIDS conference in Stockholm. The floppy
disks were labeled ``AIDS Information--Introductory Diskettes'' and
contained a trojan virus that installed itself on MS-DOS systems.
Once the virus was on a computer, it counted the times the computer
booted up. Once the computer booted up 90 times, the virus hid all
directories and encrypted filenames. An image on the screen from the
`PC Cyborg Corporation' directed users to mail $189 to a P.O. address
in Panama. The decryption process was relatively simple, however, and
security researchers released a free tool to help victims.

Ms. Jackson Lee. Would you be able to answer that question
about the barriers that may exist?
Mr. Ellis. Yes. Some of the barriers--thank you for the
question--some of the barriers that do exist are, you know,
lack of education and training, which we try to provide to many
businesses, to be more cybersecurity-aware, thinking a little
more along the lines of defensiveness when it comes to
cybersecurity. Try to get them into security awareness
training. We will go through best practices of which, you know,
looking at defense-in-depth, looking at two-factor
authentication, having a validated off-line back-up that they
can restore data, have a remediation plan or continuity plan so
they are able to get back up and running. Basically just
looking at it from that point on as they move forward. You
know, if this incident does occur or occurs again, what exactly
will they do, who will they call, can their business survive,
what best practices can they initiate being off-line? Just some
of those things. We always look at best practices to try to get
them back up and running again, but will also advise on
potential resources that may get them back up and running.
Education and awareness is obviously paramount for some of
the smaller and medium businesses in Michigan.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Ms. Clark.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Sorry, ma'am, she is suffering from
COVID and wasn't able to join us today.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. Thank you. I am sorry, I
thought I heard--let me then follow up with Mr. Ellis in
particular about the work of MC3, including the Michigan
Internet Crimes Against Children Task Force. That collaborates
with Federal, State, and local partners to investigate
offenders who use the internet on-line communication systems.
How does the ICAC Task Force work to educate children,
parents, and schools on internet safety in the face of cyber
predators?
Mr. Ellis. Thank you for the question.
We educate parents, schools, our young adults in school by
doing presentations, outreach. We will run through case
scenarios with them so they understand, you know, what the
potential is of them posting pictures on-line, which many kids
do now, as you know. You know, sextortion is one of the big
crimes or potential crimes that are going on, depending on how
far it goes. That is affecting our young kids now. Again, a lot
of it is education of our young people just to know that
because they are so involved in social media, they are posting
their lives on-line, what exactly that can mean to somebody
that is potentially seeking them out as a potential victim.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Can the Federal Government do more with
respect to legislation to help you? Help that task force or
help task forces across the country?
Mr. Ellis. As far as legislation, you know, that is a great
question. Anything that would allow for additional funding to
allow for education. Maybe mandatory cybersecurity education in
schools as part of the curriculum would be paramount so they
get it at a young age. That would be--you know, that would also
draw an interest in other areas, just so they can see and
become acquainted with cybersecurity best practices.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much.
I think my time has expired and----
Chairwoman Slotkin. Thank you, Congresswoman.
I would just say that there is a real interest on our
committee on how to deal--I had never heard the term you
mentioned for exploiting kids and sensitive pictures on-line.
Can you repeat the term?
Mr. Ellis. Sextortion.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Sextortion. I was not familiar with
that term, but our committee has passed a bunch of legislation
on K-12 resources and money basically for our K-12 schools to
be able to learn and educate themselves and protect our kids'
data, as well as digital literacy. Like how do we start
teaching digital literacy to our kids at a very young age since
they are the ones who are digital natives?
The Chair will now recognize for 5 minutes the gentlewoman
from Florida, Mrs. Demings.
Mrs. Demings. Well, thank you so much again, Chairwoman
Slotkin, and thank you to Detective First Lieutenant Ellis for
being with us today. Thank you for your very impressive record
of service with the Michigan State Police. As a former law
enforcement officer, you know, we said 30 years ago that we
could not fight today's battles with yesterday's weapons. My
goodness, when we look at how the landscape has changed, that
certainly rings true today. It is certainly not the same old
Economic Crimes Unit or the Crimes Against Children Unit.
You know, so, Detective, I would love for you to just talk
just a little bit about how policing has changed in this space,
how the work force has had to change the level of training, the
level of cooperation between you and other jurisdictions. You
said that cyber crimes have no State-wide boundaries, and boy
is that true. But how has the level of cooperation changed or
what challenges have occurred because of those no State-wide
boundaries that you face?
Mr. Ellis. Thank you for the question.
Yes, we have seen within Michigan the fact that we are the
Michigan State Police and we act as resource for those other
580 law enforcement agencies in Michigan and others around the
Nation, we see a lack of trained officers in the realm of the
recovery of digital evidence, or even what devices may contain
digital evidence that may be a part of a crime. You know,
everybody typically knows a mobile device or their phone
contains a lot of evidence or someone's patterns of life, but
with some of the other devices, that it comes to our
automobiles, obviously our computer systems, smart TVs,
personal assistant devices. If you think of all the things we
interact with that could be a potential part of a crime, those
officers need to be trained when they are responding to an
incident what potentially could contain evidence.
So we are trying to educate them the best we can through a
lot of education opportunities. When have our recruit schools
for new troopers we have a segment training them on scenarios.
So the biggest thing we can do is continue our training and
education. We bring local officers into our office as pseudo
full-time members working as affiliates to investigate digital
crime. Once their department sees how valuable they are and an
asset to their agency, it is good for us because we can keep
them and the police organizations typically want them involved
to get training.
There is a lot of industry standard training that can be
taken just regarding evidence recovery and knowing
cybersecurity in general--if I can put it that way. But a lot
of our younger people are more apt to the devices and the
capabilities because they grew up with it in their hands. So
some of our younger folks are easily more trained than maybe
some of us were a few years ago.
Mrs. Demings. Of course that is not just a challenge for
Michigan. You know, in Florida, and really across the Nation,
really making sure that your work force keeps up with the
challenges and the technology of the day.
How would you say the Federal Government could assist in
this area more? Is that through CISA making resources more
available for training opportunities?
Mr. Ellis. Thank you for the question.
We are always up for additional training and assistance.
DHS CISA is an excellent partner in Michigan of ours. We
collaborate on a lot of different initiatives and take
advantage of training. It is like I tell all my folks in the
Michigan Cyber Command Center, the more training, the better,
along with our affiliates, and even our analysts that are on
board. In these days the general officer on the road should be
taking some type of cybersecurity-related training to help them
with their investigations, without a doubt.
Mrs. Demings. Well, again, thank you so much for your
service. We are working on some legislation that involves the
digital technology area, including training for law enforcement
officers. So I am hoping that we will be able to move that
through very, very quickly.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Thank you. Those sounded like good
questions from a former police chief of a major city. That
sounded about right.
So let me just ask for the Michiganders in the room and
watching, help us understand what an average ransomware attack
looks like in the State of Michigan. Maybe go through--you can
pick one that is representative of a closed investigation. You
don't have to give any identifiable information. But walk us
through what that looks like.
Then same thing on sexploitation. You have a whole unit
that is worried about this. Help us understand in detail what
those cases look like so parents and business owners understand
what they are looking for.
Mr. Ellis. Sure. Typically in a ransomware event--and I
can, you know, look as far back as yesterday morning. This is
not really any different than any other ransomware case that is
local to a business in Michigan. They will notice that their
files are encrypted. As most users, once files are encrypted it
is obvious because you can't access your files. They get
messages on the screens, wallpapers change on your desktop,
that kind of thing.
They will call, we will go through an evaluation with them.
We typically bring on more partners sometimes, depending on the
business. We often times will include our Federal partners in
the discussion just to walk through the steps and look at where
they are at, are they able to recover. Oftentimes they may have
cyber insurance and that initially limits us from getting
potential evidence, at least initially, depending if legal is
involved. But otherwise our first avenue is to try to obtain
evidence and, you know, if their IT staff or if we can get an
image of a device to try and locate those indicators of
compromise, we will do that and help them understand what
happened on their network and, like I said earlier, take that
information back to push it back out to everybody else for
prevention and awareness.
Oftentimes they will look for resources for those small-to-
medium businesses that don't have a plan, aren't sure what to
do. We will help guide them in that respect. Within Michigan we
also have the Michigan Cyber Civilian Corps. If they have
several work stations that they need assistance with or they
are not sure how maybe the incident happened or need, you know,
hands on keyboards, the Michigan Cyber Civilian Corps, or MiC3,
is a group of volunteers that have been vetted that work in
Michigan businesses----
Chairwoman Slotkin. You all would connect them to the----
Mr. Ellis. We would connect them, they become indemnified
as State employees and they can assist with the recovery of an
incident.
Chairwoman Slotkin. This incident that you were
investigating yesterday morning, what are they asking for, how
much money? Like give us a little bit of a flavor of the
threat.
Mr. Ellis. Yes, in this case, you know, I can tell you end-
point-wise they have 100 end-points----
Chairwoman Slotkin. What is an end-point?
Mr. Ellis. A device that a user sits at. A keyboard that
somebody uses. They may have--I don't know that they announced
their ransom yet because we went to that site--they are getting
creative where they will tell you they will provide you a link
to go to and this site was down all day yesterday. So lack of
planning on their end to be able to obtain their ransom. But
typically, depending on the small-to-medium business, it can be
anywhere from $20,000 to $100,000 depending on what is at
stake. Typically the bad actors know what data they have, what
they have access to obviously, and, you know, the prime data
goes for a bigger price.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Is it fair to say that some of these
organizations, these bad actors, have done research, they have
looked on social media, they have looked on public transparency
websites? Like they have done their homework on an organization
before they decide to ransom them?
Mr. Ellis. Absolutely. They know price points, they know
the budget, they know if a school is being remodeled over the
summer based on the RFP, who won the bid. I mean they are going
in there with knowledge and have chosen a target that they
think they can succeed at.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Then, again, explain the threat, or
just a recent example on the sexploitation. Sort-of how do they
use children's data or how do they ransom it or use it to make
money?
Mr. Ellis. Yes. Sextortion is typically pictures are taken
or relationships are built through chat on same old device or
Snapchat or any other messaging platform. They will gain the
user's confidence--usually this is big with students right now,
younger people--and get them to send a provocative picture.
Oftentimes they are misrepresenting themselves as maybe--if
they are chatting with a male they may represent themselves as
a young female, attractive, sending pictures--normal pictures,
not anything provocative--and eliciting pictures back. Once
they finally do send a picture back, they will then demand that
they pay a ransom or a payment, otherwise they will publish the
photo publicly. As you can imagine, being at that age, when
your identity is everything, social media is everything, that
is, you know, not something you would want among your peers.
Just recently we have had a case where this happened and
our young gentleman paid the fee that was being asked. The
person had indicated prior they would remove any pictures that
they had possession of, but then again came back and asked for
more. Unfortunately this student committed suicide over this.
This all occurred within a 6-hour period in Michigan.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Oh.
Mr. Ellis. So it has devastating effects and it is one of
the fastest-growing incidents that we are seeing among young
people right now.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Oh, gosh. OK. Well, I have much more to
ask about that. But we are on to a second round of questions.
Ready for recognition? Oh, OK. Sorry, I was supposed to
recognize myself.
So let me just ask, can a young person under 18--is there
any rules around whether they are able to pay? I mean did this
young person handle it themselves? What are the protections for
people under 18 that are maybe different from an adult?
Mr. Ellis. They can handle it themselves. In this case, and
several cases, they do because they do not want anybody to
know.
Typically in these type of cases, the people, younger
people, our kids, don't want anything to know about--they don't
want their parents to know about it or their relatives or their
friends. So those that typically should be closest to them,
they are most embarrassed over. We are finding that--as far as
age, you know, we do have some that go to their parents and
request payment and that starts another whole investigation.
I will say on the investigation that I did just mention,
thanks to our Federal partners, we have located somebody that
we are confident we will be able to take action against.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Great. So are the folks who are
ransoming our young people for, you know, these explicit
pictures, do they have a different threat profile than some of
the ransomware folks? Is it still folks who are coming from
overseas or is it much more local? Kind-of what is the intent
other than to ransom folks? Are they then going on and using
it, you know, for pornography on-line? Just like help us
understand what might be different from--you know, are they
more local basically?
Mr. Ellis. Yes. The majority of cases we see they are not
local. The person I am referring to that is a suspect was in
Nigeria.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Oh.
Mr. Ellis. So they are looking at kids, they are looking at
social media pages. I mean they are portraying a friend that
gets accepted into their friend community and learn everything
they can about them, establish a relationship, and, you know,
the student has no idea who they are talking to. So it is very
unfortunate.
But, yes, the motivation is a little bit different. They
know they are not going to get a lot of money out of a younger
person and, you know, compared to a ransomware where they may
hit a business that has deeper pockets potentially. But again
they can go after several students, gain these relationships
over time. A lot of the suspects we are seeing are younger, so
we are still in the research phase of are they going to be
moving on to bigger and better things, are they a quick-hit
opportunity to get a few hundred dollars, or a little bit more.
So, yes, there is a lot of research going on into that
right now.
Chairwoman Slotkin. So, again, just to give people a sense
of the threat, this young person who was ransomed and then
ended up, you know, terribly committing suicide over the
potential exposure, how much money are we talking about? What
was the request for ransom?
Mr. Ellis. Less than $1,000.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Then just for the young people, if you
have got a 16- or a 17-year-old, who of course is deeply
embarrassed in front of their community to admit that they sent
these photos, if they contact law enforcement will their
parents be contacted?
Mr. Ellis. Depending on the circumstance and their age--
depending. I will say the circumstances can be different.
Typically we will notify a parent. Obviously if they are over
17, that doesn't always happen just because of their age in
Michigan and legal requirements. But, yes, I mean we will
notify a parent, a trusted guardian, or if they have a relative
we can start there. But typically we will talk them into why
they need to contact a parent or let them know that, you know,
it is going to be OK and why we need to contact their parent.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Yes.
Mr. Ellis. Just because of the potential outcome.
Chairwoman Slotkin. I think the thing that ties the issue
of sexploitation and just ransomware in general for businesses
and local officials is how these bad actors pull threads from
publicly-available information, right. As a former CIA officer
and Pentagon official, we are taught--just it is--we are beaten
over the head on you shouldn't put out personally identifiable
information, talk about where you are going on vacation,
talking about that new deck that you are building on that
house. That kind of stuff can be pieced together so that people
can basically breed familiarity so that they--it seems like
they know you really well, they are someone who is in your
kind-of community or that just they have figured out you are
spending money on things, the things that you value in your
life and what you would be willing to pay to protect.
So, you know, for folks who are not in law enforcement or
come from an intelligence background, talk about personally
identifiable information. Particularly we talked in the last
session about how that helps people figure out passwords and
answers to security questions. Just talk about how those bad
actors piece the stories together.
Mr. Ellis. Sure. I mean if you think about--good question,
and thank you.
If you think about the average social media account,
depending how active anyone in this room may be, there are some
people that are very active and they post everything from
pictures of their home, their vehicles, what they eat--I mean
you name it, every activity of their day is on-line. Oftentimes
you can build a tremendous profile and get to know a pattern of
life of somebody from their address, based on photos, where
they are going to be playing ball that night, where dance
practice is going to be. They think they are just taking
pictures of their friends, but if you start looking in the
background you can piece all this together.
So it is very important to parents to know what their
children are doing, know what their young adults are doing. Pay
attention, ask questions, look on their accounts. They will be
glad you did in the long run. You can kind-of see if you can
put a pattern of life together based on what they are posting.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Thank you for that.
The Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes the gentlewoman from
Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, again, Madam Chair, for this
hearing. I want to express my appreciation for the witnesses on
the first panel from the Department of Homeland Security and I
hope it exposed to the Nation, to the great resources that we
have in the Federal Government, and also the work, legislative
work that has been done by this committee, by the full
committee and Chairman Thompson, and the work that I have done
regarding zero-day incidences in trying to ensure that major
attacks against much of our infrastructure does not bring
America to a point of disaster.
Working with local communities is certainly an important
moment and it is an important moment because it provides
education.
So I would be interested, and if said before I ask you to
say it again, as I have taken note of the attacks from the
medical center in Yuma, Arizona in April, Texas Tech in my
State announced that the ECL ransomware attack in December
potentially affected 1.29 million of their patients. This can
be a deep dive into the personal lives of individuals and
private information.
So I would be interested, again, if you would State if you
put in policies that provide a wall of infrastructure around
potential cyber ransomware attacks.
Also should we--I think I heard a discussion about
insurance--should there be a mechanism to compensate those who
have been harmed--this is a crime, but it is also in the civil
sphere as well--by the loss of their data? I think it is really
something that is a new phenomenon. Children are hurt, families
are hurt, patients are hurt, small businesses are hurt. I think
we need to emphasize this as a larger question than sometimes
what it may be predicted.
So with your years of law enforcement experience, I am sure
you have had to solve cases, you have seen crime victims, what
would be your viewpoint on how we address the elements that I
have said, the loss of data, the impact on an individual or
business, and the kind of infrastructure we should stand up to
be much safer.
Lieutenant Ellis.
Mr. Ellis. Thank you for the question.
You know, it comes down to security and it is--your
question would actually solve a lot of things if we knew what
that answer was as far as infrastructure. Because one of the
things we face, even with those in cybersecurity that are
putting all the protections in place with firewalls, IDS, IPS,
all the security devices, user awareness training, there is
always something new coming out based on new software, new
technologies. I feel like we would always be chasing down new
solutions.
There are solutions out there that will protect data itself
versus the infrastructure that the data resides on or
traverses. They are expensive solutions, they are typically at
the Federal level and just coming into play now. We are hoping
to see more of this. Essentially what that is is--I have just
seen samples of this where you can pretty much put any kind of
data in the worst environment and it really cannot be used in
any way, even if they exfiltrated it. It is impervious to
malware. There are solutions out there. They are expensive. You
know, that is one solution when some people find out or
entities and businesses find out about this, the common
question is why doesn't everybody use these solutions?
It typically comes down to price, unfortunately. But that
is just one way that you could help combat this. But I feel
like there is no one solution that is going to solve all of
this immediately with how we do things today when it comes to
cyber.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me thank you so very much.
Madam Chair, as I yield back let me thank you for this
hearing that has been enormously informative. I think Mr. Ellis
has left us with next steps in particularly how we can assist
States across America. Focusing on Michigan and the local needs
and the local insights I think has been vital for this full
committee.
I look forward to working with you back in Washington to be
sure we take this very vital information and incorporate it
into solutions to some of the issues being raised here by these
representatives from your State and of course those from the
Department of Homeland Security.
Thank you so very much. Again, thank you for your
leadership and I am yielding back.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Slotkin. Thank you, Congresswoman.
With that, I thank the witness for his valuable time and
testimony and the Members for their questions. Thanks for the
opportunity to just pulse you one-on-one on how our Michigan
organizations can protect themselves.
I urge again all of our businesses, our farmers, our K-12
schools, our local electeds to get to know Mr. Ellis and his
team before you have a problem. Take all your friends in the
sector that you come from, ask for a meeting.
I know that him and his team are very responsive and you
can understand how to protect yourself. Have a relationship,
have a business card before you have a major incident, since we
know that chances are folks in the room are going to be on the
wrong end of a ransomware attack at some point in their careers
unfortunately.
Members of the subcommittee may have additional questions
for all of our witnesses. We ask that you respond expeditiously
in writing to those questions. The Chair reminds Members of the
subcommittee that the record will remain open for 10 business
days.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:54 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
