- ENSURING EQUITY IN DISASTER PREPAREDNESS, RESPONSE, AND RECOVERY

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ENSURING EQUITY IN DISASTER PREPAREDNESS,
RESPONSE, AND RECOVERY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 27, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-35

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-870 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            John Katko, New York
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island      Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Clay Higgins, Louisiana
J. Luis Correa, California           Michael Guest, Mississippi
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri            Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Al Green, Texas                      Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Yvette D. Clarke, New York           Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
Eric Swalwell, California            Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Dina Titus, Nevada                   Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey    Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Val Butler Demings, Florida          Peter Meijer, Michigan
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California    Kat Cammack, Florida
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          August Pfluger, Texas
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey
Ritchie Torres, New York
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Daniel Kroese, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable John Katko, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     6

Witnesses

Dr. Lori Peek, PhD, Director, Natural Hazards Center and
Professor, Department of Sociology, University of Colorado:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................     9
Ms. Chauncia Willis, Co-Founder and Chief Executive Officer,
Institute for Diversity and Inclusion in Emergency Management:
Oral Statement.................................................    15
Prepared Statement.............................................    16
Mr. Christopher P. Currie, Director, Homeland Security and
Justice Team, GAO:
Oral Statement.................................................    21
Prepared Statement.............................................    23
Mr. James K. Joseph, Vice President for Response, Tidal Basin:
Oral Statement.................................................    30
Prepared Statement.............................................    32

For the Record

The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Graphic........................................................     3
Letter From the Board of Supervisors, Leflore County, MS.......    69
Statement of the National Low Income Housing Coalition.........    69

ENSURING EQUITY IN DISASTER PREPAREDNESS, RESPONSE, AND RECOVERY

----------

Wednesday, October 27, 2021

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., via
Webex, Hon. Bennie G. Thompson [Chairman of the committee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Thompson, Jackson Lee, Langevin,
Payne, Slotkin, Green, Clarke, Swalwell, Watson Coleman, Rice,
Demings, Barragan, Gottheimer, Malinowski, Torres, Katko,
Higgins, Guest, Bishop, Van Drew, Norman, Miller-Meeks,
Harshbarger, Clyde, Gimenez, LaTurner, Pfluger, and Garbarino.
Chairman Thompson. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order. Without objection, the Chair is authorized to
declare the committee in recess at any point.
Good morning. Today the committee is meeting to examine how
the Federal Government can ensure equity in disaster
preparedness, response, and recovery.
Last summer almost 1 in 3 Americans experienced a disaster.
Disasters are increasing, and as they do, the number of people
in need of assistance will always increase. However, not
everyone who needs assistance will get in. In fact, those who
need it the most are often the least likely to get help. Some
believe that ``disasters are great equalizers''. To the
contrary, disasters expose and worsen inequities, in part
because disaster assistance programs favor some groups over
others. For example, internal FEMA analyses reported by NPR
showed that low-income applicants were twice as likely to be
denied FEMA housing assistance due to ``insufficient'' damage.
These outcomes lead to long-term impacts that are detrimental
to already marginalized groups.
Put simply, a growing body of evidence shows that in the
wake of a disaster, the rich get richer and the poor get
poorer. Race always appears to play a role in outcomes.
According to a 2018 study, White Americans living in counties
that received disaster aid gained over $100,000 in wealth
compared to White Americans living in counties that did not
experience a disaster. In contrast, Black and Latino Americans
in areas that received disaster assistance lost thousands
compared to their peers that had not experienced a disaster. A
person's zip code or skin color should not affect how he or she
fares in a disaster, but this is exactly what happens. Low-
income and rural communities are especially at risk. The
Federal Emergency Management Agency is aware of these
inequities.
In November 2020, FEMA's own National Advisory Council
delivered a stunning rebuke of the status quo, stating ``FEMA
does not meet the equity requirements of the Stafford Act''.
The Advisory Council defined equity as ``to provide the
greatest support to those with greatest need to achieve a
certain minimum outcome''. Equity is recognizing and responding
to different needs to ensure everyone can recover with dignity.
That means making sure that we do not leave rural
communities behind, supporting community members with differing
abilities, as well as protecting everyone's right to a safe
recovery, regardless of their race or ethnicity or their
income.
I commend the Biden administration for working to ensure
equity in FEMA programs, including expanding allowable
ownership documentation to help families with heirs' properties
keep land that has been in their family for generations. These
are important steps in the right direction, and we must press
on.
Now is the time for bold action. It is time to rethink a
system that too often fails those who are already marginalized.
I have seen the effect of the status quo on the communities
with my own eyes. In June, floods devastated the Mississippi
Delta. Over 700 homes were impacted, yet residents did not
receive assistance. These families had inches of water in their
homes and after 30 days were informed by the State that the
Governor would not even pursue Federal assistance. The Stafford
Act relies on Governors and local leaders to act in good faith,
but this may not always be the case when it comes to certain
communities.
I am currently working on legislation to help address this
problem and looking forward to introducing it in the near
future. I also encourage DHS to continue making progress toward
equity where it has discretion to do so. It is time to change
inequitable policies throughout our disaster response system.
Today, we will hear from our witnesses why these inequities
exist and what we can do about them. I look forward to your
testimony.
[The statement of Chairman Thompson follows:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
October 27, 2021
Today, the committee is meeting to examine how the Federal
Government can ensure equity in disaster preparedness, response, and
recovery. Last summer, almost 1 in 3 Americans experienced a disaster.
Disasters are increasing, and as they do, the number of people in need
of assistance will also increase. However, not everyone who needs
assistance will get it. In fact, those who need it the most are often
the least likely to get help. Some believe that ``disasters are great
equalizers.''
To the contrary, disasters expose and worsen inequities, in part
because disaster assistance programs favor some groups over others. For
example, internal FEMA analyses reported by NPR showed that low-income
applicants were twice as likely to be denied FEMA housing assistance
due to ``insufficient'' damage. These outcomes lead to long-term
impacts that are detrimental to already marginalized groups. Put
simply, a growing body of evidence shows that in the wake of a
disaster, the rich get richer and the poor get poorer. Race also
appears to play a role in outcomes.
According to a 2018 study, White Americans living in counties that
received disaster aid gained over $100,000 in wealth compared to White
Americans living in counties that did not experience a disaster. In
contrast, Black and Latino Americans in areas that received disaster
assistance lost thousands compared to their peers that had not
experienced a disaster. A person's ZIP code or skin color should not
affect how he or she fares in a disaster, but this is exactly what
happens. Low-income and rural communities are especially at risk. The
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is aware of these
inequities.
In November 2020, FEMA's own National Advisory Council delivered a
stunning rebuke of the status quo, stating ``FEMA does not meet the
equity requirements of the Stafford Act.'' The Advisory Council defined
equity as ``to provide the greatest support to those with greatest need
to achieve a certain minimum outcome.'' Equity is recognizing and
responding to different needs to ensure everyone can recover with
dignity.
That means:

Making sure we do not leave rural counties behind

Supporting community members with differing abilities, and

Protecting everyone's right to a safe recovery, regardless
of their race or ethnicity or their income.
I commend the Biden administration for working to ensure equity in
FEMA programs, including expanding allowable ownership documentation to
help families with heirs' property keep land that has been in their
family for generations. These are important steps in the right
direction, and we must press on.
Now is the time for bold action. It is time to rethink a system
that too often fails those who are already marginalized. I have seen
the effect of the status quo on these communities with my own eyes. In
June, floods devastated the Mississippi Delta--over 700 homes were
impacted--yet residents did not receive assistance. These families had
inches of water in their homes and after 30 days were informed by the
State that the Governor would not even pursue Federal assistance.
The Stafford Act relies on Governors and local leaders to act in
good faith, but this may not always be the case when it comes to
certain communities. I am currently working on legislation to help
address this problem and look forward to introducing it in the near
future. I also encourage DHS to continue making progress toward equity
where it has discretion to do so. It is time to change inequitable
policies throughout our disaster response system. Today, we will hear
from our witnesses why these inequities exist and what we can do about
them.

Chairman Thompson. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Katko, for an opening statement.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to echo your sentiments that with respect to FEMA
disasters, I think your quote was something along the lines of
those who need it the most are often least likely to receive
the aid. I couldn't agree more. Sometimes I think it is a
formulaic thing. In upstate New York we have had multiple
disasters and none of them have qualified for FEMA assistance.
I am going to talk more about that during the hearing today.
But I do think the formulas are something that we need to look
at as well because that seems to reinforce some of the concerns
that you have.
So I do want to thank you for holding this very important
hearing today on equity in emergency management. I am thankful
for the opportunity to discuss this topic and look forward to
hearing from our witnesses.
Unfortunately, disasters around the globe have historically
had greater negative impacts on lower-income and minority
populations. The reasons for this are complex and numerous.
Some of these reasons include minimal investment in
infrastructure before a disaster, lack of insurance or under-
insurance, inability for those in disaster-prone areas to flee
when or before disaster strikes, and the philanthropic gap
after an event. All these factors, and more, contribute to
added negative impacts on the front end of a disaster, as well
as slower and less effective response and recoveries after
disaster strikes.
These factors also, unfortunately, contribute to pushing
more individuals and communities that are already on the brink
into further poverty and despair.
According to a 2017 article in Scientific America, in the
United States ``each big catastrophe, like a hurricane,
increases a U.S. county's poverty by 1 percent 90 years of data
show''. In the United States we have seen this phenomenon of
greater short- and long-term damage to lower-income and
minority areas play out through some of the country's worst
disasters. These impacts can sometimes be extremely long-
lasting and permanent.
Ten years after Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans, 96,000
fewer African Americans were living in New Orleans than prior
to Hurricane Katrina. Nearly 1 in 3 black residents had not
returned to the city after the storm. The median black
household in New Orleans in 2013 was $30,000, which is $5,000
less than it was in 2000, adjusted for inflation.
We see the impacts of disasters on these individuals and
communities not only in the United States but across the world
where those already in poverty are disproportionately impacted
by disasters.
According to a 2016 World Bank report, some 26 million
people are forced into poverty every year as a result of
natural disasters. A 2008 report from the United Nations stated
that of the 262 million individuals affected in 2007 and 2008
by natural disasters, 98 percent of those people resided in
developing nations. That is the poorest of the poor.
Mr. Chairman, like you, my district in central New York
also includes low-income and rural areas that may be
disproportionately impacted by disasters. I know that both of
us, if and when disaster strikes back home, would want
assurances that all of our constituents are being treated in an
equitable manner.
These statistics from the United States and around the
world are very eye-opening and unfortunately, as I stated
before, this phenomenon is not limited to one type of disaster
or even only to natural disasters.
Disadvantaged and minority communities were also, and
continue to be, hit particularly hard by COVID. According to a
recent article on Healthline Media, ``Researchers report that
the death rate from COVID-19 is significantly higher in black,
Native American, and Latino communities than any other groups.
They say some factors are underlying medical conditions,
unequal access to health care services, and jobs that require
employees to work closely with the public.''
Additionally, in an article published by NBC News a few
weeks ago, ``Since the pandemic began, about 1 in 434 rural
Americans have died from COVID compared with roughly 1 in 513
urban Americans. And though vaccines have reduced overall COVID
death rates since the winter peak, rural mortality rates are
now more than double that of urban ones and accelerating
quickly.''
This death rate is also directly correlated to counties
with a high rate of poverty, according to NIH.
Mr. Chairman, again, I appreciate you having this hearing
and shedding some light on this issue. I will say that I think
we can do better, not only in the Government, but in other
organizations, such as nonprofits and community-based
organizations that work on these issues.
Since our focus today is on emergency management, I would
like to simply challenge emergency managers, as I have in the
past at all levels, to keep these anecdotes and statistics in
mind as they work with communities on a full range of
assistance, from pre-disaster mitigation to flood insurance to
post-disaster insurance.
We need to level the playing field and ensure that we are
not only offering the same type and amount of assistance to
everyone, but that emergency managers are considering the
unique needs that certain communities and individuals have so
that we can improve outcomes for all disaster survivors.
I know that FEMA has recently taken steps to help ensure
equity in disaster assistance, including the formation of an
equity enterprise steering group and the establishment of a
robust stakeholder engagement process to develop FEMA's 2022 to
2026 strategic plan.
The equity enterprise steering group focuses on assessing
issues such as access and delivery of FEMA programs,
activities, and services. I hope these initiatives and others
allow for greater access and inclusion in FEMA programs.
We should consider ourselves very fortunate to live in a
country that has the resources and programs to help our
communities and individual citizens before, during, and after
disasters. That is certainly not the case in all countries
around the world. We also have tens of thousands of
professionals dedicated to fields of emergency management and
related fields, including our witnesses today.
I look forward to hearing from them on how to better
achieve equity in emergency management to ensure that all
Americans and the communities they live in are able to
mitigate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from any and all
disasters.
I will say before closing that I am sick and tired of
seeing people building multi-million-dollar mansions on the
beach and then getting FEMA assistance while people in rural
areas don't get squat. We have got to change that. That is what
I am interested in talking about today.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Katko follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member John Katko
Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this very important hearing on
equity in emergency management. I am thankful for the opportunity to
discuss this topic and look forward to hearing from our witnesses.
Unfortunately, disasters around the globe have historically had
greater negative impacts on lower-income and minority populations. The
reasons for this are complex and numerous. Some of these reasons
include:

Minimal investment in infrastructure before a disaster;

Lack of insurance or under-insurance;

Inability for those in disaster-prone areas to flee when/
before disaster strikes; and

A philanthropic gap after an event.
All these factors, and more, contribute to added negative impacts
on the front end of a disaster, as well as slower and less effective
response and recoveries after disaster strikes. These factors also,
unfortunately, contribute to pushing more individuals and communities
that are already on the brink into further poverty and despair.
According to a 2017 article in Scientific America, in the United
States . . . ``each big catastrophe like a hurricane increases a U.S.
county's poverty by 1 percent, 90 years of data show.''
In the United States, we have seen this phenomenon of greater
short- and long-term damage to lower-income and minority areas play out
through some of the country's worst disasters. And these impacts can
sometimes be extremely long lasting/permanent.
Ten years after Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans, 96,000 fewer
African-Americans were living in New Orleans, than prior to Hurricane
Katrina. Nearly 1 in 3 Black residents had not returned to the city
after the storm. And, the median Black household in New Orleans in 2013
was $30,000, which is $5,000 less than it was in 2000, adjusted for
inflation.
We see the impacts of disasters on these individuals and
communities not only in the United States but across the world, where
those already in poverty are disproportionally impacted by disasters.
According to a 2016 World Bank report, some 26 million people are
forced into poverty every year as a result of natural disasters.
A 2008 report from the United Nations stated that of the 262
million individuals affected in 2007 and 2008 by natural disasters, 98
percent of those people resided in developing nations--the poorest of
the poor.
Mr. Chairman, like you, my District in Central New York also
includes low-income and rural areas that may be disproportionately
impacted by disasters. I know that both of us, if and when disaster
strikes back home, would want assurances that all of our constituents
are being treated in an equitable manner.
Mr. Chairman, these statistics from the United States and around
the world are very eye-opening, and unfortunately, as I stated before,
this phenomenon is not limited to one type of disaster, or even only to
natural disasters.
Disadvantaged and minority communities were also--and continue to
be--hit particularly hard by COVID. According to a recent article in
Health Line Media, ``Researchers report that the death rate from COVID-
19 is significantly higher in Black, Native American, and Latino
communities than other groups. They say some factors are underlying
medical conditions, unequal access to health care services, and jobs
that require employees to work closely with the public.'' Additionally,
in an article published by NBC News a few weeks ago, ``Since the
pandemic began, about 1 in 434 rural Americans have died from COVID,
compared with roughly 1 in 513 urban Americans . . . And though
vaccines have reduced overall COVID death rates since the winter peak,
rural mortality rates are now more than double that of urban ones--and
accelerating quickly.'' This death rate is also directly correlated to
counties with a high rate of poverty according to NIH.
Mr. Chairman, I again appreciate you having this hearing and
shedding some light on this issue. I will say that I think we can do
better, not only in the Government, but in other organizations, such as
non-profits and community-based organizations that work on these
issues.
Since our focus today is on emergency management, I would like to
simply challenge emergency managers, at all levels, to keep these
anecdotes and statistics in mind as they work with communities on the
full range of assistance, from pre-disaster mitigation, to flood
insurance, to post-disaster assistance. We need to level the playing
field and ensure that we are not only offering the same type and amount
of assistance to everyone, but that emergency managers are considering
the unique needs that certain communities and individuals have so that
we can improve outcomes for all disaster survivors.
I know that FEMA has recently taken steps to help ensure equity in
disaster assistance, including the formation of an Equity Enterprise
Steering Group and the establishment of a robust stakeholder engagement
process to develop FEMA's 2022-2026 Strategic Plan. The Equity
Enterprise Steering Group focuses on assessing issues such as access
and delivery of FEMA programs, activities, and services. I hope these
initiatives and others allow for greater access and inclusion in FEMA
programs.
We should consider ourselves very fortunate to live in a country
that has the resources and programs to help our communities and
individual citizens before, during, and after disasters. That is
certainly not the case in all countries around the world. We also have
tens of thousands of professionals dedicated to the field of emergency
management, and related fields, including our witnesses here today.
I look forward to hearing from them on how to better achieve equity
in emergency management to ensure that all Americans and the
communities they live in are able to mitigate, prepare for, respond to,
and recover from any and all disasters.
Again, Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing. I yield
back.

Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. I couldn't have
made a better example than the million-dollar mansion on the
beach.
Mr. Katko. Absolutely.
Chairman Thompson. Absolutely.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that under the
committee rules opening statements may be submitted for the
record. Members are also reminded that the committee will
operate according to the guidelines laid out by the Chairman
and Ranking Member in our February 3 colloquy regarding remote
procedures.
I now welcome our panel of witnesses.
Our first witness is Dr. Lori Peek. Dr. Peek is director of
the Natural Hazard Center and professor of sociology at the
University of Colorado, Boulder. She is an author and expert on
vulnerable populations in disasters and has conducted field
investigations on the aftermath of the 9/11 terrorist attacks,
Hurricane Katrina, the Joplin tornado, Superstorm Sandy, and
Hurricane Matthew.
Our second witness is Chauncia Willis. Ms. Willis is co-
founder and CEO of the Institute for Diversity and Inclusion in
Emergency Management. She is a certified emergency manager, a
master exercise practitioner and author, and served as
emergency manager in Tampa, Florida for over 14 years where she
established programs for marginalized communities.
Our third witness is Christopher Currie. Mr. Currie serves
as the director of Homeland and Justice Division with the U.S.
Government Accountability Office. In his role, Mr. Currie leads
GAO's investigative work on emergency management, disaster
response and recovery, and management of the Department of
Homeland Security. Mr. Currie began his tenure with GAO in
2002.
Our fourth and final witness is Mr. James Joseph. Mr.
Joseph is the vice president of response at Tidal Basin. From
June 2020 to January 2021 he served as the Federal Emergency
Management Agency director of External Affairs. Previously Mr.
Joseph served as FEMA's region 5 administrator.
Thank you for your participation here today. I look forward
to all of your testimony.
Without objection, the witnesses' full statements will be
inserted in the record.
I now ask each witness to summarize their statement for 5
minutes, beginning with Dr. Peek.

STATEMENT OF LORI PEEK, PH D, DIRECTOR, NATURAL HAZARDS CENTER
AND PROFESSOR, DEPARTMENT OF SOCIOLOGY, UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO

Ms. Peek. Thank you, Chairman Thompson and Ranking Member
Katko, for the invitation to testify.
Disasters now directly affect tens of millions of Americans
annually. Between 1960 and 2019 in the United States natural
hazards contributed to an estimated 35,000 deaths and more than
$1.1 trillion in property and crop damage. During the same
period, every single U.S. county has experienced some loss due
to natural hazards. We are all living with risk, but these
risks are not felt equally.
Decades of social science research has shown that disasters
disproportionately affect the most marginalized among us--
people living in poverty, people of color, women, children,
older adults, and people with disabilities. Entire books are
filled with examples of the unequal impacts of disaster.
At present, however, many Government programs do not
consider equity in providing aid and therefore can actually
deepen and create sustained inequalities. This leaves already
vulnerable people even more at risk. For example, a recent
study by Drakes and colleagues revealed low levels of post-
disaster aid disbursement in places where households have high
levels of social vulnerability--specifically those in rural
areas, renters, the unmarried, black and Asian Americans, and
those with low incomes received less aid.
In their examination of more than 41,000 residential
properties in 500 municipalities across the United States,
Elliott and colleagues found that flood damage is not the only
predictor of where buyouts occur. Racial composition matters
too, with whiter counties and neighborhoods being more likely
to gain access to buyout assistance even though those in
neighborhoods of color are more likely to accept the
assistance. This ends in communities of color being more likely
to experience demolition and relocation.
A 2016 study by Carter discovered that only 117 of 566
Federally-recognized Tribes had FEMA-approved disaster
mitigation plans. This means that more than three-quarters of
all Tribes will be ineligible to apply for FEMA grants and
therefore could not receive Federal funding for disaster
projects.
We know that Federal aid doesn't always reach those most in
need. What is less clear at present is what mechanisms are
driving the observed inequities across programs. Some
explanations include that low-income enrolled communities,
communities of color, and indigenous communities have a harder
time competing for funding because of Federal cost-share
requirements, lack of access to technical assistance, limited
data availability, and cumbersome application requirements.
FEMA has supported the mitigation match concept in an
effort to overcome these long-standing challenges. But
historical injustices and contemporary inequities play a large
role in shaping the receipt of individual and public
assistance.
Low-income Americans, for example, are less likely to have
clear title to their property, which can lead to the outright
denial of aid. About half of low-income and minority households
are renters, but our current disaster policy prioritizes
private homeowners.
Right now the dedicated staff at our Federal agencies are
confronting on onslaught of ever more damaging disasters. In
addition, they are busy auditing their programs and policies to
advance racial equity and support for under-served communities.
This vital process could lead to a fundamental re-imagining of
disaster aid whereby the vulnerable people who are hit first
and worst in disasters are prioritized.
In closing, it is clear that inequitable policies and
practices, even when designed in good faith and meant to
provide much-needed relief and assistance, can become a second
disaster that further upends people's lives and leads to a
deepening of disadvantage. If we truly want to reduce natural
hazards losses, we must work fervently to reduce economic and
social inequality. This will take sound science, political
leadership, a larger and more diverse disaster work force, and
adequate financial support for Government agencies and their
community partners. It will also require serious investment in
equitable hazard mitigation and climate adaptation programs
that reduce exposure to disaster harm in the first place.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today.
The prepared statement of Ms. Peek follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lori Peek
Wednesday, October 27, 2021
gratitude
Thank you Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Katko, and Members of
the Committee on Homeland Security for inviting me to testify before
you about equity in disaster preparedness, response, and recovery. This
is a topic that I care deeply about, and I am so grateful that you have
chosen to elevate the conversation in this way and at this crucial
moment in our National history. As disaster losses mount and more
Americans suffer the consequences of extreme events, the focus of this
hearing is ever more urgent.
introduction
I am a professor in the Department of Sociology and the director of
the Natural Hazards Center at the University of Colorado Boulder. The
Natural Hazards Center has long served as the Nation's National Science
Foundation-designated information clearinghouse for the societal
dimensions of hazards and disasters. Our mission is to reduce disaster
harm by:

Translating and sharing hazards and disaster research and
information;

Building connections between researchers, non-profit, and
private-sector professionals, the media, policy makers, and
local, State, and Federal officials;

Advancing social science and interdisciplinary knowledge,
with a special emphasis on the most vulnerable populations and
places; and

Training and mentoring a diverse next generation of hazards
and disaster professionals.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Natural Hazards Center. 2021. ``Our Vision and Mission.''
Available at: https://hazards.colorado.edu/about/history-and-mission.
Accessed on October 20, 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I have studied the root causes and human consequences of disasters
for more than 20 years now. During this time, I have conducted field
research in the aftermath of several major events such as the 9/11
terrorist attacks, Hurricane Katrina, the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill,
the Joplin tornado, Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Matthew, the Anchorage
earthquake, and the Ridgecrest earthquake sequence. Much of my time in
these places has been spent surveying and interviewing children,
members of low-income families, women, people of color, the elderly,
and other people from socially disadvantaged communities. I have
written extensively about the social and economic barriers that members
of these groups face in preparing for, responding to, and recovering
from disaster, while also acknowledging that all people have capacities
and strengths that could contribute to reducing disaster risk.
disasters as shared experience
According to SHELDUS--a spatial disaster loss database maintained
by Arizona State University--the cumulative U.S. burden from natural
hazards between 1960 and 2019 stands at more than $1.1 trillion in
direct property and crop damage, 252,361 injuries, and 34,933
fatalities.\2\ Most of the costliest disasters have occurred in the
first two decades of this century, where ``milestone events of
catastrophic proportion'' in terms of magnitude and/or impacts have set
new damage records in rapid succession.\3\ For example, in 2017,
Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria and the California wildfires cost
more than $300 billion, far surpassing the previous record of nearly
$220 billion in losses set in 2005.\4\ Moreover, the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) estimates that 25 million people were directly
affected in these four major disasters in 2017--representing almost 8
percent of the United States population.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ SHELDUS. 2019. ``U.S. Hazard Losses: SHELDUS v19 Summary of
Losses, 1960-2019.'' Available at: https://cemhs.asu.edu/sheldus/
reports#Losses. Accessed on October 21, 2021.
\3\ Gall, Melanie. 2019. ``Loss Reduction and Sustainability.'' Pp.
209-232 in From Disaster to Catastrophe: U.S. Emergency Management in
the 21st Century, edited by C. Rubin and S.L. Cutter. New York, NY:
Routledge, p. 219.
\4\ Ibid., p. 209.
\5\ Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 2018. FEMA
Strategic Plan, 2018-2022. Washington, DC: FEMA, p. 18.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Numbers related to escalating disaster impacts could stretch on for
pages. But they can also be hard to take in because such news has a way
of receding into a gray statistical blur. In addition, as disturbing as
the trend lines are, most experts agree that the available data
actually underestimate direct losses associated with natural hazards
and largely overlook indirect losses due to a lack of documentation or
quantification.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Gall, Melanie, Kevin A. Borden, and Susan L. Cutter. 2009.
``When Do Losses Count? Six Fallacies of Natural Hazards Loss Data.''
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 90(6): 799-809.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
What is important for our discussion today is to emphasize that
every county (or county equivalent) in the United States has
experienced some loss due to natural hazards during the time period
from 1960 to 2019. While the damage varies widely across counties,
ranging from $119 in recorded property damage in Mineral County,
Colorado to $34.7 billion in Harris County, Texas, there is no county
in the Nation that has gone untouched by natural hazards since 1960.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ SHELDUS. 2020. SHELDUS Version 19.0. Available at: https://
cemhs.asu.edu/sheldus. Accessed on October 22, 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, every State has been affected by at least one disaster
with costs equaling or exceeding $1 billion in damages (adjusting for
inflation) since 1980 (see Figure 1).\8\ The record number of disasters
that we are experiencing is creating more of what the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) has referred to as compound
extremes, where multiple billion-dollar disaster events occur at the
same time or in sequence.\9\ This is further complicating already
difficult response and recovery efforts and increasing levels of
cumulative disaster exposure--defined here as multiple, acute on-set,
large-scale collective events that cause disruption for individuals,
families, and entire communities.\10\ Available research suggests that
children and adults who experience greater numbers of these potentially
traumatic community-level events are at risk of a variety of negative
outcomes and on-going stressors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI), National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). 2021. ``Seven Things to
Know about NCEI's U.S. Billion-Dollar Disasters Data.'' Available at:
https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/news/calculating-cost-weather-and-climate-
disasters. Accessed on October 22, 2021.
\9\ National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI), National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). 2021. ``Billion-Dollar
Weather and Climate Disasters: Overview.'' Available at: https://
www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/. Accessed on October 24, 2021.
\10\ Mohammad, Lubna and Lori Peek. 2019. ``Exposure Outliers:
Children, Mothers, and Cumulative Disaster Exposure in Louisiana.''
Journal of Family Strengths 19(1): Article 4, https://
digitalcommons.library.tmc.edu/jfs/vol19/iss1/4.

uneven landscapes of risk and disproportionate disaster impacts
Recent major disasters sharply underscore that while we are all
living at risk, these risks are not borne equally. Indeed, disaster
risk is patterned in ways that reflect pre-existing social and economic
inequalities. Groups that are marginalized have less power and fewer
resources, and in turn, they often have the hardest time preparing for,
responding to, and recovering from disaster. This means that disaster
impacts tend to be distributed along the familiar and intersecting
social fault lines of race, ethnicity, gender, social class, and
age.\11\ Indeed, decades of social science research has documented
disaster-related disparities among women and men, the poor, people of
color, the elderly, children, and persons with disabilities.\12\
Research in this vein has repeatedly shown that those at the margins of
society bear the heaviest environmental burdens,\13\ are more likely to
suffer severe physical and mental health outcomes after disaster,\14\
more likely to be displaced,\15\ and more likely to experience
protracted and uneven recovery processes.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Peek, Lori, Tricia Wachtendorf, and Michelle Annette Meyer.
2021. ``Sociology of Disasters.'' Chapter 11 in the Handbook of
Environmental Sociology, edited by B.S. Caniglia, A. Jorgenson, S.A.
Malin, L. Peek, D.N. Pellow, and X. Huang. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
\12\ Bullard, Robert. 2008. ``Differential Vulnerabilities:
Environmental and Economic Inequality and Government Response to
Unnatural Disasters.'' Social Research 75(3): 753-784, p. 757.
\13\ Peek, Lori. 2019. ``The Vulnerability Bearers.'' Director's
Corner, December 12. Boulder, CO: Natural Hazards Center, University of
Colorado Boulder. https://hazards.colorado.edu/news/director/the-
vulnerability-bearers.
\14\ Thomas, Deborah S.K., Brenda D. Phillips, William E. Lovekamp,
and Alice Fothergill, eds. 2013. Social Vulnerability to Disasters, 2d
Edition. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
\15\ Weber, Lynn and Lori Peek, eds. 2012. Displaced: Life in the
Katrina Diaspora. Austin: University of Texas Press.
\16\ Cutter, Susan L., Ronald L. Schumann III, and Christopher T.
Emrich. 2014. ``Exposure, Social Vulnerability, and Recovery
Disparities in New Jersey after Hurricane Sandy.'' Journal of Extreme
Events 1(1): 1450002; Finch, Christina, Christopher T. Emrich, and
Susan L. Cutter. 2010. ``Disaster Disparities and Differential Recovery
in New Orleans.'' Population and Environment 31: 179-202.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The social patterns that disasters both reveal and reinforce are
apparent in who lives and who dies in disaster events. For example, old
age was the single most important factor in determining who died in
Hurricane Katrina. Among the over 1,300 persons who perished in New
Orleans, 67 percent were at least 65 years old, although this group
represented only about 12 percent of the pre-storm population.\17\ The
1995 Chicago heat wave claimed more than 700 lives, and 73 percent of
the heat-related deaths were among persons over 65 years of age.\18\ At
the National level, our recent research drawing on the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention's WONDER database found that older
adults have a 3.84-fold increase in mortality caused by all natural
hazards compared to those under age 60. Among older adults, males have
higher mortality rates than females. American Indians/Alaska Natives
have the highest mortality rate of any racial/ethnic group and are
particularly impacted by excessive cold. Mortality is also high among
older Black males, especially in the context of cataclysmic storms.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Sharkey, Patrick. 2007. ``Survival and Death in New Orleans:
An Empirical Look at the Human Impact of Katrina.'' Journal of Black
Studies 37(4): 482-501.
\18\ Klinenberg, Eric. 2002. Heat Wave: A Social Autopsy of
Disaster in Chicago. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
\19\ Adams, Rachel M., Candace M. Evans, Mason Mathews, Amy Wolkin,
and Lori Peek. 2020. ``Mortality by Forces of Nature Among Older Adults
by Race/Ethnicity and Gender.'' Journal of Applied Gerontology,
10.1177/0733464820954676.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At the other end of the age spectrum, it is worth acknowledging
that while children make up only a fraction of those who have died in
the COVID-19 pandemic, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
has identified gaping racial and ethnic disparities in terms of
mortality \20\ and morbidity rates \21\ among child and youth
populations. Black and Latino children are especially at risk for
illness and death because they are more likely to live in households
with adults who have been deemed essential workers--and are therefore
more likely to be exposed by the virus being brought home from the
workplace. These children are also more apt to reside in crowded living
conditions, to experience food insecurity, to have limited or no access
to computers or the internet, to miss or drop out of school, and to
lack contact with supportive adults and peers outside the home.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Danae Bixler et al. 2020. ``SARS-CoV-Associated Deaths Among
Persons Aged
Research by Drakes and colleagues, which examined data from
the contiguous 48 States from 2006 to 2018, found that FEMA's
Individuals and Households Program (IHP) may not always be
reaching those who need Federal aid to manage the impacts of
disasters. Specifically, their study revealed that there were
low levels of IHP disbursement in places where households have
high levels of social vulnerability related to race (Black,
Asian), income (low income), homeownership status (renters), or
marital status (unmarried). This means IHP may not adequately
extend to the people in the areas with the most need. The
authors' geographic analyses found that such places were mostly
rural and clustered in Appalachia, the Mississippi Valley
region, and the Southeastern United States. Conversely, places
where socially vulnerable households received high levels of
IHP disbursements--indicating overperformance--were usually
urban and clustered in the Midwest and Northeast.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Findings quoted in: Drakes, Oronde, Eric Tate, Jayton Rainey,
and Sam Brody. 2021. ``Beyond Damages: Social Equity in Allocating
Disaster Assistance.'' Research Counts, Special Collection on Mass
Sheltering and Disasters. 3(14). Boulder, CO: Natural Hazards Center,
University of Colorado Boulder. Available at: https://
hazards.colorado.edu/news/research-counts/beyond-damages-social-equity-
in-allocating-disaster-assistance. Accessed on October 23, 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Domingue and Emrich analyzed FEMA's Public Assistance
distribution at the county level following major disaster
declarations involving 1,621 U.S. counties between 2012 and
2015, while controlling for damages sustained, population,
household counts, and FEMA region. Their results indicate that
FEMA's Public Assistance program generally operates as
designed, whereas places with the highest losses receive the
most funding. However, their research also underscored that
that county social conditions related to socioeconomic
characteristics and social vulnerability influenced funding
receipt. The authors conclude that to determine Public
Assistance ``FEMA should consider a robust characterization of
communities utilizing a suite of socioeconomic characteristics
rather than depending only on one variable (losses).''\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Simone J. Domingue and Christopher Emrich. 2019. ``Social
Vulnerability and Procedural Equity: Exploring the Distribution of
Disaster Aid Across Counties in the United States.'' The American
Review of Public Administration 49(8): 897-913, p. 909.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

In their examination of 500 municipalities across the United
States between 1990 and 2015, Elliott, Brown, and Loughran
observed that flood damage is not the only predictor of where
Federal buyouts occur. As they write, racial composition
matters too, with buyout programs targeting Whiter counties and
neighborhoods in more urbanized areas. Although people of color
are more likely to take advantage of such programs, they
receive disproportionately lower disbursements when compared to
their White counterparts.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Elliott, James R., Phylicia Lee Brown, and Kevin Loughran.
2020. ``Racial Inequities in the Federal Buyout of Flood-Prone Homes: A
Nation-wide Assessment of Environmental Adaptation.'' Socius, https://
doi.org/10.1177/2378023120905439.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Drawing on a Nationally-representative sample from the Panel
Study on Income Dynamics, Howell and Elliott discovered that as
local hazard damages increase, so does wealth inequality,
especially along the lines of race, education, and
homeownership.\27\ Specifically, their findings indicated that
``holding disaster costs constant, the more Federal Emergency
Management Agency money a county receives, the more Whites'
wealth tends to grow, and the more Blacks' wealth tends to
decline, all else equal. In other words, how Federal assistance
is currently administered seems to be exacerbating rather than
ameliorating wealth inequalities that unfold after costly
natural hazards'' (see Figure 2).\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Howell, Junia and James R. Elliott. 2019. ``Damages Done: The
Longitudinal Impacts of Natural Hazards on Wealth Inequality in the
United States.'' Social Problems 66: 448-467.
\28\ Howell, Junia and James R. Elliott. 2018. ``As Disaster Costs
Rise, So Does Inequality.'' Socius 4: 1-3, p. 1.

In her thesis research, Carter reported that as of September
30, 2015, only 117 of the 566 Federally-recognized Tribes in
the FEMA database used for analysis had FEMA-approved disaster
mitigation plans.\29\ This means that at the time this research
was conducted, more than three-quarters of all Tribes would
have been ineligible to apply for FEMA grants and therefore
could not receive Federal funding for disaster mitigation
projects. In addition, the number of approved plans varied
widely across FEMA regions, with FEMA Region I--which includes
Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island--having the
highest proportion (66.7 percent, or 6 of 9 Tribes) of approved
mitigation plans. Conversely, in Region X--which spans Alaska,
Idaho, Oregon, and Washington--only 24 of the 270 Tribes (8.9
percent) had disaster mitigation plans in effect. In Alaska,
the State with the largest number of Tribes, FEMA reported that
just 3 of the 228 Tribes (1.31 percent) had approved disaster
plans. With the rising number of climate-related disasters and
the alarming toll of these events in vulnerable Tribal areas,
the need to tackle this escalating issue is more salient than
ever. Yet, cost barriers, a lack of technical expertise,
limited data availability, physical isolation, mistrust of
Government authorities, and culturally-based communication
challenges all serve as barriers to participation in FEMA
mitigation programs.\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Carter, Lucy. 2016. ``An Investigation of United States
Federal Policy Attempts to Reduce American Indian and Alaska Native
Disaster Vulnerability'' Master's Thesis, Department of Sociology,
Colorado State University.
\30\ Carter, Lucy and Lori Peek. 2016. ``Participation Please:
Barriers to Tribal Disaster Mitigation Planning.'' Natural Hazards
Observer 40(4). Boulder, CO: Natural Hazards Center, University of
Colorado Boulder. Available at: https://hazards.colorado.edu/article/
participation-please-barriers-to-tribal-mitigation-planning. Accessed
on October 25, 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Many other case studies as well as National-level analyses
conducted by hazards and disaster researchers have consistently shown
that inequitable policies and practices--even when designed to provide
needed relief and assistance--can become ``a source of profound
disorder and confusion, a kind of second disaster'' that follows the
first.\31\ The research evidence is clear in this regard. What is less
clear is how to develop policies and programs that can simultaneously
address the grand environmental and social challenges that we currently
face.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Kroll-Smith, Steve, Vern Baxter, and Pam Jenkins. 2015. Left
to Chance: Hurricane Katrina and the Story of Two New Orleans
Neighborhoods. Austin: University of Texas Press, p. 82.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Figuring out a path forward will require leadership, bold new
strategies, major investments of time and resources, and science-
informed action. Right now, Federal agencies are putting their programs
and policies through an audit to advance racial equity and support for
under-served communities. This is not happening by chance. It is
happening by design,\32\ and these audits are being influenced by
research from the hazards and disaster community that has--for
decades--pointed to inequitable, unjust, and unacceptable post-disaster
outcomes that leave the most vulnerable even further behind. In
response, FEMA has posed several crucial questions \33\ and begun to
advance new initiatives \34\ related to how the agency can better
structure its programs to meet the needs of the most vulnerable
populations and to carefully consider what actions it can take to
reduce barriers to assistance among the Nation's most marginalized
communities. Other scientific and hazards mission agencies are
similarly moving forward in attempts to address rapidly-rising hazards
losses and ever-widening social disparities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ The White House. 2021. ``Executive Order on Advancing Racial
Equity and Support for Under-served Communities Through the Federal
Government.'' Available at: https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
presidential-actions/2021/01/20/executive-order-advancing-racial-
equity-and-support-for-underserved-communities-through-the-federal-
government/. Accessed on October 25, 2021.
\33\ National Advisory Council. 2020. ``Report to the FEMA
Administrator.'' Washington, DC: FEMA. Available at: https://
www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_nac-report_11-2020.pdf.
Accessed on October 24, 2021.
\34\ Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 2021. ``Equity.''
Available at: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/national-
preparedness/equity. Accessed on October 25, 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
in closing
The idea that natural hazards losses are inextricably linked to
social and economic inequality is now widely accepted. This growing
body of work acknowledges that our environmental suffering is connected
to and worsened by our social suffering. The logical extension of this
insight is that if we want to reduce natural hazards losses we must
work just as fervently to reduce economic and social inequality in all
of its forms. To make these changes will take sound science and a
strong moral imagination. This is our opportunity to envision new
possibilities that can come from investing in equitable solutions to
mitigating hazards loss.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify. I look forward to
hearing from the other witnesses and to your questions and the
discussion to follow.

Chairman Thompson. I thank the witness for her testimony.
We now ask Ms. Willis to summarize her testimony for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHAUNCIA WILLIS, CO-FOUNDER AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, INSTITUTE FOR DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION IN EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT

Ms. Willis. Thank you. Chairman Thompson and Ranking Member
Katko and distinguished Members of the House Committee on
Homeland Security, thank you for the opportunity to share
information with you today concerning equity in disaster
preparedness and response and recovery.
Our organization, the Institute for Diversity and Inclusion
in Emergency Management, comes to you to suggest that anti-
poverty bias and discrimination against marginalized groups is
as pervasive and deeply rooted in emergency management as the
water is wet in the ocean.
As we meet today to discuss disaster equity, there is one
thing that we must keep in the forefront of our minds, and that
is the plight of the disaster survivors. We must address the
basic tenets of inequitable policies, like the Stafford Act and
understand and empathize with the suffering of the people and
their perspective. Black, white, rich, poor, Democrat, or
Republican, we can all get behind humanity and the human
perspective.
Equity is about the people, not the numbers. We are dealing
with two major issues. First we are dealing with biased
policies, like the Stafford Act, that don't benefit
historically marginalized groups, and in many cases harms them.
Second, we are dealing with a work force that has become
accustomed to discriminatory behavior. Biased behavior becomes
normal and seems acceptable when you have done it for so long,
and in some cases you have been rewarded for it.
Now, my mother graduated from Tougaloo College and my
father from Jackson State University in Mississippi. So my
family and I are very familiar with the daily behavior and
disregard of a Government that diminishes the plight of people
of color. In times of disaster, when the policies are not
equitable and fail to value all people equally, and when the
work force and volunteers bring their own implicit bias to the
job, the outcome is disproportionate negative impact on the
most vulnerable.
Now, many States have historical disaster bias to contend
with, where the very bodies of African American and Indigenous
People were sacrificed and in some cases used as sandbags while
they were still alive to prevent flooding of White homes and
businesses. In States like Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, the
Carolinas, and all over the country, the very soil still cries
out from the blood and sweat of the enslaved and the
indigenous. The soil now cries from the tears of those who are
still being mistreated and marginalized.
Not only must they endure mother nature, but they must also
endure the response of a country that is comfortable operating
in a construct where two emergency management systems prevail,
one that embraces the educated, affluent, and/or middle class
homeowners and one that everyone else must endure and that
actively works against them.
The policies must change and the work force must be
retrained. You cannot ask an entire work force, a staff,
contractors, and volunteers to produce equity without first
training them to understand and value equity. The outcome is
performative equity and this is neither impactful nor
sustainable. It is easy to change a policy that is clearly
inequitable, but it is much harder to change the mindset and
behavior of the people that created and enforced that
inequitable policy. Equity is not easy and it is not fast, and
it requires a true meaningful commitment to change.
My goal here today is to save lives and end suffering of
our most vulnerable people. We can save more lives through
allocation of more preparedness and mitigation funding in
vulnerable communities. We can end the suffering by ensuring
equitable response and recovery that is prioritized in policy
and practice.
Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Willis follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chauncia Willis
October 27, 2021
Chairman Thompson, Vice Chairman Torres, Ranking Member Katko, and
Members of the House Committee on Homeland Security, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today concerning ``Equity in Disaster
Preparedness, Response, and Recovery.'' My name is Chauncia Willis, co-
founder and chief executive officer (CEO) of the Institute for
Diversity and Inclusion in Emergency Management (I-DIEM). I-DIEM has
been a leader in disaster equity championing diversity, equity, and
inclusion initiatives across the emergency management enterprise which
has been recognized Nationally and globally including National Public
Radio, The New York Times, and two Congressional testimonies before the
116th Congress on ``Pandemic Response: Confronting the Unequal Impacts
of COVID-19'' and ``Experiences of Vulnerable Populations During
Disasters.'' With this testimony, I continue a conversation that is
built on previous testimonies and the historic inequities that continue
to negatively impact vulnerable, under-served, and marginalized
communities in present contexts.
FEMA defines equity as ``the consistent and systematic fair, just
and impartial treatment of all individuals.''\1\ However, this
definition outlines a concept of equity without a defined understanding
of how to achieve equity within context. I-DIEM recognizes equity as
the ``efforts that guarantee fair treatment, advancement, equal
opportunity, and access for all individuals while striving to identify
and eliminate barriers that have prevented full participation and
beneficence of specific groups.'' This defined approach looks beyond
broadly stating what equity is and outlines intentional strategies and
outcomes that promote equitable advancement. By our definition,
ensuring equity seeks parity in treatment, parity in access, and a
community-based understanding of barriers that combat inequitable
systems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ FEMA Defines Equity in its Mission of Making Programs More
Accessible/FEMA.gov.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These systems are a result of policy, programs, and practices that
have been designed to marginalize individuals, families, and
communities. For example, the declaration process under the Stafford
Act limits the assistance to individuals, families, and communities in
need with major disaster declarations lying in the hands of partisan
politics and State-administered funding support. Following Hurricane
Ida in August, counties in Mississippi are just now receiving Federal
disaster assistance,\2\ in October, based on the declaration process
due to politics and the policy structure of Federal assistance under
the Stafford Act.\3\ Counties such as Wilkinson, Pike, and Amite, which
are comprised of 70.6%, 54.1%, and 40% of Black/African American
residents, respectively, are among those that have suffered
significantly due to the declaration process. While advancements toward
equity have been a priority of the Biden administration, this
spotlights how previous policies can combat equitable priorities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ President Joseph R. Biden, Jr. Approves Major Disaster
Declaration for Mississippi/FEMA.gov.
\3\ Stafford_Act_pdf.pdf (doi.gov).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Environmental justice, redlining, and housing congruently highlight
inequitable impacts of policy, practice, and programs. Research has
shown that racial- and income-based divisions in zoning and city
infrastructure contribute to negative outcomes.\4\ \5\ Communities of
color are more likely to live near landfills and industrial plants that
pollute water and air and erode quality of life.\6\ More than 9 million
people living near hazard waste sites are people of color, and Black
Americans are 3 times more likely to die from exposure to air
pollutants than White counterparts. This same subjugation to risk
applies in emergency management.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Residential segregation rewards whites while punishing people
of color/The Kinder Institute for Urban Research (rice.edu).
\5\ Hurricane Harvey hit low-income communities hardest--
ThinkProgress.
\6\ Environmental racism: Black Americans are three times more
likely to die from pollution--Quartz (qz.com).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Houston, residential patterns in Texas based on infrastructures
that are often associated with race and class lines due to
discriminatory housing policies confined low-income people and people
of color to fewer desirable areas that are at increased risk of
flooding, which was evident in Hurricane Harvey. Federal assistance
caused greater harm than help, as 45 percent of households with annual
incomes less than $15,000 were denied FEMA individual assistance after
Hurricane Harvey while 14 percent of household with annual incomes more
than $45,000 were denied.\7\ Among low-income residents who were able
to navigate the complex administrative and bureaucratic application
processes, the average payout from FEMA was $4,300 which was far less
than minimal repairs.\8\ In Hurricane Laura, Blacks and Hispanics were
only approved for Federal assistance at rates of 13 percent and 28
percent respectively, compared to Whites (45 percent) and low-income
survivors were about twice as likely to be denied assistance deeming
their damages as ``insurance'' or faulting homeowners from assistance
due to the inability to maintain flood insurance based on their forced
flood risks.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Recent disasters reveal racial discrimination in FEMA aid
process/Facing South.
\8\ ``People just give up'': Low-income hurricane victims slam
Federal relief programs--POLITICO.
\9\ FEMA Assistance Is Unfair To Poorer Disaster Survivors: NPR.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although recently updated by FEMA,\10\ issues such as heirs'
property contributed to the denial of assistance previously while on-
going concerns will likely arise based on retroactive pay with the
implementation of the new policy. Moreover, loss of property, one of
the single most effective pathways to wealth,\11\ creates generational
financial instability and eliminates the history of communities forced
to relocate. Consequently, we see the loss of social and cultural
identity among low-income and communities of color as the demographics
of predominantly Black cities shift to predominantly White populations
following disaster recovery which is evident in New Orleans following
Hurricane Katrina.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Verifying Home Ownership or Occupancy/FEMA.gov.
\11\ Homeownership as a Key Driver of Wealth/HuffPostnull[sic].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In our most recent work deploying Equity Response Teams to New
Orleans and Southeast Louisiana, we engaged with Tribal nations to
identify and understand inequities within disaster response and
recovery following Hurricane Ida. On-going issues such as denial of
mitigation assistance funding, lack of access to resources and support
for Tribes that are not Federally-recognized, difficulty acquiring
State funding, and the process for Federal recognition of Tribes
requiring documented historical proof for decades that may be lost due
to on-going disasters contribute to oppressive systems that amplify
risk for marginalized groups without the structure to properly mitigate
or overcome major disasters. As disasters are increasing in severity,
intensity, and frequency, this will create on-going problems that
continue to contribute to an increase in disaster-related costs if not
addressed through equity.
Ensuring equity requires addressing the root causes of
vulnerability. We must understand both social determinants of health
\12\ and disaster while understanding our role in contributing to
factors that create disparities. Ensuring equity requires that
emergency managers are trained in cultural competence and that we
bridge the gap between the community and Federal Government, especially
considering the community holds the Federal Government responsible for
recovery. Ensuring equity requires improving access and understanding
the process that is required to achieve equal status among vulnerable,
under-served, and marginalized communities. Most importantly, ensuring
equity requires us to hold ourselves accountable for the policies,
practices, and programs that we design, develop, and implement to guide
our work. Despite the tenured implementation of policies, such as the
Stafford Act, most policies were created with inequity and without
equitable review and assessment, and so they fail to meet the needs of
the ever-changing demographics of American society. Ensuring equity
should start with the policies that have created inequity as these
policies guide our approaches. In alignment with my final statement, I
would like to offer policy recommendations for the Stafford Act which
are geared toward ensuring a more equitable future for current and
future generations [See Addendum].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Social Determinants of Health/CDC.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ADDENDUM: STAFFORD ACT RECOMMENDATIONS
Concern 1
Section 203(a): Modify the definition of a small, impoverished
community. The limited definition does not take information into
account that impacts rural communities such as population growth,
economic indicators, financial conditions, employer departures, wage
stagnation, climate impacts based on community type, legal status of
the community, resident demographics, housing/rental vacancies.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the population limit be raised from 3,000 to
25,000 or 50,000. Additionally, we would recommend that more
demographic data be added to this definition to clearly define what
community indicators demonstrate economic distress prior to, during,
and after disasters. Additionally, we recommend removing the language
that a Governor must select the local government to qualify as
impoverished. This requirement leads many impoverished communities at
the mercy of a State Governor whereby partisan politics may be a factor
in decision making versus collecting data to assess the critical needs
of the community. This creates further inequities for many rural, and
minority communities.
Concern 2
Sec 322. Mitigation Planning (42 U.S.C. 5165) contributes to the
inequities levied against many communities that bear the brunt of the
climate change crises. The requirement to have a mitigation plan to
receive any assistance for hazard mitigation does not equitably provide
any relief for unincorporated jurisdictions/communities, non-Federally
recognized Tribal communities, and many rural communities. These
communities may have fiscal constraints prohibiting them from creating
the plans, or they have been denied access from counties, parishes, and
State governments from submitting plans due to non-incorporation status
as a recognized Government entity.
Recommendation 2
It is recommended that FEMA set up a program to deploy the
Community Planning and Capacity Building cadres, National partners, and
university partners supported by technical staff (i.e. engineers), to
assist small and communities of color with the development of these
plans so that they may have an equal opportunity to seek disaster
funding. Additionally, one alternative is to allow for these same
communities to bypass local and State government barriers by creating
an expedited process that allows for the submission of individual
community hazard plans to be reviewed directly by FEMA for approval of
Federal funding. The program can be set up as a pilot, technical
assistance and capacity building can be provided to small communities,
and FEMA can establish population size definitions and allow for the
inclusion of written justifications to be provided demonstrating
hardship, denial of access to prior local and State programs, or other
documentation submissions that will help a community justify the need
to participate in the pilot program to improve their communities.
Concern 3
Sec. 326. Designation of Small State and Rural Advocate (42 U.S.C.
5165d) FEMA can designate a Small State and Rural Advocate during
disasters, but this advocacy position is not consistently deployed
across all disasters.
Recommendation 3
Set clear perimeters behind when Small State and Rural Advocates
and Tribal Liaisons should be deployed and make more of a concerted
effort to higher more liaisons with work and cultural experience
working with these types of communities. The liaisons should reach out.
Concern 4
Sec 406. Repair Restoration and Replacement. Private nonprofits
that have sustained damages to critical facilities serving the under-
served may be excluded from submitting applications to local, county,
and State governments implicitly and explicitly. One strategy to
exclude non-Governmental applicants is to ensure that projects,
buildings, and equipment maintained by those agencies are excluded from
mitigation project lists that are drafted for local mitigation strategy
plans or mentioning them in State hazard mitigation plans. As a result,
the entities cannot submit applications for recovery grant funding and/
or public assistance in many communities.
Recommendation 4
In as much as State decentralization of the disaster process is
needed, it causes greater harm to communities of color as they have no
mechanism to work with the ``system'' that has been designed to access
funding to combat the current climate crises. Separate direct Federal
application systems must be set up for small, impoverished communities,
rural, and communities of color to have a chance at equity related to
rebuilding their communities. This effort would be similar to what has
been set up for Federally-recognized Tribal governments.
Concern 5
Sec 415 Legal Services, Sec 416 Crises Counseling Assistance and
Training, Sec 419 Public Transportation, Sec 425 Transportation
Assistance to Individuals and Households, Sec 426 Case Management
Services. In these sections ``The President'' can authorize these
services and financial assistance to States, local governments, and
private organizations to assist communities. However, there are
disparities between addressing the unmet needs in rural, minority, and
distressed communities.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that this language be changed to allow for maximum
availability of resources upon written, Congressional, or expressed
communications directly from these communities to personnel within FEMA
or the White House. For example, Tribal communities have written joint
letters to FEMA, Congress, and the President's Office seeking direct
assistance during times of disaster (i.e. COVID pandemic). These
communities do this because their needs are not being addressed at the
local, State, or FEMA regional offices. This should be rectified, and
access to liaisons in Washington should be assigned to allocate
resources directly to the hardest-hit areas.
Concern 6
Many indigenous, communities of color, and rural communities are
located in coastal locations, or in repetitive distressed areas of
impact from climatic and public health disasters. As such, due to
economic conditions many homeowners are underinsured, or uninsured as
it relates to flood insurance and homeowner's insurance.
``If you have a Federally-backed mortgage and live in an area
identified as a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) within a participating
NFIP community, you are required to have flood insurance, according to
the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973.
``Additionally, if you live in a high-risk flood area and have
received Federal disaster assistance, such as grants from FEMA or funds
from the Disaster Loan Plan of the U.S. Small Business Administration,
you are required to maintain flood insurance in order to be considered
for any future Federal disaster aid.''--Jason Metz, Forbes.
Many families cannot afford to rebuild, nor afford to relocate
because FEMA's programs for Severe Repetitive Loss (SRL) and Repetitive
Loss (RL) grants require buyouts from homeowners who are insured
through private sources or the National Flood Insurance Program. The
Flood Insurance Reform disproportionately impacts homeowners, or
multiple property/inherited homeowners in a way that prevents access to
these grant programs. Thus, resulting in homes that cannot be repaired,
homeowners that cannot be relocated, and contributing to blight in
areas that have repetitive flooding.
Recommendation 6
On August 3, 2021, FEMA announced a new policy to allow inherited
homeowners to self-certify homeownership for FEMA's Individual
Assistance (IA) program, which will impact Hurricane Ida applicants in
Louisiana. A policy analysis must be conducted to determine how to
support the numerous homeowners and Government/nonprofit entities in
SRL and RL areas so that they have access to disaster funding in the
same way that wealthier homeowners have access to Federal funding.
Concern 7
Listed below is the current language used as part of the Stafford
Act for the use of local businesses. In many GAO audits, and per policy
directives issued by FEMA, local communities are prohibited from
implementing goals or set-asides on contracts thus limiting the
capacity of established local small business programs; which are
designed to help decrease disparities in equity, be more inclusive, and
build the capacity of small businesses. The Stafford Act along with
conflicting OMB Uniform Grant Guidance and other policies eliminates
the opportunity for small businesses to provide services during a
disaster.
`` 5150. Use of local firms and individuals
``(a) Contracts or agreements with private entities
``(1) In general
``In the expenditure of Federal funds for debris clearance,
distribution of supplies, reconstruction, and other major disaster or
emergency assistance activities which may be carried out by contract or
agreement with private organizations, firms, or individuals, preference
shall be given, to the extent feasible and practicable, to those
organizations, firms, and individuals residing or doing business
primarily in the area affected by such major disaster or emergency.
``(2) Construction
``This subsection shall not be considered to restrict the use of
Department of Defense resources under this chapter in the provision of
assistance in a major disaster.
``(3) Specific geographic area
``In carrying out this section, a contract or agreement may be set
aside for award based on a specific geographic area.''
The Federal Government by definition typically defines small
businesses as organizations with up 500 employees, which is not a small
firm. However small business defined locally may be a business with 10
to 50 employees, which is best defined as a `Micro-Business'.
Local government procurement programs are not allowed to provide
those smaller individual businesses with the opportunity to scale their
business through the procurement process because local small business
programs, as defined by the Stafford Act and OMB Uniform Grant Guidance
policies, as ``geographical preference'', thus taking away the
opportunity for maximum support in the event of a natural disaster.
Recommendation 7
Changes to the Stafford Act, OMB Uniform Grant Guidance, and FEMA
policy directives allowing local small (or micro) businesses to be
selected in the bidding process as, participation and or set-asides
(smaller parts of the contract) ensures local participation as well as
efficient and effective responses to the disasters. Additionally, it
will ensure that the local economy is strengthened, firms who are
familiar with the disaster area may be selected, and it decreases
disparities by size or ethnic background in the disaster contracting
process.
additional recommendations
Recommendation 8
Stafford Action Section Discussing Equity: https://www.fema.gov/
sites/default/files/2020-03/stafford-act_2019.pdf
``Sec. 308. Nondiscrimination in Disaster Assistance (42 U.S.C. 5151)
``(a) Regulations For Equitable and Impartial Relief Operations--
The President shall issue, and may alter and amend, such regulations as
may be necessary for the guidance of personnel carrying out Federal
assistance functions at the site of a major disaster or emergency. Such
regulations shall include provisions for ensuring that the distribution
of supplies, the processing of applications, and other relief and
assistance activities shall be accomplished in an equitable and
impartial manner, without discrimination on the grounds of race, color,
religion, nationality, sex, age, disability, English proficiency, or
economic status.
``(b) Compliance with Regulations As Prerequisite to Participation
by Other Bodies in Relief Operations--As a condition of participation
in the distribution of assistance or supplies under this Act or of
receiving assistance under this Act, governmental bodies and other
organizations shall be required to comply with regulations relating to
nondiscrimination promulgated by the President, and such other
regulations applicable to activities within an area affected by a major
disaster or emergency as he deems necessary for the effective
coordination of relief efforts.''
Recommendation 9
Change cost-benefit analysis for mitigation projects.
Analysis should value low-income community members and renters. The
current BCA is inherently inequitable and biased toward homeowners.
Recommendation 10
Eliminate the 75/25 percent cost-share requirement.
Recommendation 11
Provide ``place-based'' additional funding and support for limited
resource communities whose vulnerability is heightened due to past
Government discriminatory practices.
Recommendation 12
Redefine and enhance technical assistance to support marginalized
communities and limited-resource local governments.
Recommendation 13
Change/update FEMA's definition of ``disadvantaged communities'' to
include more local governments with limited resources.
Recommendation 14
Expedite process for allocating funds to marginalized and limited-
resource communities, including hazard mitigation grants.

Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
For the record, I graduated from Tougaloo and Jackson
State, so you have excellent parents.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Currie for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER P. CURRIE, DIRECTOR, HOMELAND SECURITY
AND JUSTICE TEAM, GAO

Mr. Currie. Thank you, Chairman Thompson and Ranking Member
Katko, for the opportunity to be here to discuss GAO's work on
equity and disaster programs.
In recent years there has been a huge increase in disaster
spending at the Federal level to confront more extreme weather
throughout the entire country. Since 2005, for example, the
Federal Government has spent over half a trillion dollars on
disaster aid to citizens and communities. These are huge
numbers, but they don't tell the whole story about who gets
disaster aid and the effect it has.
As FEMA even notes, low-income and rural areas, communities
of color, people with disabilities, Tribes, and other groups
face barriers to accessing aid. These groups also do not
recover as quickly, if they recover at all. While there is not
a lot of research out there that is definitive, we identified
many studies that show how disaster aid can help these
communities. Other studies show how groups may not benefit as
much as others. For example, one study reported that the more
FEMA aid an area received, the more wealth inequality grew
along the lines of race, education, and home ownership.
Another study found that U.S. counties with greater
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program
experienced fewer fatalities from flood events.
Our work has also found a number of challenges across
Federal programs that can impact our most vulnerable
populations. We recently looked at the largest Federal recovery
programs within FEMA, HUD, and SBA. We found that they all have
begun some work to identify and address these barriers and
disparities, however, our concern right now is that agencies
lack good information to identify when access barriers or the
disparities exist.
Specifically, they lack data needed to analyze and identify
these areas. For example, none of the Federal agencies
collected and analyzed demographic data from applicants for the
purpose of identifying disparate outcomes. Further, we also
found there is no systematic process across these agencies to
determine if these barriers and recovery outcomes exist across
programs and how they affect various groups of vulnerable
populations.
You can't fix what you can't identify or measure. Getting
the right information and using it effectively will be a
critical first step in this to ensuring more equitable outcomes
for all disaster survivors.
Our prior work has also identified areas where Federal
programs can be improved in order to help disaster survivors
more easily navigate them. For example, we found that FEMA
could improve its individuals and households program by helping
survivors better understand their eligibility and award status.
We also found that confusion often prevented survivors from
continuing the enrollment process or mistakenly assuming they
were denied when they may not have been. We made a number of
recommendations to FEMA to help survivors better understand how
to get assistance, including improving their award letters, and
communicating more information to survivors on their
eligibility status as well.
We have also found that elderly individuals and those with
disabilities face challenges in obtaining assistance.
Specifically, at the time of our report FEMA didn't provide
individuals with clear opportunities to disclose disability-
related needs when they register for individual assistance. We
recommended that they do a better job of this and they have
since taken some action to do this. However, this is just a
drop in the bucket compared to everything else that needs to be
done.
Now, to its credit, FEMA and some other agencies have
acknowledged that this is a challenge that has to be fixed and
they are taking some action. However, I want to stress that
these efforts are really in their infancy. In January the
President issued the Executive Order on advancing racial equity
and support for under-served communities. Since then Federal
agencies have rushed to look at their programs and identify
what to do. Since this is a brand-new lens, it is fair to say
that there is confusion across the Federal agencies on how best
to do this and what standards to set across Government.
It is not going to be easy and everyone won't agree, but
based on our work, I think it boils down to several key steps
that we can take right away. First, I think we need to define
equity, determine what data we need to identify disparities,
and we need to use it to change programs. Second, I think we
need to integrate equity into key policies and doctrine. This
is somewhat started, but I think this needs to trickle into
strategic plans for agencies. I think it also needs to make its
way into key frameworks, such as the National Response and
National Disaster Recovery framework. Then we need to move to
each program to identify potential barriers to the process and
disincentives that prevent those most in need of getting aid.
I thank you for the chance to be here and I look forward to
talking about these issues in more detail.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Currie follows:]
Prepared Statement of Christopher P. Currie
Wednesday, October 27, 2021
gao highlights
Highlights of GAO-22-105488, a testimony before the Committee on
Homeland Security, House of Representatives.
Why GAO Did This Study
Each year, disasters affect hundreds of American communities and
cause billions of dollars of damage. Disaster recovery is a complex
process with many factors that affect individual and community
outcomes, including in various socioeconomic and demographic groups.
Recently, Federal actions have focused on equitable administration of
Federal recovery assistance.
This statement is based on preliminary observations from GAO's
forthcoming report on Federal actions to identify and address potential
access barriers and disparate outcomes, which is currently at FEMA for
comment. It also discusses prior GAO work and recommendations issued
from 2019 through 2021 related to various Federal recovery programs and
vulnerable populations.
To develop the preliminary observations, GAO conducted a literature
review and interviewed officials at the three Federal agencies with the
largest disaster recovery programs and reviewed relevant documents. GAO
also interviewed recovery stakeholders representing State, local,
Tribal, and nonprofit interests.
What GAO Recommends
GAO made recommendations to FEMA in prior reports designed to
address the challenges in this statement. For example, GAO has made
recommendations to FEMA to help disaster survivors navigate the
application process and to revise processes to better serve survivors
with disabilities. FEMA has taken actions to address many of these
recommendations.
disaster recovery.--efforts to identify and address barriers to
receiving federal recovery assistance
What GAO Found
GAO's past work has shown areas where improvements can be made to
Federal disaster recovery programs to help disaster survivors and
State, local, territorial, and Tribal governments. While these programs
are not typically targeted toward only to low-income or vulnerable
populations, GAO's prior work and recommendations identified areas that
could help these populations. Specifically,

GAO reported in October 2021 that the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's (FEMA) flood mapping investments for fiscal
years 2012 through 2020 were lower for communities with higher
levels of social vulnerability and under-served populations
than communities with lower levels of social vulnerability and
under-served populations, other factors being equal. GAO
recommended that FEMA better use flood risk data to prioritize
flood mapping for vulnerable communities;

in September 2020, GAO found that disaster survivors,
including low-income individuals, faced numerous challenges
obtaining aid and understanding the Individuals and Households
Program, a FEMA program that provides housing assistance and
other needs assistance to individuals affected by a major
disaster or emergency. GAO recommended, among other things,
that FEMA simplify and streamline the disaster assistance
process for survivors;

in 2019, GAO found that officials from entities that partner
with FEMA reported challenges following the 2017 hurricanes
providing assistance to individuals who are older or who have
disabilities. GAO recommended that FEMA revise its application
process to better serve survivors with disabilities.
FEMA is taking actions to address many of these recommendations.
GAO conducted a literature review as part of its preliminary work
and found limited research to describe recovery outcomes and specific
characteristics related to participation in the six recovery programs
in its review. However, some studies and stakeholder perspectives
provided insight. For example, a study of counties in one State found
greater levels of flood mitigation in communities with larger tax
revenues and greater budgets for emergency management. In addition,
officials representing States said small towns and rural areas may lack
resources to contract for disaster recovery services. Similarly,
representatives from voluntary organizations said that conditions of
socioeconomic vulnerability--such as lower-income households or
homelessness--may present barriers to participating in Federal recovery
programs.
GAO's preliminary work found that the six Federal recovery programs
in GAO's review have taken some actions that could help officials
identify and address potential access barriers and disparate outcomes.
However, programs lack key information--data and analysis--that would
allow them to determine if access barriers and disparate recovery
outcomes exist. Moreover, the programs have not taken action to
determine: (1) What data they need to support this kind of analysis and
(2) sources and methods to obtain those data when the programs do not
already collect them, including overcoming key challenges. GAO will
complete its evaluation of the areas above and issue a final report in
the coming months.
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Katko, and Members of the
committee: Thank you for the opportunity to discuss our past work on
Federal efforts to ensure equity in various disaster recovery programs.
Each year, disasters affect hundreds of American communities and cause
billions of dollars of damage. According to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA)--the agency that facilitates the coordination
of recovery support at the National level--too many disaster survivors
face barriers in accessing disaster assistance programs and resources
to support their recovery. Specifically, according to FEMA, those
living in low-income neighborhoods, communities of color, people with
disabilities, older adults, those with language barriers, and those
living in rural and isolated areas face such barriers. Disaster
recovery, as described in the National Disaster Recovery Framework, is
a complex process for individuals and communities.\1\ According to the
framework, one critical aspect of Federal assistance contributing to
successful individual and community outcomes is the extent to which
individuals and communities can access the assistance they most need.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The National Disaster Recovery Framework outlines the strategy
and doctrine for how the whole community--including individuals and
communities, the private and non-profit sectors, and all levels of
government--builds, sustains, and coordinates delivery of recovery
capabilities. Department of Homeland Security. National Disaster
Recovery Framework, 2d ed. (Washington, DC: June 2016).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
My testimony today is based on preliminary observations from a
forthcoming report on Federal efforts to identify and address potential
access barriers and disparate outcomes, which is currently at the
agencies for comment. It also discusses prior GAO work issued from May
2019 through October 2021 and recommendations related to various
Federal recovery programs and vulnerable populations.\2\ Specially,
this statement discusses: (1) Preliminary observations on available
research on recovery outcomes and participation in select Federal
recovery programs; (2) preliminary observations on Federal recovery
program actions to identify and address potential access barriers and
potential disparate outcomes; and (3) our prior work related to select
Federal recovery programs and vulnerable populations and
recommendations to strengthen these areas.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ GAO, Disaster Assistance: FEMA Action Needed to Better Support
Individuals Who Are Older or Have Disabilities, GAO-19-318 (Washington,
DC: May 14, 2019); Disaster Assistance: Additional Actions Needed to
Strengthen FEMA's Individuals and Households Program, GAO-20-503
(Washington, DC: Sept. 30, 2020); and FEMA Flood Maps: Better Planning
and Analysis Needed to Address Current and Future Flood Hazards, GAO-
22-104079 (Washington, DC: Oct. 25, 2021). We currently have a review
under way looking at Federal actions to identify and address potential
access barriers and disparate outcomes. We plan to issue a report on
our findings in December 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For the forthcoming report on access barriers and disparate
outcomes, we examined six Federal programs: FEMA's Individual
Assistance and Public Assistance programs, National Flood Insurance
Program, and Hazard Mitigation Grant Program; the Small Business
Administration's (SBA) Disaster Loan Program; and Housing and Urban
Development's (HUD) Community Development Block Grant Disaster
Recovery. We conducted a literature review of research that examined
participation in or recovery outcomes related to these six programs.
To obtain perspectives on recovery challenges for vulnerable
socioeconomic or demographic populations, we also interviewed disaster
recovery stakeholders from voluntary organizations; State emergency
managers; organizations that represent local governments; and
organizations representing Tribes and Tribal emergency management
groups. We also interviewed program officials to understand the actions
they took to identify and address access barriers and disparate
outcomes and to obtain their perspectives on related challenges.
For our previously-issued reports and recommendations on which my
comments are based, we reviewed FEMA and SBA documents, including
policies, procedures, and guidance for disaster assistance programs and
flood mapping efforts; analyzed FEMA data on disaster assistance and
flood mapping efforts; and interviewed officials from FEMA, States,
territories, and representatives of nonprofit disability organizations
to understand challenges in providing assistance to individuals who are
older or have disabilities. More detailed information on the scope and
methodology for our past work can be found in each of the issued
reports listed in enclosure 1.
We conducted the work on which this statement is based in
accordance with generally accepted Government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
background
Our review included six Federal recovery programs with historically
large amounts of disaster-specific obligations:
1. FEMA's Public Assistance.--This program reimburses State, local,
Tribal, and territorial governments and certain types of
nonprofit organizations for the cost of disaster-related debris
removal, emergency protective measures to protect life and
property, and permanent repair work to damaged or destroyed
infrastructure.
2. FEMA's Individual Assistance.--This program provides financial
assistance and, if necessary, direct assistance to eligible
individuals and households who, as a direct result of a major
disaster or emergency, have uninsured, or under-insured,
necessary expenses and serious needs and are unable to meet
such expenses or needs through other means.
3. FEMA's Hazard Mitigation Grant Program.--This program is
designed to help communities reduce the risk of property and
infrastructure damage as well as injury and loss of life to
populations impacted by disaster events. The program funds a
wide range of hazard mitigation projects, generally executed by
State, local, Tribal, or territorial governments.
4. FEMA's National Flood Insurance Program.--The purpose of this
program is to protect homeowners from flood losses, minimize
the exposure of properties to flood damage, and alleviate
taxpayers' exposure to flood loss.
5. HUD's Community Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery (CDGB-
DR).--Grant recipients use this flexible funding for a range of
efforts to help rebuild their communities and mitigate future
disaster risk.
6. SBA's Disaster Loan Program.--SBA makes direct, low-interest
loans to help businesses, nonprofit organizations, homeowners,
and renters repair or replace property damaged or destroyed in
a Federally-declared disaster.
The National Disaster Recovery Framework outlines the strategy and
doctrine for how the whole community--including individuals and
communities, the private and nonprofit sectors, and all levels of
government--builds, sustains, and coordinates delivery of recovery
capabilities. The framework advises and specifically charges Federal
recovery partners to identify and remove social and institutional
barriers to program participation, whether intentional or
unintentional. It calls on the Federal Government to understand how its
actions affect the overall progress of recovery efforts and to measure
progress toward recovery holistically.
The Federal Government has acknowledged a need for a focus on
equity. For example, in January 2021, the President issued an Executive
Order that calls for the Federal Government to pursue a comprehensive
approach to advancing equity for all, including people of color and
others who have been historically under-served, marginalized, and
adversely affected by persistent poverty and inequality.\3\ Further,
the Executive Order directs Federal agencies to assess whether under-
served groups face systemic barriers in accessing opportunities and
benefits available pursuant to certain programs and to produce a plan
for addressing any identified barriers to full and equal participation
in the programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Exec. Order No. 13985, Advancing Racial Equity and Support for
Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government, 86 Fed. Reg.
7009 (Jan. 25, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
research on recovery outcomes and participation in federal disaster
recovery programs
The body of literature we reviewed, as part of our preliminary work
for our forthcoming report, discussed socioeconomic and community
resilience outcomes related to the six Federal recovery programs in our
review. It also described individual, community, and program
characteristics with potential relationships to participation in the
programs. However, limitations--such as the challenge of isolating the
effects of a single program and the limited number of findings that
cross different disasters and programs--prevented us from drawing
definitive conclusions about these relationships. Disaster recovery
stakeholders also described some challenges associated with
participation in the programs.
Our preliminary analysis of the research suggested that
socioeconomic outcomes of disaster assistance for individual programs
may be uneven across communities. For example, a descriptive study of
communities in Louisiana and Mississippi 5 years after Hurricanes
Katrina and Rita found that low-income neighborhoods were more likely
to receive CDBG-DR assistance and to still have damaged structures even
after receiving the assistance.\4\ Our preliminary analysis of the
research also suggested that select Federal programs may enhance
community resilience, prevent flood-related fatalities for vulnerable
residents, and contribute to the survival of small business
establishments. For example, one study found that counties with higher
rates of participation in the National Flood Insurance Program
experienced fewer fatalities from flood events.\5\ Another study found
that for every additional dollar spent on disaster loans per
establishment in a county, 4 small businesses survived in the wake of
extreme events.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Jonathan Spader and Jennifer Turnham, ``CDBG Disaster Recovery
Assistance and Homeowners' Rebuilding Outcomes Following Hurricanes
Katrina and Rita,'' Housing Policy Debate, vol. 24 no 1 (2014): 213-
237.
\5\ Jungmin Lim and Mark Skidmore, ``Flood Fatalities in the United
States: The Roles of Socioeconomic Factors and the National Flood
Insurance Program,'' Southern Economic Journal, vol. 85, no. 4 (2019):
1032-1057. Administered by FEMA, the National Flood Insurance Program
makes insurance available to residents of approximately 23,000
participating communities, who pay premiums, to help with recovery
after a flood-related loss.
\6\ Meri Davlasheridze and Pinar C. Geylani, ``Small Business
vulnerability to floods and the effects of disaster loans,'' Small
Business Economics, vol. 49 (2017): 865-888.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our preliminary analysis of the research and recovery stakeholder
interviews identified potential socioeconomic, demographic, community,
and programmatic characteristics that may be related to participation
in at least one Federal recovery program. For example, our preliminary
analysis of the research suggested that better-resourced communities--
that is, communities with more staff, funding, time, Government
revenue, capital outlay, or budgets for emergency management--
participated more actively in select Federal programs. One study of
counties in North Carolina that illustrated this condition found that
higher levels of local government tax revenue, greater budgets for
emergency management, and population density all had a positive
relationship with flood mitigation activities.\7\ Similarly, officials
representing States said larger cities can hire a third party to manage
disaster recovery, but small towns and rural areas may lack resources
to contract for disaster recovery services. In addition, an official
representing Tribal nations told us that not all Tribal nations have
sufficient funding to develop emergency management departments, which
can be a barrier to accessing Federal resources. Moreover,
representatives from voluntary organizations said that conditions of
socioeconomic vulnerability--such as lower-income households or
homelessness--may present barriers to participating in Federal recovery
programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Jingyuan Li and Craig E. Landry, ``Flood Risk, Local Hazard
Mitigation, and the Community Rating System of the National Flood
Insurance Program,'' Land Economics, vol. 94, no. 2 (2018): 175-198.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These findings align with and highlight concerns expressed by the
National Advisory Council. This council, which advises the FEMA
administrator on all aspects of emergency management, reported in
November 2020 that there is a potential for a compound effect on low-
resource communities if they face barriers to accessing funding for
preparedness and disaster resilience.\8\ Specifically, this report
stated that by perpetually assisting larger communities that already
have considerable resources, the smaller, less resource-rich, less-
affluent communities cannot access funding to appropriately prepare for
a disaster, leading to inadequate response and recovery, and little
opportunity for mitigation. We will complete our review of the areas
above and issue a final report in the coming months.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Department of Homeland Security, National Advisory Council
Report to the FEMA Administrator (November 2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
federal actions to identify and address access barriers and disparate
outcomes
Preliminary findings from our forthcoming report indicate that
within and across Federal programs, there are no systematic actions to:
(1) Ensure the availability and use of quality information to identify
potential access barriers or disparate outcomes or (2) establish
routine processes to address any identified access barriers and
disparate outcomes.
Recovery program officials from each of the three Federal agencies
that are responsible for the six recovery programs in our review--FEMA,
SBA, and HUD--described various ad hoc actions and early stage
initiatives that may help with identifying and addressing social and
institutional barriers. Removing such barriers is something the
National Disaster Recovery Framework calls for all Federal and non-
Federal recovery partners to do. However, our preliminary findings show
that the six large Federal recovery programs in our review lack data
and analysis that would allow them to identify potential access
barriers and disparate outcomes.
Further, the programs have not taken action to determine: (1) What
data they need to support this kind of analysis; and (2) sources and
methods to obtain those data when the programs do not already collect
them, including overcoming key challenges. For example, none of the six
recovery programs in our review collected and analyzed demographic data
from applicants specifically for this purpose. When officials described
collecting data in the application process, they did not do so with the
aim of identifying and addressing potential access barriers and
disparate outcomes; rather, they collected only data that directly
supported the implementation of their programs. At the same time,
although officials responsible for some of the FEMA programs described
having an idea of the data that are needed and taking some steps to
obtain it, they have not established a means to work systematically
through data needs either within their own programs or across the
programs.
Moreover, program officials described challenges to obtaining data
that would support high-quality analysis of potential access barriers
and disparate outcome, particularly for analyses that cross agency
boundaries. For example, FEMA and HUD officials who manage grants for
activities carried out primarily at the State and local level described
some challenges developing and using this kind of information, because
the relationships and decisions take place more at the State than at
the Federal level. Similarly, FEMA officials described challenges
navigating complex Government-wide privacy policies, which were
compounded for interagency data needs. These officials also discussed
challenges collecting data over time, because of difficulties with
long-term follow-up, particularly when they were not able to offer
incentives to stay engaged. Although some of the challenges are
daunting, until the agencies work together on strategies to address
them, they are unlikely to be resolved, leaving recovery programs
without key information to help identify potential access barriers.
While obtaining information through the collection and analysis of
data is necessary, it is only one step in identifying and addressing
potential access barriers and disparities in recovery outcomes. Our
preliminary findings also show that FEMA, SBA, and HUD have not
established processes to systematically and routinely identify: (1) The
characteristics of different groups who do and do not participate in
their recovery programs or (2) the relationship between their recovery
programs and recovery outcomes. Officials from all three agencies
explained that this is due, in part, to challenges associated with
collecting program participation data. Additionally, FEMA officials
said they faced challenges because the goal of ensuring equity in
administration of Federal programs has only recently received new focus
and attention. However, the lack of routine and interagency processes
leaves programs without assurance that they will address potential
access barriers, understand the relationship between program assistance
and outcomes, or help achieve equity goals.
We will complete our review on these issues and make
recommendations, as appropriate, in our final report, which will be
published in the coming months.
additional actions that could address the needs of vulnerable disaster
survivors
GAO has conducted prior assessments of Federal disaster assistance
programs that provide aid to individual disaster survivors and State,
local, territorial, and Tribal governments. While these programs are
not typically targeted toward only low-income or vulnerable
populations, our work has shown areas where improvements can be made to
help these populations.
We reported earlier this week that FEMA's flood mapping investments
for fiscal years 2012 to 2020 were lower for communities with higher
levels of social vulnerability and under-served populations than
communities with lower levels of social vulnerability and under-served
populations, other factors being equal.\9\ Specifically, we reported
that
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ GAO-22-104079. (Washington, DC: Oct. 25, 2021). We measured
``social vulnerability and under-served populations'' by using the
Social Vulnerability Index, developed by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention to help public health officials and local
planners better prepare for and respond to emergencies and disasters.
Social vulnerability is broadly defined as the susceptibility of social
groups to the adverse impacts of natural hazards, including
disproportionate death, injury, loss, or disruption of livelihood.
Social vulnerability considers the social, economic, demographic, and
housing characteristics of a community that influence its ability to
prepare for, respond to, cope with, recover from, and adapt to
environmental hazards.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

communities with higher levels of social vulnerability and
under-served populations had more unmapped miles or paper maps
in fiscal year 2012 than communities with lower levels of
social vulnerability and under-served populations;

communities with higher levels of social vulnerability and
under-served populations had a smaller increase in the
percentage of mapped miles that met FEMA's quality standard
metric than communities with lower levels of social
vulnerability and under-served populations;\10\ and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ FEMA's quality standard metric identifies the miles of map
studies that adequately identify the level of flood risk backed by
technical credibility and that do not warrant updating.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

communities with higher levels of social vulnerability and
under-served populations had longer cycle times between the
stages of FEMA's mapping process than communities with lower
levels of social vulnerability and under-served populations.
We recommended that FEMA consider ways to better use flood risk
data for prioritizing flood mapping investments toward priority areas,
such as vulnerable communities. FEMA agreed with our recommendation and
is planning actions to address it.
In September 2020, we reported that survivors of major disasters
faced numerous challenges obtaining aid and understanding the
Individuals and Households Program (IHP), a FEMA program that provides
housing assistance and other needs assistance to individuals affected
by a major disaster.\11\ We made 14 recommendations on additional steps
FEMA could take, some of which are designed to help disaster survivors
obtain assistance. Our findings and recommendations included the
following:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ GAO-20-503.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

We found that FEMA requires that certain survivors first
be denied an SBA disaster loan before receiving certain types
of IHP assistance. FEMA, State, territory, and local officials
said that survivors did not understand and were frustrated by
this requirement. We found that FEMA did not fully explain the
requirement to survivors and that its process for the
requirement may have prevented many survivors from being
considered for certain types of assistance, including low-
income applicants who are less likely to qualify for an SBA
loan.
We recommended that FEMA assess the extent to which its process for
determining applicants' eligibility for some types of IHP
assistance limits or prevents survivors' access to assistance
and that FEMA work with SBA to identify options to simplify and
streamline the disaster assistance application process for
survivors. FEMA agreed with this recommendation and officials
told us that a joint FEMA-SBA working group developed and
shared with agency leadership a draft options paper to address
the challenges we identified. In August 2021, FEMA officials
told us that FEMA leadership approved the option paper and
planned to implement it. We will continue to monitor full
implementation of this action.

We also found that opportunities exist to improve survivors'
understanding of FEMA's eligibility and award determinations
for the IHP; for example, clarifying that an ineligible
determination is not always final but may mean FEMA needs more
information to decide the award. We recommended that FEMA
identify and implement strategies to provide additional
information to applicants about how the agency determined
applicants' eligibility for assistance and the amount of
assistance to award. FEMA agreed with this recommendation and,
in August 2021, officials told us that due to software
limitations, FEMA is unable to include information about
verified damages in the agency's notification letters; however,
FEMA officials stated that the agency will continue a review of
the letters sent to applicants and plans to implement any
revisions by April 2022. We will continue to monitor FEMA's
actions in addressing this recommendation.
In May 2019, we reported that a range of officials from entities
that partner with FEMA reported challenges providing assistance to
individuals who are older or who have disabilities following the 2017
hurricanes.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ GAO-19-318.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

For example, officials said that many of these individuals
required specialized assistance obtaining food, water,
medicine, and oxygen, but aid was sometimes difficult to
provide. We also reported that aspects of the process to apply
for assistance from FEMA were challenging for older individuals
and those with disabilities and that FEMA did not provide
individuals clear opportunities to disclose disability-related
needs.
We recommended, among other things, that FEMA implement new
application questions to improve FEMA's ability to identify and
address survivors' disability-related needs. FEMA agreed with
this recommendation and implemented it in May 2019 by using a
revised application that asked directly if survivors had a
disability.
We also found that FEMA had taken limited steps to communicate the
agency's new disability integration staffing approach in the
regions to Regional Administrators and Regional Disability
Integration Specialists, who are critical to implementing these
changes. We recommended that FEMA improve communication of
applicants' disability-related information across FEMA
programs. FEMA did not concur with our recommendation. The
agency stated that it began a long-term initiative in April
2017 to improve data management--including a data analytics
platform--that will allow analysts, decision makers and
stakeholders more ready access to FEMA data. After completing
this initiative, FEMA expects that efforts to share specific
disability-related data will be much easier. Our
recommendation, however, was not solely focused on data system
changes, but also on needed communication improvements.
Therefore, we continue to believe that FEMA can improve this
communication through cost-effective ways, such as revising
guidance to remind program officials to review survivor case
files for disability-related needs.
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Katko, and Members of the
committee, this completes my prepared statement. I would be pleased to
respond to any questions that you may have at this time.
Enclosure I: Related GAO Products Previously Issued
GAO, Disaster Assistance: FEMA Action Needed to Better Support
Individuals Who Are Older or Have Disabilities. GAO-19-318. Washington,
DC: May 14, 2019.
GAO, Disaster Assistance: Additional Actions Needed to Strengthen
FEMA's Individuals and Households Program. GAO-20-503. Washington, DC:
September 30, 2020.
FEMA Flood Maps: Better Planning and Analysis Needed to Address
Current and Future Flood Hazards. GAO-22-104079. Washington, DC:
October 25, 2021.

Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Joseph for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES K. JOSEPH, VICE PRESIDENT FOR RESPONSE,
TIDAL BASIN

Mr. Joseph. Good morning, Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member
Katko, and the membership of this committee.
My name is James Joseph and I am the vice president of
response at Tidal Basin, a disaster management and recovery
firm based in Alexandria, Virginia.
I have been an emergency manager at the county, State, and
Federal level over the past 11 years, most recently as regional
administrator of FEMA region 5. I have had the pleasure of
working with many of you, both in my role at FEMA, as well as
in my current role at Tidal Basin, and it is an honor to speak
with you all.
I would also like to take a moment during this month of
October to honor all those that have been victim to, but more
importantly recovered, from breast cancer. Women and men suffer
from this disease and I wear pink today to honor them,
including my cousin, Sue, in North Carolina that beat breast
cancer. She is a beautiful and wonderful human being and her
strength is a source of courage to many.
The topic before us, ensuring equity in FEMA's disaster
preparedness, response, and recovery, has been spoken about for
years now and it is my hope that we continue to act and take
deliberate actions to help increase representation in the
emergency management profession, but also continue to build
equitable practices in recovering from natural or man-made
events.
As it relates to ensuring equity in disaster recovery,
there are several recommendations in my written statements and
actions we can take as a Nation to bring timely disaster
response and recovery not only to communities that need them
the most, but also to individuals and families that are
struggling to make ends meet daily, let alone when a
catastrophic disaster strikes.
It is important for us also to realize and recognize that
this is not just in the Federal level of disasters supported by
FEMA, but also for localized disasters that are managed by each
State or community. As such, there is responsibility to have
equitable recovery from disasters that State and local
governments have policies and programs in place that help
financially struggling communities, individuals with
disabilities, and those that face additional hardships during
times of disasters.
While State and local agencies bear the responsibility to
provide for their communities and residents, there are still
improvements that can be made at the Federal level as it
relates to distribution of funds after the President declares a
disaster.
Some of those recommendations in my written statement are
to streamline the application process for individual assistance
by eliminating the requirement to apply for an SBA loan prior
to FEMA authorizing a disaster claim, streamlining emergency
lodging services to allow individuals without traditional
credit or modes of transportation to relocate from homes more
quickly and allowing them to access lodging in their own
communities, re-instituting the Sheltering and Temporary
Essentials Program, or the STEP program, that allowed for
temporary emergency repairs while families remained in their
home versus needing to find alternate lodging, including
emergency shelters, as long as their home was safe to be
resided in.
Equally important is the need to build the pipeline and
provide promotional opportunities for individuals that mirror
our Nation's diversity. A few years ago I had the opportunity,
the honor of addressing nearly 200 individuals that before my
eyes raised their hands and denounced their birth citizenships
and pledged allegiance to these United States of America. As
one of the first people to welcome my now fellow citizens, the
look on their faces were both inspiring with pride and rich
with joy. In my address to them I shared how my parents, who
were in the audience that morning, came to this country some 50
years ago and one day sat in the same seats that they were in,
and that by God's grace and their hard work, in one generation
I was standing on the other side of the dais welcoming them. I
told them that their children can be anything that they want to
be--homemakers, business owners, doctors, lawyers, elected
officials, or even the President, but could they be the next
emergency manager?
Having been an emergency manager at the local, State, and
Federal level I was most often the only person of color in the
room. At the local and State level, there were few or no women
in leadership positions. Recently, there have been more
minority and female leaders in emergency management and I
applaud that, but we must still prioritize diversity and
inclusion in the hiring and promotion of individuals from all
backgrounds and all identities. If we are not deliberate about
diversity and weave into the very fabric of our local, State,
and Federal programs, this will never be achieved.
I championed programs to diversity while at FEMA and found
the red tape of the Federal hiring process to be the largest
obstacle.
I am also proud to work for Tidal Basin and our CEO Daniel
Craig, who with Chauncia's organization, IDIEMM, created the
first scholarship program for minority students wishing to
enter emergency management.
Solutions do not require years of additional studies or
months of deliberation on policy, it requires advocates at the
senior level of every agency to advise and guide leadership in
building and promoting a diverse work force.
As I conclude, let me say that we must do everything in our
ability to advocate for equitable programs, agencies, and
departments and to advocate for diversity and inclusion in
hiring and promotion. I feel that we should do so as if the
future of our profession depends on it, because in my opinion,
it does.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, thank you for this
opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Joseph follows:]
Prepared Statement of James K. Joseph
My name is James K. Joseph, and I am the vice president of response
for Tidal Basin Government Consulting based in Alexandria, VA. I have
held positions in emergency management, security, investigations, and
crisis management for over 20 years--10 years for a global corporation
and 12 at all levels of government.
In my opinion, diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) should not
just be a topic of discussion, it should be the very fabric by which we
operate as a country. A few years ago, I had the honor of addressing
nearly 200 individuals that before my eyes, raised their hands and
denounced their birth citizenship and pledged allegiance to these
United States of America. As one of the first people to welcome my now
fellow citizens, the look on their faces were both inspiring and rich
with pride. In my address to them, I shared how my parents, who were in
the audience that morning, came to this country some 50 years ago and
one day sat in the same seats they were in. And that by God's grace
alone, in one generation, I was standing on the other side of the dais.
I told them their children can be anything they want to be--homemakers,
business owners, doctors, lawyers, elected officials, or even
President.
But--could they be the next Emergency Manager? Having been an
emergency manager at the local, State and Federal level--I was most
often the only person of color in the room and at the local and State
level, there were few or no women. Recently, there have been more
minority and female leaders in emergency management across the private
sector and Government positions. However, it is still important for us
to ensure that we are a profession that builds the pipeline to
leadership positions that identifies with the diverse communities we
serve.
The following summarizes the thoughts of myself and my colleagues
at Tidal Basin on how we cannot only increase the presence of
minorities and all gender identities in emergency management leadership
positions, but also ideas on more equitable disaster recovery across
social and economically disadvantaged communities.
building the pipeline
While there have been many catastrophic incidents across the
country recently, and we know they will continue in the future--much of
America only sees the devastation and destruction of a natural or
human-made incident on TV or read about it in print. The first
introduction to emergency management that most will ever have, is the
unfortunate and stressful experience that disaster survivors face
during or after a disaster. They will interact with their local
emergency management team, county or State emergency management
officials, and non-profit organizations.
We must be deliberate about diversity. As the profession looks to
diversify leadership roles, promoting recruitment into the emergency
management profession not just in college programs, but in the K-12
grades are important. Agencies should not only look at colleges and
universities with formal emergency management programs, but other
emergency management and vocational training programs that tie into
programs that FEMA manages. For example, many junior and community
colleges have a variety of programs in environmental and utility
programs. These programs have a direct cadence to important roles
within emergency management programs such as environmental and historic
preservation and State or Federal public assistance damage assessment
or inspection.
From a Federal Government perspective, specifically my experience
as a FEMA Regional Administrator--there are limitations that prevent
Federal agencies from being able to provide opportunities to students
in college programs. When attempting to create opportunities for paid
internship programs, there are lengthy and cumbersome application
processes and documents required. While many Federal employees
themselves find the application process for positions and promotions
difficult to understand and follow, a college student should not be
expected to navigate that process. In addition, due to varying
criteria, the ability to be presented to an agency hiring official on
an official certification list for hiring consideration is also
difficult. Therefore, it eliminates students from gaining Federal
experience while in their college or university programs, but more
importantly, it creates a barrier to entry in the Federal Government.
If there was less ``red tape'' in the application, evaluation,
hiring, and onboarding process for many Federal agencies, I believe
there would be much greater success in bringing employees and interns
into Federal agencies. Furthermore, as previous reports have indicated,
the representation of minorities or females in leadership positions is
lower within FEMA compared to employees in non-management positions.
We must be deliberate about diversity. This occurs when we are
creating ways to attract, hire, and mentor people of all backgrounds
and identity. It doesn't require creativity to do so--it requires
dismantling the barriers to entry that exist and clearing a more direct
path to hiring. I am proud to work for an organization that lives and
exemplifies diversity as part of its culture through its hiring
practices and supporting scholarships to minority students entering the
emergency management field with our partners from the Institute for
Diversity and Inclusion in Emergency Management (I-DIEM). I-DIEM
recently announced the first recipients of the Julius Becton
Scholarship, named after Lt. General Julius Becton, who was the first
minority to head FEMA from 1985-1989. Tidal Basin sponsors this program
annually through corporate and personal donations from its CEO.
equity in disaster recovery programs
Equally important to hiring emergency managers that represent the
diverse communities we serve, and mentoring them into senior
leadership, is equity in disaster response and recovery programs.
Oftentimes, communities that have low to moderate income will be
adversely impacted by events due to their inability to not only respond
and recover the community, but also the financial constraint to
mitigate against natural disasters. Providing common-sense solutions
that streamline the ability for communities to receive mitigation
assistance, and individuals to receive disaster assistance, should be a
focus at all levels of government.
As mentioned above, this is not a burden that should be placed on
the Federal Government alone. Not all natural or man-made disasters are
significant enough to result in a Presidential Disaster Declaration
that brings Federal aid to a community or individuals. Rather, it is
often the municipality, county, or State that must respond to and
recover from disasters without assistance from Federal agencies. As
such, it is important for local and State governments to identify and
set aside funds for mitigation and recovery. However, it would be tone-
deaf to make such a statement across the board as if the financial
resources of the Nation are equal; we know they are not.
Cost Match Considerations
For all communities to have access to Federal funds for mitigation
and recovery, there must be changes made to the cost match required in
Federal grants. These changes should be based on the applicant
communities need as well as prioritization of areas that experienced
repetitive loss. We know from a variety of studies that for every
dollar spent in mitigation, there are savings that will be realized in
future disaster response. The Building Resilient Infrastructure and
Communities (BRIC) grant managed by FEMA is a game-changing tool in
preparedness and mitigation. Giving local communities the ability to
buy down the risk and prevent the repetitive cycle of damage and loss
saves money in the long term. However, many communities that experience
repetitive loss from disasters are unable to meet the cost match of
grants--both mitigation and disaster recovery grants. While over a
billion dollars were set aside for BRIC recently, more money will not
increase equitable disbursement of the funds, because many communities
that need to utilize those funds will not be able to meet the 25
percent match. This is not a race, gender, or functional access issue,
but an issue local governments face that transcend across all social
and economic status. The FEMA administrator should have the ability to
wave or eliminate cost match based on formula and strategy for
adjusting cost share based on need from both a financial lens, as well
as from the lens of mitigating repetitive loss based on where it has
already or continue to occur. We have seen over the years that
communities with high LMI (low to moderate income) populations will
struggle in recovery--both community and individual recovery, so
deliberate steps need to be taken to reduce or eliminate the cost match
based on need.
After a Presidential Disaster has been declared, FEMA's Public
Assistance program provides critical funding to help Government and
certain non-profits organizations in the form of reimbursements. As
with other grants, there is 25 percent cost match required. While that
match can be reduced based on the level of loss the State faces, the
thresholds set for each State are extremely high and usually only met
in catastrophic events. However, it does not take a catastrophic event
to cripple communities--the impact is severe in areas that do not have
a tax base to support strengthening infrastructure.
As there are many Federal agencies that provide disaster recovery
services and grants, coordination among these agencies to create a
process for States to provide global match for grants is recommended.
While a global match has been utilized across mitigation program such
as FEMA's Hazard Mitigation Grant Program, which buys out homes that
have significant repetitive loss, the review process for such projects
by multiple agencies is lengthy. As such, applicants that have applied
lose patience and drop out of the program or suffer other financial
losses while waiting for Federal approval. I have seen first-hand the
impact and heartbreak of homeowners that experienced devastating losses
while waiting for a buy-out. It is paramount that agencies come
together with the common goal of creating policies to streamline
efforts and coordinate reducing the complexity of such programs for
equitable recovery.
Individual Assistance (IA) Considerations
FEMA's Individual Assistance program should also have policies in
place that help streamline services to disaster survivors. Like I
mentioned above, those that have experienced loss during natural
disasters know first-hand the stress, emotion, and frustration that
comes with recovery. When disasters impact a family or individual, the
resources that provide support to kick-start recovery need to be
quickly administered and delivered. While the employees of FEMA and
other organizations have the disaster survivor in mind, their desire
and calling to assist survivors is often hampered by red tape within
the program.
The maximum funding available to individuals in an area covered by
a disaster declaration, if Individual Assistance (IA) has been declared
by the President, is around $36,000 for uninsured losses. Furthermore,
the number of individuals that receive the maximum amount is low, with
average IA grants of around $5,000. FEMA programs are not intended to
make an individual whole, and I do not disagree with that. How
assistance is delivered and the steps to apply for eligibility are
cumbersome, and often confusing to individuals who have never had to
apply for or be familiar with the program. Even still, it can remain
confusing for individuals that have experienced repetitive loss and
have applied for the program more than once. While insurance is the
best source of recovery and will provide higher cost recovery than even
the maximum allowable amount through FEMA IA grants, we must recognize
that due to multiple economic factors, there will always be a segment
of our country that can't afford insurance and is a risk they are
forced to live with.
The application process for Individual Assistance can be confusing
and frustrating. For anyone that has applied for disaster assistance in
the past, there are processes that for many do not make sense and adds
time to the determination process. For example, it has been a long-
standing policy that prior to being deemed eligible for an IA grant,
the disaster survivor must first apply for a loan via the Small
Business Administration (SBA). Even if the homeowner knows they are not
eligible for a loan--which is unfortunately those that have economic
hardships face, they are still required to apply for a loan, only to be
rejected, before they are eligible for an IA grant from FEMA. The loan
process requirement can easily be eliminated to expedite the delivery
of services to the survivor.
If an individual or family is displaced from their home, and if
emergency lodging has been requested by a Governor and approved, the
path to receiving the hotel assistance with limited finances can be a
long and arduous process. In an area affected by a disaster, there will
be survivors with insurance and/or financial means that are able to
secure a hotel room quickly. On the contrary, those without the
financial resources to secure a hotel room near their homes must first
apply for the assistance, await confirmation of eligibility, and then
find a hotel room. While this process takes time, the likelihood of an
individual or family without the financial resources to evacuate on
their own means that hotel rooms near their home may be unavailable.
Hotels may already be full of other evacuees oftentimes placing those
without means to evacuate on their own a significant distance away from
their home. Thus, the recovery process becomes more stressful as access
to begin recovery with clean-up and other repairs, if approved through
the IA program, an even lengthier process. This is exacerbated further
if the families evacuating do not have access to a vehicle or their own
transportation and need to rely on other modes of transportation,
including public transportation. Reform of the program to allow for
quicker access to hotels, which will result in closer evacuation
locations to their homes, is needed.
In many situations, being able to remain in their home while
repairs are being made, so long as it's safe to be in the dwelling, is
the best option for recovery. Not only will families remain within
their community and close to other services they may typically utilize,
but it allows them to start the rebuilding process without the perils
of distance and transportation access. In the past FEMA managed a
highly successful program called the Sheltering and Temporary Essential
Power (STEP) program. This program allowed families to live in their
homes while repairs were being made from damage due to a natural
disaster. This program provided emergency assistance for life-
sustaining needs such as emergency repairs to roofs, walls, and
electric and plumbing utilities. Due to some isolated misuse of the
program, STEP was suspended and has not been utilized in years.
However, the benefit to families being able to remain in their
community, where they have built-in support systems, is often the best
solution for temporary repairs concurrent to the IA application and
adjudication process. In addition, a secondary benefit of the STEP
program is that it reduces, and in some cases may eliminate the need
for local sheltering and feeding programs, thus saving on additional
disaster response and recovery expenses.
conclusion
Building a pipeline of emergency managers to lead programs,
departments, and agencies, as well as making disaster assistance more
equitable for our Nation will not occur overnight. However, there has
been significant discussion about diversity, equity, and inclusion
(DEI) for years, and it is time that we act. Local, State, and Federal
agencies have a wealth of research and studies available to them, and
we must be deliberate about DEI by building it into strategic planning,
policy, and programs. DEI is not and cannot be a temporary topic of
discussion but is something that we need to engrain in our minds and
actions. The face of our Nation, as it always has, continues to change.
Let us do everything in our ability--including creating DEI champions
in every department and agency that reports to senior officials to
continuously advocate for equitable programs, agencies, departments,
and delivery part of the fabric by which we operate. Let us do so as if
the future of this profession depends on it. Because in my opinion, it
does.

Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
I thank the witnesses for their testimony.
As usual, we will have questions. I will start the process
of questioning.
All of us who are Members of Congress have had or will have
some disaster in their respective community. For the most part
the majority of us will have areas of high-income, moderate-,
to low-income citizens. It appears those of us who have gone
through a disaster, that bar is somehow higher for working-
class individuals or individuals who are in rural areas than it
is for individuals in high-income or urban areas.
Dr. Peek, how would you suggest leveling the playing field
so that Americans who are facing disasters can feel that their
Government looks at them as an American, not as some member of
a particular class?
Ms. Peek. Thank you so much, Chairman Thompson, for that
question. I just want to acknowledge that I know your district
in particular has been struck low recently by hurricanes,
flooding, and several other disaster events. So just thank you
for holding this hearing today and, again, for that question.
So I think one of the first things that is most important
in terms of leveling the playing field is what is happening
today. So the fact that we are having this conversation and
shining light on the fact that low-income communities, people
of color, and other marginalized community members have the
hardest time accessing this aid and often times experience the
most prolonged and protracted recovery processes. So I think
that acknowledgment is first and foremost.
But second from there, I think some of the ideas that have
already been put forth by the other panelists are absolutely
vital. That until we have data available that allows us to
track and monitor the status of different communities and how
they are faring in disaster, we are going to have a very hard
time changing policies and programs that may be deepening these
inequalities. I think the data availability is absolutely
vital.
Then also keeping this focus on equity central throughout
all of our programs and policies.
Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
Mr. Currie, you talked about the data availability, I
understand that, but generally speaking don't we already
collect the data as an agency as we work through the disasters?
What data are we not collecting that we ought to be collecting?
Mr. Currie. That is a great question, sir.
So as you know--and I am trying not to get too technical--
but there are various factors that FEMA and the jurisdiction
consider when they are developing a damage assessment and
preparing the information that eventually goes to the President
to make a disaster declaration.
So several of those factors include things that should
account for the things we are talking about today, the income,
the unemployment, the poverty level, elderly population, the
disabled. The question becomes how good of a job do we do
during that process to make that justification. I think the
challenge right now, those factors are so--they are very vague
and it is up to the local jurisdiction and the State to come up
with that information. I think there are a number of options we
can look at, some of it in legislation, but also some of this
is in regulation and FEMA could change or other agencies could
change. For example, we could look to further quantify or
require more quantitative measures be included when we are
making an assessment of whether there needs to be a
declaration. That would factor in the poverty level, you know,
unemployment, all the things that we are talking about. Right
now, though, it is very vague.
Chairman Thompson. That is very troubling, the fact that
here we have communities that are suffering and we are caught
in the lurch between the lack of information by which those
individuals who are in this disaster position have really
nothing to complement their situation but their particular
situation.
So, Mr. Joseph, since you have been a practitioner, what
recommendation would say that we need to do so that vulnerable
populations cannot miss out on the particular resources that
are available to more affluent communities?
Mr. Joseph. Mr. Chairman, I think one of the criteria that
Mr. Currie spoke about is looking at the localized impact,
looking at what the level of impact is on that community. I
don't feel, having been a local emergency manager, a State
emergency manager, or even a Federal emergency manager, that we
always look at that because it is not easy to identify, it is
not data that is always collected. But even when it is
available, I feel far too often that we may just look at
threshold numbers, the dollar figures that are associated with
declaring a disaster.
As the FEMA original administrator, I advocated for
communities. I saw first-hand as a State and local emergency
manager what the impacts are on those communities. So I believe
that cued advocacy, as I mentioned for, even within the Federal
Government to look at what the communities are facing and look
at what the long-term impacts are, and does that community
truly have the ability to recover. In many cases they might
through State and local assistance, but in many cases they
don't. I think that is where the Federal Government can assist
further by looking at what those specific localized impacts are
in those communities and providing assistance where it is
needed, even if it is not through a Presidential declaration
but by other means of Federal assistance that could be
available from the multitude of agencies that have disaster
service and recovery programs.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
The Chair recognizes the Ranking Member.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate this very
important hearing today.
I just want to give a couple of quick examples before I
follow up with you, Mr. Joseph, on what you just said because I
completely agree with you.
There is a home in Syracuse, New York in a predominantly
African American community, $60,000 value on it. Because they
hadn't had a flood in over 100 years in that area, the Flood
Insurance Program did not mandate that home must have upwards
of a $3,000 a year in flood insurance had to pay for a premium,
which makes a house almost non-saleable and it just puts more
of a burden on an economically depressed area. I find it very
hard to believe that if you do a proportional amount that a $6
million beach house is going to be paying $300,000 a year in
insurance, which you would have to pay if it was proportional.
So I just think that the premiums are charging on these
low-income areas are not proportional to what they are paying
in the fancy areas. To me that is a form of discrimination and
it is something that is not right and something we need to look
at.
Second, I will give you an example of a town in my
district, not a high-income town, very low-income town
generally speaking, a rural area. They had 4 inches of rain in
about an hour and a half and it had a catastrophic flood for
that town. Millions of dollars of damage. Didn't qualify for
FEMA aid.
Then last I will note Lake Ontario shoreline had a
catastrophic flood in 2 out of 3 years--2 out of the past 4
years. Hundreds of millions of dollars of damage along the
shoreline to homes. A lot of these homes were blue-collar
people who work very hard their whole lives to get a little
piece of heaven on the lake and their homes were devastated by
the flooding. Didn't qualify for FEMA.
So, Mr. Joseph, to your point, I think that the formulas
that FEMA has right now tend to favor shoreline communities and
big-ticket disasters, what they see as big-ticket disasters.
But proportionately the town of Moravia had millions of dollars
of damage, which was more than their entire budget by far,
didn't qualify.
So I would like to speak to drill down a little bit more on
what you said, how we can fix this anomaly with specific
recommendations, not just discussions. What would you recommend
that FEMA do to change your formula structure? Because right
now it is really discriminating against lower-income
communities.
Mr. Joseph. Absolutely. Thank you, sir.
I think we see that across several States that have a large
urban area population in one portion of the State, such as New
York, such as the State of Illinois, where I served as a local
and State director, where the formulas that are used based on
the large population in one portion of the State impacts the
remainder of the State because of the threshold that needs to
be met.
So I don't believe that the threshold alone should be the
determining factor when making a decision or making a
recommendation to the president on a Presidential disaster
declaration. I truly believe that the localized impact needs to
have a significant weight in their process.
For example----
Mr. Katko. Yes, that I understand. I don't mean to cut you
off. I understand. But what specific changes do we need to do
in the law, us as legislators, to fix that problem? Not make so
it is option. If they make it, say, by law you must consider
these things. What things should we consider?
Mr. Joseph. Well, I think there are things that we can do
for rural communities when it comes to areas. For example,
Southern Illinois compared to Northern Illinois, their impact
is going to be significant. There is less tax base in those
communities. We have to look at not just what the total taxable
revenue of the entire State is, but we have to look at the
revenues that are in those individual communities. The ability
of those communities to recover is significantly lower because
of the lower tax base, and because in many States they don't
have State programs that can provide assistance in the absence
of FEMA assistance.
So looking at some of those localized areas, those
localized events, what the total taxable revenue for those
areas are, what the tax base is in those communities, and being
able to provide specific guidance for FEMA to look at that
separate from just the large urban areas that make up the
overall population of the State. It is something that should be
considered and that we could look at.
Mr. Katko. Thank you. I will note that I am wearing a pink
tie today for the very reason you are, so it is a very
important cause.
Mr. Currie, is there anything you want to add to that?
Mr. Currie. I mean I agree. If we are going to change this
problem, we are going to have to do something to the process
that the locality goes up through the State. Because, like Mr.
Joseph said, you know, a locality could be--I mean--your
district completely the opposite from Manhattan and lower New
York. So something is going to have to be done to change the
regulation, how we look at the locality and the specific impact
of that.
I will say that could be done in law. You know, you could
require FEMA to do that. A couple of years ago they did change
the factors for the individual assistance program. But FEMA--
that is written in the regulation. I mean they could do that
without a law as well.
Mr. Katko. Yes, but they are clearly not doing that. So
sometimes we need to give--mandate that they do that because
the discrimination and the unfairness continues and it
continues in my district. My district is very different than
Mr. Thompson's, but we are experiencing the same problems and
it is just not right and we have got to get it fixed.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
The Chair--Ms. Jackson Lee--the Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
for holding this very important hearing. I want to thank the
witnesses for their testimony today.
I would like to begin just by focusing my time on the
experiences of people with disabilities and older adults to
overlapping populations that are among the most vulnerable in
emergency situations, as you can well appreciate.
Mr. Currie, if I could start with you. I would like to ask
you about the 2019 GAO report that you reference in your
written testimony. You note that FEMA did not concur with GAO's
recommendations to better communicate disaster assistance
applicants' disability-related information across FEMA
programs. Instead FEMA argued that it was working on a long-
term project to improve data management which would help make
disability data more readily available--accessible I should
say.
So on that point, has FEMA since completed this long-term
process? If so do you believe that it has led to any
improvement in its communication of applicants' disability-
related information?
Mr. Currie. Yes, sir.
One of our major findings from that report was that when we
looked at the enrollment and registration process for
individual assistance we didn't see any granularity in the
questions that were asked to really obtain the type of
information they would need on disability to help tailor the
assistance to the individual that has the disability. So while,
you know, they said they were very committed to helping those--
you know, the disabled and others, if they didn't have the
information then they weren't going to be able to do anything
different than they were just doing for everybody else.
So since that time they have revised the intake process to
gather more information. They have also increased the resources
at the regional level on their disability coordinator positions
there to try to better integrate that into the assistance.
So they have made some strides. You know, I still think--
you know, like other populations we are talking about now, much
more can be done to help tailor the assistance and ensure that,
you know, people that need it the most are getting it.
Mr. Langevin. Agreed. Thank you for that comment.
Continuing on with you, Mr. Currie, if I could.
In addition to collecting and communicating the disability
status of survivors, response agencies need to be ready long
before disasters strike to accommodate disability-related
needs.
In August I reintroduced what I call the Ready For Disaster
Act, which would establish a network of centers to provide
training in technical systems to State and local governments
and expand the National advisory committee on individuals who
have disabilities in disasters to better represent the
disability community.
So, Mr. Currie, do you believe--you think that these
provisions would help address some of the deficiencies GAO
identified in its 2019 report?
Mr. Currie. Yes, sir. I think anything we can do to prepare
communities for these types of issues before-hand would be a
good thing. These things don't have to be a surprise when a
disaster happens. I mean most communities understand where the
folks are with the most disabilities reside. For instance, the
assisted living facilities and things like that. We know this
information. So we can use it before the disaster and plan
accordingly, then anything like that would be very helpful.
Mr. Langevin. Well, precisely my point and the reason for
introducing the Act. You are spot-on. Thank you for that
perspective and concurrence.
If I could turn to Dr. Peek for now. I would also like to
hear your perspective on the Ready For Disaster Act. In your
testimony you note that it is social forces that turn natural
hazards into human tragedies.
So my question is, in your opinion, would better access to
technical assistance for a disaster give agencies a more
inclusion of people with disabilities in planning from the get-
go, help reduce the pressure of these social forces?
Ms. Peek. Thank you for your sponsorship of the Ready Act
and support for the disability community in our country.
Absolutely, to the point about social forces turning
natural hazards into disasters. I think one concrete example of
that is that people with disabilities are not inherently
vulnerable to disaster. Instead, things in our social structure
and our built environment may render these populations
vulnerable.
So a specific example of that is curb cuts. When we put
curb cuts on streets, everybody can have access to the cut
sidewalks. When we don't have those curb cuts people don't have
access. So I think any policy or program that can advance the
kind of equitable vision for groups that are marginalized is
absolutely crucial.
Thank you.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
I know my time has expired. Let me just say I think your
framework to describe the interaction between natural hazards
and social forces really hits the nail on the head. Thank your
work and your perspective on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognized the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Higgins, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member,
for holding this hearing today. I thank our witnesses for being
here.
Today's hearing is very important to me because inequity in
Federal Government's disaster response is real and it has
deeply injured my district in Southwest Louisiana.
The impact of storms, it can be quite stunning to witness
and yet if that impact is not communicated and does not
resonate throughout the Federal Government and throughout the
Nation's media--this is when inequity is really suffered. On
August 27, 2020 Hurricane Laura made landfall in Southwest
Louisiana. In my 60 years as a Louisiana resident I have never
seen a storm hit that hard and that fast. Just 38 days later a
second category 4 hurricane made landfall in almost the
identical path.
Inequity in disaster response, my experience certainly over
the last year since Laura and Delta hit, is both political and
institutional. The media is a factor here because, you know,
most Americans never realized that Southwest Louisiana
experienced mass destruction and homelessness and horrors
because it was buried in other news. Louisiana's citizens are
known for--you know, we rely on our neighbors and our community
to recover and respond to hurricanes because quite frankly many
of us feel that the response from the Federal Government is not
to be trusted and cannot be relied upon.
Over a year after Hurricane Laura hit, Southwest Louisiana,
which to note for Americans watching and our witnesses here
today and my colleagues, it is a rural area, you know, a lot of
agriculture. It flies under the radar. This is where inequity
comes in in the Federal Government's response. Over a year
later many Louisiana citizens still displaced, businesses that
smashed, will never reopen, destroyed infrastructure, destroyed
homes. Many citizens have lost hope and given up. Thank god our
churches and volunteers have performed because the Federal
bureaucracies at the Executive level has certainly not
performed.
The Executive branch response to a disaster must be noted
here as we talk about inequity today. After Hurricane Katrina
the Governor of Louisiana requested that the President of the
United States request of Congress a supplemental disaster
response bill and within 5 days of Katrina President Bush
responded. But our Governor of Louisiana submitted an official
request to President Biden and it was waiting on his desk his
first day in office. That was in January of this year. But you
didn't get a response. You didn't get a request from President
Biden's Executive branch to Congress asking for a supplemental
disaster plan, which as my colleagues know, that is the way
things work. That didn't happen until New Orleans got hit.
So herein lies inequity. I am going to ask Mr. Currie to
respond to this because you stated, sir, you said we need to
define inequity. Well, let me just give us a nudge toward
reality here. Housing, primary housing should be our focus as a
Nation. Getting Americans back into some livable housing, their
primary house. Not their second or third house on the coast,
millionaires, et cetera. We need our rural folk, our poor that
are the most vulnerable to loss of housing, primary housing,
after a storm. We need those citizens back on their feet. We
need rural areas to not be ignored by the Federal Government
from the Executive level as opposed to urban areas and cities.
The President of the United States' response to the Governor of
a sovereign state's official request that that President
request of Congress a supplemental disaster plan--this is where
we need to focus our attention and make this thing work.
Mr. Currie, does the GAO consider the inequity that I just
described to be real? What would you suggest, sir, as a plan to
address it from both legislatively and through Executive
branch?
Mr. Currie. Thank you, sir.
Well, believe me, those of us who work in this area, I
understand the situation in Southern Louisiana very well. I
know folks in your district were not just those storms, but
still recovering from Hurricane Harvey and also the 2016
flooding in that area too. So it is just unbelievable what they
have had to endure during the last decade.
But to answer your question, so, you know, this issue of
when the President requests supplemental has been an issue. It
was an issue after Hurricane Sandy with the delay. I know it
has come up. Unfortunately, you know, we don't--we can't
control--we don't have a recommended--you know, anything about
the timing of when Congress should do that. I do know for most
of the big hurricanes you are talking about, there were
disasters declared, but there was some delay for some of the
later ones, sir.
Mr. Langevin. Disasters declare--let me just interject--
declarations, yes, sir----
Chairman Thompson. The gentleman----
Mr. Langevin. That happens very quickly, but the request of
Congress, could you just finish addressing that?
Chairman Thompson. The gentleman from Louisiana's----
Mr. Langevin. I beg that----
Chairman Thompson. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Langevin. I beg the indulgence of the Chairman for the
gentleman to answer the question.
Chairman Thompson. Well, if you be quiet, I am sure he will
answer the question, Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Yes, sir, yes, sir. I am sorry.
Mr. Currie. Well, sir, unfortunately, you know, at the GAO,
we, you know, we have made many recommendations about the
declaration process as you said, and they are declared. But,
you know, we cannot control how quickly Congress moves on a
supplemental appropriation.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey for 5
minutes, Mr. Payne.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Peek, your research has focused on the impact of
disasters on children. Can you discuss the unique impacts of
disasters on children, specifically from communities of color?
Also could you recommend to this committee the policies or
programmatic changes that should be taken to better address
these unique needs?
Ms. Peek. Thank you, Representative Payne, for asking a
question about children.
Children make up nearly one-quarter of our population here
in the United States, but children remain overlooked in
emergency management, in policy and in practice. Children, they
do not vote, they are not in the room when decisions are being
made about their lives and their livelihood, but they are
experiencing more and more disasters and coming of age in this
ever more turbulent world. So this is a crucial question as to
what are the impacts on children and especially children of
color in a disaster.
There is a growing body of research on this, and I am going
to give one specific example from the COVID-19 pandemic, which
I think really illustrates the inequalities and also those
social forces that turn hazards into massive disasters. During
COVID-19, according to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, we know that while children thankfully make up only
a tiny fraction of those who have perished in the pandemic, of
those children who have perished they are disproportionately
black, Latino, and from indigenous communities. Again, that
isn't about inherent vulnerabilities, it is about that these
children are more likely to live in crowded living conditions,
to have parents who are deemed essential workers who are
outside the home, and so forth.
So to your question of what are the specific policy actions
that we could take around children, Katrina there was actually
a Presidential commission that issued a report on children's
needs in disasters. There were over 80 recommendations in that
report. More than a decade later most of those policy
recommendations have remained unfulfilled.
So I think, Representative Payne, one of the most important
things we can do is return to those recommendations that have
already been made and to bring them to life, because there is
no time to waste. Children of today, again, are experiencing
more and more disasters and they have a role to play in
reducing that risk. We have a role to play in ensuring that
their needs are met.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Payne. Thank you for that answer.
As you can see, this issue has taken up most of my time,
but, you know, thank you.
It is for those reasons that I introduced the Homeland
Security For Children Act, which passed the House unanimously
in July. I hope the Senate quickly passes the bill and we can
send it to the President's desk.
But I want to thank the Chairman for his support throughout
my time on Homeland Security and my work around children and
disasters and the support of the Chair has been instrumental in
this work moving forward.
With that, I will yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Thompson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Tennessee, Ms.
Harshbarger.
Ms. Harshbarger. Thank you, Chairman Thompson and Ranking
Member Katko. I thank the witnesses for being here today.
I do have a couple of questions. The first is for Mr.
Currie. You know, I am looking over some of the stats here and
FEMA obligated $23.8 billion in public assistance funds to
Puerto Rico to help with the damages due to hurricanes in 2017
and earthquakes in 2019 and 2020. According to the GAO report
they have only spent $4.7 billion of this money. Evidently the
reason was that at Puerto Rican agencies staff were not
equipped to develop those projects that they needed to help
them recover.
I guess, first of all, why is the staff not equipped to
develop those plans? If this is what is happening in Puerto
Rico, where else is it happening basically?
Mr. Currie. Thank you, ma'am, for the question.
The situation in Puerto Rico is an unfortunate case study
about a jurisdiction--it could be any jurisdiction throughout
the country that has low-income population, more than 50
percent of the population is at or below the poverty level.
What we see in those kind of places is in general they lack the
staff capacity, resources, and experience that other places
around the country that don't have that problem. So think about
places like Houston or Florida or California that have the
resources and the experience.
Part of this is the way these programs work at the Federal
level, ma'am. So the way the FEMA public assistance process
works is it is a reimbursement program, which means it is meant
to reimburse the jurisdiction or the State for the cost of the
disaster. That works if a jurisdiction has the resources or the
ability to obtain capital up front. Puerto Rico doesn't. They
are in bankruptcy, they can't get loans, they can't take out
bonds, and they have very little wiggle room in their budget.
So to provide that up-front funding to start these projects and
then get reimbursed is very difficult. Because that is not the
way the process has worked typically, that is why.
In fact, ma'am, for permanent work, actually the amount
spent on real brick-and-mortar projects is way less than that.
Out of the $23 billion back in June we found that only I think
under $200 million had actually been spent. So if you go to
Puerto Rico and you are looking for shovels in the ground, you
are probably not going to find it.
Ms. Harshbarger. Well, then if that money has been
allocated is there a sunset for that money to be used or is
that just--they use it when they need it or they can find
people to do that?
Mr. Currie. So, yes, there is no sunset on that money once
it is obligated. I mean eventually--disasters can remain open
for a long time. Hurricane Katrina is still open. There are
still monies being, you know, being spent and finalized. So
they can stay open for 15 or more years. I mean you would
expect, though, in most disasters to see that drawdown happen a
lot faster.
For example, take another catastrophic disaster like Harvey
or Irma, or--you are going to see permanent work projects much
further along at this point than you would see in Puerto Rico.
The main reason for that is State and local resources.
Ms. Harshbarger. Yes. Well, that explains that then. They
need to--they need a program I guess to fix that to get some
things implemented to train these people in one way.
I have one other question for Mr. Joseph.
FEMA has tried to improve diversity in the work force
through many different mechanisms, but they still continue to
struggle to recruit women and minorities in the work force. I
guess I want you to talk a little bit about what steps FEMA is
taking to recruit these people. The reason I ask is even in my
district in East Tennessee, there was a fire station that
needed to hire 10 people and they recruited from all over the
country and they recruited Hispanics and women. Some of the
best workers they ever had, but they would never had done that
unless they went outside to recruit those and said no
experience necessary, we will do the training.
So if you could expand a little bit about that issue.
Mr. Joseph. Sure. Thank you, ma'am.
I cannot speak to what FEMA is doing currently today as I
left several months ago. But I can speak to programs that I
attempted to start.
No. 1--I know that time is running short--but we looked to
colleges, community colleges and city colleges when I was at
FEMA that were in minority neighborhoods, that had a large
census of black and Hispanic students. I worked with the
president of that college to create programs. They didn't have
a formal emergency management program, but to look at the
vocational programs they had that tied into the things that we
do on the public assistance side or the mission support and the
human resources side of the house, as well as environmental
historic preservation, the areas we need to focus on,
especially after a disaster. I tried to bring them in as
interns, but the red tape of the Federal hiring process stopped
me. I was unable to give those students opportunities in paid
internships because of the requirements that were set forth
already by OPM on how I can hire interns.
So though I identified a college, a president of a college
that wanted to sign an agreement with us and wanted to bring
their students to me, and I wanted their students to come to
me, I need to bring them into the pipeline before I can make
them the next director or administrator of an organization.
That is what I wanted to do. So that red tape was difficult,
but I think if we can find vocational programs that we can
build that pipeline of students from and then find promotional
opportunities.
We also created an executive leadership program in the
region made up of diverse employees of the Region 5 office and
we took them through all sorts of things that they wouldn't
have learned in their traditional job. We took them out of
their comfort zone and creative programs. It was even
recognized by the FEMA administrator at the time who came to
Chicago for their final cohort presentation.
So there is a number of things that we can do to build a
pipeline within the agency, but we need the help in the hiring
process to be able to get them in the door.
Ms. Harshbarger. Well, sounds like we need to cut some red
tape.
Chairman Thompson. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Jackson
Lee.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Michigan, Ms.
Slotkin.
Ms. Slotkin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So I am from Michigan. The issue that we have been
grappling with, particularly this summer, is being hit by
severe and repetitive flooding. In June in Southeast Michigan
it overwhelmed--the rains overwhelmed our infrastructure,
flooding basements, leaving cars submerged on highways across
vulnerable communities. We had our second 500-year flood in 2
years. In August the Huron River reached its fourth-highest
recorded level, flooding some of the smallest communities I
represent, lake communities and rural areas, Livingston County,
for instance, Lake Orion. Then we had another burst of rainfall
in Orion Township in Oakland County, what we consider a 1,000-
year flood, in just in the past month-and-a-half. So this is
far from normal for us.
I went in September and visited Ore Lake in Livingston
County and heard directly from the residents there. I think
this is a question for Mr. Currie. You know, they described how
they did not have accurate information on the potential for
flood, on previous claims that were filed on flooding when they
were buying the home. That, in fact, under the National Flood
Insurance Program FEMA only shares information about claims on
that property when you are the owner of the home and only when
you request it. Buyers can ask sellers to verify claim if they
think about it, but there is no requirement for disclosure.
Can you talk to me about--you know, we have Carfax for cars
so that you know what kind of used car you are buying and the
history it has, can you talk to me about why it is that a buyer
of a home would not be able to understand the history of
flooding on a home?
Mr. Currie. Thank you, ma'am.
So on that specific question and what FEMA shares and what
the flood insurance companies, the contracts share, I can get a
detailed answer back to you on that process. I don't have that
on the tip of my tongue.
But what I can also tell you about this issue is a major
problem with the Flood Insurance Program is that many of those
properties that you are talking about were not in the special
hazard flood zone. This is a problem we are seeing around the
country. Places are flooding that never flooded.
Ms. Slotkin. I know.
Mr. Currie. Rain events are causing flooding in places
where there has never been flooding. So they are not seen as
high-risk areas, so they are not ``in the system.'' I think
that is one big problem. We just issued a report on Monday
basically talking about the flood mapping process that FEMA
doesn't take into account future conditions as much as it
should. Because calling these 500- or 1,000-year floods frankly
is just--it is just not helpful anymore, because these are
every year floods, not 500-year floods.
Ms. Slotkin. Yes. So thank you. I think certainly with the
increased number of storms and increased veracity of those
storm--or ferocity of those storms, we should certainly take up
a deep dive look on this here in the committee.
We also talked about how disadvantaged many of our rural
communities are when they apply. The overlapping disadvantage
that I saw was it seemed like you had to have internet in order
to property engage with FEMA, even if you were in a flood zone.
You know, a lot of our rural communities just do not have
access to broadband internet. One out of 10 families in one of
my counties has no access.
So can you talk about how one is supposed to engage with
FEMA if they don't have the internet?
Mr. Currie. Very difficult because most FEMA enrollments at
this point for individuals go through their app or the
internetdisasterassistance.gov. The second-most cases are
through the phone. But as we all know, that is not a fun
process. I think the average wait time for the phone is well
over an hour.
Then the third option is to visit disaster centers in
person, which may not be close to somebody's house. In the
COVID environment I think has become even more difficult.
So there is absolutely no question if you don't have good
internet access, applying for disaster assistance would be very
painful.
Ms. Slotkin. So in my remaining time, if you had just one
thing you could do that would have the most outsized impact on
helping in particularly rural communities get better treatment
and consideration from FEMA? What would it be?
Mr. Currie. I think at this point much more tailored
assessment of the localized need, which is what we talked about
earlier in this hearing. You know, like for instance, in your
State, assessing a very rural community much differently than
you are going to assess a suburb in Detroit. It is necessary if
we are ever going to be able to tailor the assistance to these
areas any better. Because the way it is done is it is pretty
much lumped all within a State into one package. As we know,
and we have talked about, you know, all areas are not the same.
Ms. Slotkin. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Clyde from Georgia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Chairman Thompson.
We all saw the devastation that Hurricane Katrina had on
New Orleans in 2005. It took years for that area to recover.
Chairman Thompson. Excuse me. Yes, the clock is. Go ahead.
Thank you.
Mr. Clyde. OK. All right. It took years for that area to
recover and we all learned many valuable lessons in mitigating
the effects that disasters can have on communities, especially
with issues pertaining to infrastructure resiliency.
After Hurricane Katrina New Orleans made it a priority to
work with the Army Corps of Engineers to address issues in
their levy systems. The steps taken by the City and the Army
Corps of Engineers helped mitigate the damage of Hurricane Ida
when it made landfall at the end of August of this year. I am
pleased to have 3 companies in my district that helped to
strengthen the levy system of New Orleans, TenCate
GeoSynthetics located in Pendergrass, Georgia produced several
high-strength polyester products to reinforce the levy.
Patterson Pumps, located in Stephens County, Georgia,
manufactured the pumps for the levies. ABB Motors, located in
South Hall County, Georgia, produced the motors that powered
the Patterson pumps, electric motors that are designed to work
when completely submerged under water. I am proud of the work
of these companies, what they did to help preserve New Orleans
after Hurricane Ida.
I hope that we can continue to learn from these disasters
and strengthen our capability to eliminate the vulnerabilities
in our Nation's infrastructure. I am sure that TenCate, ABB,
and Patterson will continue to play a valuable role in that
mission.
Now I have a question for Director Chris Currie.
Sir, I know first-hand the many risks that come with owning
a small business. As a small business owner for over 30 years,
I have had to plan for every possible scenario in order to just
keep my doors open. I also understand the great value small
businesses provide in helping a community recover from a
disaster.
Director Currie, in your testimony you highlight that for
every additional dollar spent on disaster loans per
establishment in a county, 4 small businesses survived in the
wake of extreme events. Can you talk a little bit more about
GAO's preliminary finding that select Federal programs may
contribute to the survival of small business establishments,
sir?
Mr. Currie. Yes, sir.
I mean you hit the nail on the head. I mean the whole
purpose of these programs. Particularly I think you are
referring to the Small Business Administration Disaster Loan
Program, is to ensure that no business goes under water because
of a disaster or because of the loss of revenue of a disaster.
So it is a cascading domino effect. If businesses go under
water then individuals lose employment, and it is just dominoes
from there in a community. So, absolutely, they have a huge
benefit.
Now, the concerns that we have had recently in our work is,
No. 1, you know, is everybody getting access to these and is
everybody applying that could get access to them. One of the
things we see in these programs is that they are very, very
complicated and there could be built in disincentives to
applying for these programs. For example, some people that want
assistance may not want to get a loan, they don't want to apply
for a loan. They just want grant assistance, and so they may
not apply. So I think these are some of the complexities that
we have to look at.
Mr. Clyde. Well, thank you. Because we know that small
businesses are definitely the backbone of America. When small
businesses have problems, then America has problems.
Now, as follow-up question to that, does your report
examine how the survival of those small businesses impact the
community's efforts in rebuilding?
Mr. Currie. Sir, it doesn't dive into that or quantify
that, but it is well-accepted that, you know, the businesses of
the community are critical, not just for employment but for the
tax revenue of a community. If businesses go under then they
lose tax revenue and they lose the locality and the
jurisdiction's ability to be resilient and prepare and respond
to events. So it is really a domino effect.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you very much. I appreciate that
information.
With that, I yield back, Chairman Thompson.
Chairman Thompson. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from
Texas for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, thank you so very much for
your kindness and of course for the timeliness of this
important hearing. To the Ranking Member, I have enjoyed my
time on this committee, not because we have faced disasters and
terroristic acts, but because we have the greatest opportunity
to help people in their desperate time of need.
Let me thank all the witnesses. I think I have been, since
coming to the U.S. Congress, in every storm on the Gulf Coast
and beyond. Been to Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, was
on the ground at Hurricane Katrina, stayed in the Astrodome--
not the Astrodome, the Superdome--different locations. But I
have been in the Astrodome when the Hurricane Katrina survivors
came from that storm-ridden city and helped them be comforted
and to do what we could as Houstonians. Thank everyone for all
of their support for us during Hurricane Ike and Rita and
Hurricane Harvey, which devastated my Congressional district.
So this issue of equity is crucial. I still meet
constituents with blue tarps on their roofs and the devastation
of Hurricane Ida is still painful.
Let me quickly ask the question about the reform of FEMA,
which I think is one of the greatest agencies. But I have
introduced in the past Congress H.R. 3060, which I intend to
work with the Chairman and the Chairman of the subcommittee on
this issue again. Let me share with you some of the aspects of
it and have your comments.
It makes permanent the FEMA Office of Disaster Response and
the FEMA Office of Disaster Recovery, creates an ombudsman for
each office to assist survivors and victims which feel left
behind, even with the great work of those FEMA persons on the
ground, establishes a new National disaster medical triage
capacity, an incident medical recovery and management team to
determine best practices for implementing advanced trauma life
support capabilities affecting medical evaluations, establishes
a program to provide education and job training, focuses on the
CERT teams, establishes and creates an office of ombudsman to
work within the agency to create equity and access--what we are
taking abut here--provides for accurate reporting on deaths and
missing persons,--which we fought for during Hurricane Katrina,
to get the number of deaths and initially we couldn't get
anything--collect data and reports on effective casework
management so that people are followed all the way through,
help homeowners who in the past were left out of the full
benefit of Federal Government disaster partly because of the
home ownership connection that they would ask for.
So helping FEMA get its hands around how to deal with
disasters I think is crucial in the equity question. So I would
appreciate, Dr. Peek, Ms. Willis, and our GAO commenting--
anyone else can as well--but, Dr. Peek, can you comment on the
framework of helping to reform FEMA?
Thank you. My time is short. Dr. Peek.
Ms. Peek. Thank you. Can you hear me, Representative
Jackson Lee?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yes. Yes.
Ms. Peek. OK, thank you.
So first just acknowledging the number of disasters that
have hit the people in your district and your leadership to
bring survivors to the table is absolutely critical. We know
that often times even when our aid providers have the best of
intent, if we don't have the voices of survivors at the table
this is when things can go badly awry. So I think your idea to
integrate survivors into the work that is happening and to
ensure that they have a voice in all that is happening is
absolutely vital.
In the interest of time I am going to turn this over to Ms.
Willis right now.
Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much.
Ms. Willis.
Ms. Willis. Yes, thank you so much.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Then Mr. Currie. Yes, thank you, Ms.
Willis.
Ms. Willis. Thank you.
I think that is a great point. I think anyone could support
the reform of FEMA based on the tenets that you have provided.
I think it is very important, as Dr. Peek said, that we
acknowledge the voices of the people that have been ignored for
so long. Right now there is a disconnect. Our organization
deploys equity response teams to disaster locations so that we
can ground troop and hear from disaster survivors. That is
something that I believe would be very beneficial for FEMA to
also employ.
Also I think it is important that we understand that many
of the policies that FEMA operates with are inequitable and
must be revised. They are not--they were not created with
equity and so the outcome is inequitable. It is just that easy
to really re-frame and understand. Once we change the policies
we will see better outcomes. Right now the policies have to be
changed.
I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Ms. Willis. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. GAO? Sir.
Mr. Currie. Yes, ma'am.
I think all of those ideas sound like good things to do. I
agree with Ms. Willis. I think, you know, this lens of equity
is new in terms of--not the problem, but this lens of looking
at all the programs through equity is new. So it is going to
take a top-down approach by FEMA in all of their programs, not
just little things here and there. They are going to have to
look from top to bottom at these programs and find every place,
you know, from their policies, their strategies, all the way
down to mechanical issues like how are questions asked in the
enrollment, to address some of these issues.
I know that they get that and taking some time, but it is
not going to be easy and it is going take them a while to
figure this out. So they need to do that and then we need to
come up with a way to measure that we did what we wanted to do.
That is the other difficult piece.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much, Mr. Chairman, for
the time. Thank the witnesses for their very astute testimony
today. Thank you again to my colleagues.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr.
Guest, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guest. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Willis, in your written testimony on page 1 there at
the bottom you say the declaration process under the Stafford
Act limits the assistance to individuals, families, and
communities in need with major disaster declarations lying in
the hands of partisan politics and State-administered funding
support. Then you list our home State of Mississippi as an
example.
I just ask, if you would, could you please expand upon when
you are talking about the fact that the role that partisan
politics plays in disaster relief and the interplay that you
see between those two.
Ms. Willis. Absolutely. I think that is a fantastic
question. I think that we must understand and address the
politics that comes into play after a disaster.
Disasters are about people and should not be about
politics. When people are suffering and going through the worst
times of their lives, it is not the time to decide whether or
not you are going to help them based on their political
affiliation. Unfortunately that is what we have seen and what
we continue to see in disasters. Many today have already
described that their location, their jurisdictions were denied
assistance for Presidential declarations and they felt that it
was probably partisan. This is something that occurs and we
must address the humanity of disaster. We must address the fact
that in places like Riverdale, Mississippi where the Government
decided to not pursue disaster funding for those who were most
impacted by flooding events. We must address that and
understand that there are impoverished communities that do not
have a voice. When the local emergency managers and the
Governors or government of the State do not acknowledge the
needs of those who are most vulnerable and do not have a
platform to receive and request assistance, there is a larger
divide and gap in equity that is created. Also their needs and
ability to recover in a timely manner is impeded.
Thank you.
Mr. Guest. Let me ask you specifically, because you cited
here in your written testimony that following Hurricane Ida
that counties--and you include Wilkinson County, Pike County,
and Amite County--that they suffered significantly. Again you
seem to cite that there were partisan politics that played into
either the delay or the lack of disaster relief for those 3
counties. Particularly could you share with me whether that was
partisan politics on a State level, was that local level? Where
was the disconnect, where was the partisan politics as it
relates specifically to the 3 counties that you list there in
your example so that we can help address that in our home State
of Mississippi?
Ms. Willis. Yes. You know, that is an excellent question.
As I mentioned before, our family is from Mississippi, and
so we have a very personal connection to the people and their
experience. One thing that we need to be clear on is that many
times vulnerable communities are not receiving the amount of
preparedness or mitigation funding that they are due. Post-
disaster, the resources that come into those communities can be
impeded by the decisions of local Government agencies. That is
something that has been proven and that is something that must
be addressed. I believe that by modifying the Stafford Act and
the process for making declarations and the process for
requiring those very distressed residents to take pictures, to
fill out complex applications is at the heart inequitable. That
must be something that we consider as we make modifications to
these policies to make them more equitable. Without that
equity, we will continue to see disproportionate impact and
delayed recovery.
So those areas that we mentioned definitely must receive
more outreach and equitable assistance.
Mr. Guest. Well, specifically as it relates to those 3
counties, because those are 3 counties that I serve in the
Third Congressional District, is it the partisan politics? Is
that local? Is that something that I need to address with local
leaders? Is that partisan politics on the State level? Is that
something I need to be addressing with MEMA? So I am just
trying to get specifically as it relates to those 3 counties
that you listed in your example where that partisan politics
lies so that I can have the opportunity to try to address that.
So, again, as it relates to those counties, what level do
you see where the partisan politics is affecting disaster
relief to those citizens?
Ms. Willis. I would suggest that we look at all levels. I
think on-going issues such as denial of funding, denial of
recovery assistance, and the fact that many of those counties
were not able to receive assistance, even post-Ida and during
the storm in June. We need to look at why they have been denied
funding. Those are on-going issues that must be addressed at
every level. It is not just the county, it is not just the
State, we need to look at how the counties, the local level is
coordinating with the State and the Federal Government as well.
All levels, sir.
Mr. Guest. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, my time is up. I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Greene,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Greene. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I greatly
appreciate the opportunity to pose a few questions.
I also would like to thank the staff for the excellent
intelligence provided so that I may be able to pose the
question.
Mr. Chairman, I have spent most of my adult life fighting
invidious discrimination, not because I wanted to or chosen
this as my mission in life, it is because I have found myself
in positions where I have had an opportunity to make a
difference and I have tried to do so. Today is a continuation
of this effort.
I want to talk about racial disparities. In zip codes with
more Black Americans compared to predominantly White areas,
Black neighborhoods had a lower rate of securing an inspection,
prior likelihood of best assistance being denied without an
explanation, and less assistance when awarded. A 2019 study
found that FEMA grants were less likely to be awarded to
survivors who lived in communities with more racial minorities,
contributing to almost a 40 percent increase in bankruptcy
rates in these areas.
So, Director Currie, has FEMA studied the disparate impacts
of race on its programming?
Mr. Currie. No, sir, not comprehensively. This is one of
the problems we have identified in our work. FEMA has not
traditionally captured demographic information across all of
its programs. Their position in the past was that they were not
able to do that because of certain statutes. However, they--I
think that that approach and that view is changing under this
lens of looking at programs under equity and needing that data
and that information to better assess the impact of its
programs and where they are going.
So one of our findings is that, you know, we just need
better data and quality information first to better assess
these types of things and figure out what the challenges are.
Mr. Greene. Well, one of the challenges is always
acknowledging what the problem is. Have you found an
acknowledgment of structural racism in programming?
Mr. Currie. I think that FEMA and other agencies
acknowledge and--you know, we still saw this in the President's
Executive Order he issued in January that these programs have
not benefited under-served communities as much as others and
under-served communities have faced obstacles in getting the
assistance as well.
Mr. Greene. Dr. Peek, what does the research say about why
these impacts exist?
Ms. Peek. Yes, Representative Greene, thank you for this
leadership in this area.
I just wanted, to your prior question, to say some of the
various staffers and leaders at FEMA who I have worked with and
fellow social scientists have worked with, they are very aware
of these recent National-level analyses that have revealed
these racial inequities and I think are taking this very
seriously. But as Mr. Currie has emphasized time and time
again, this is going to be a long and challenging process that
is really going to take more data, more research partnerships
and so forth to further uncover those mechanisms that are
driving these inequalities that you are rightfully bringing to
light.
So what is driving this? The first thing I would say, there
is no single answer. As with any--as you well know--as with any
complex social problem that is rooted in our history and our
social structures, we can't just point to one thing and wave a
magic wand and fix these deeply-rooted issues. So that is why I
think FEMA putting forward the definition of equity, forming
the equity councils, working together with researchers and
community-based groups who this is their expertise, and
bringing that into the agency with the experts in the agency, I
think these are all crucial first steps. But they are just
first steps that are so important that we take, but we have a
long road to travel if we are really going to get to this
equitable outcome where the people who need the aid the most
receive the aid.
Thank you.
Mr. Greene. Well, I thank you. I have less than 20 seconds
left, so I won't follow up with another question.
I will simply say this, it really is time for all
Government agencies to take a hard look at what is happening
because these issues hurt people, many of whom don't have
lobbyists to help them. They need the assistance that is being
provided. My hope is that all of these agencies, especially
FEMA now will take a hard look at what is happening. I thank
you for being here today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Iowa, Ms. Miller-
Meeks, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
This is for Mr. Currie. Mr. Currie, as you know, Iowa is in
flood plains both between the Mississippi and the Missouri
River, the Des Moines River, and the National Flood Insurance
Program, which is administered by FEMA, offers insurance
policies for homeowners in areas that are prone to flooding.
The NFIP has been largely criticized because of communities of
color and lower-income areas are disproportionately less likely
to be covered.
Earlier this week the GAO published a report on the NFIP.
Based on the report, how can NFIP be improved?
Mr. Currie. Well, thank you, ma'am.
The issue with the National Flood Insurance Program--there
are so many issues to discuss. It is one of the reasons that
NFIP has been on GAO's high-risk list. It is a Federal program
since 2006. So, you know, I won't get into the issues with the
sustainability and the solvency of the program, but as you
probably know better than anyone in Iowa, the program is not
fiscally solvent. It doesn't take in enough revenue to cover
its costs. The premiums and the costs do not reflect actual
risk. So there are a number of structural challenges with the
program that Congress has worked over the years to try to
address.
But let me talk about the most recent report we did
specifically. Because what we looked at is the flood maps.
Those are extremely critical to this whole process because what
those do is they set up the special hazard flood areas by which
FEMA uses to determine who is in those and out and who has to
pay for flood insurance and who doesn't and then what their
premiums are.
One challenge that has happened is that the special hazard
flood area over the years is not reflective of actual risk.
Many areas outside of the special flood hazard area now
throughout this country flood and cause tremendous amounts of
damage. So the perfect example of that is what happened in West
Virginia few years ago. That was not a special hazard flood
area, those were not on any FEMA flood maps. So people are
flooded and often times they don't have insurance that will
cover flood.
So, you know, one of the things that we have found is FEMA
needs to do a way better job of encountering, you know, future
conditions into these flood maps if we are going to have an
actual picture of risk to decide where to help people for
flooding and what to do in that regard. We also found that FEMA
does not target flood mapping resources toward the most
vulnerable areas, which has been a problem over the years as
well. So, you know, we don't have good information about flood
risk in the most vulnerable areas of the country.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you. Do you think that FEMA's risk
rating 2.0 better enables lower-income communities to
participate in the program or is it a hurdle?
Mr. Currie. So I think risk rating 2.0 does a better job
because it is trying to get more granular data so they actually
have a good picture of flood risk for that property, a specific
property. But, you know, this gets into this bigger challenge
we have been talking about today. These programs are incredibly
complicated and very technical. So what does that require? That
requires State and local governments to have the resources, the
local capacity, and the resources to bring on technical experts
and consultants. So who is going to have those resources? It is
going to be higher-income areas and higher-income jurisdictions
and counties.
So this is just another example of where extremely
complicated processes and programs fall harder on more
vulnerable jurisdictions because they just don't--they don't
have the same level of capacity and resources.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. In the report it also examined equity
challenges at FEMA, HUD, and SBA. The GAO studied these
specific agencies because they all manage Federal recovery
programs with historically large amounts of disaster-specific
obligations. Why is it so important for the--to disaster
recovery that these agencies work together?
Mr. Currie. Thank you for asking that question, because I
know some of those agencies fall out of the committee's
jurisdiction. But for a State or local government agency, it is
all Federal funding. Even though it is coming from different
Federal departments, it is just billions of Federal dollars
coming into play. They all have different rules, requirements,
time frames. So what we don't want to see is we don't want to
see problems fixed in this area and one program and then the
other 8 programs to not be fixed. Because that is not going to
help people at the local level. It is just going to be more
complicated.
So if we are going to do this we need to do it right and we
need to look from the top down at all the major disaster
recovery programs. Those agencies manage--it is hundreds of
billions of dollars over the last few years in recovery
funding.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. So it sounds like the intelligence silos
that we had to break down after 9/11, we need to break down
some of those silos that are existing in our Federal disaster
recovery programs.
Mr. Currie. It is very true. It is very true. It is very
difficult because it crosses departments. They don't--you know,
they don't have to work together, they don't have to share
data. It crosses committees of jurisdiction in Congress as
well.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you so much for that.
Thank you, Chairman Thompson. I appreciate the ability to
question the witnesses and for their testimony.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Clarke, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Clarke. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank our
Ranking Member Katko for holding this important hearing on our
Nation's disaster response framework.
Let me also thank our witnesses for your testimony here
today.
When disaster strikes the most vulnerable and under-served
communities among us bear the greatest impact. We have been
hearing that all morning. Once recovery efforts begin, the very
same communities who were most impacted also receive the least
amount of assistance. We saw this with Hurricane Katrina in
2005, we saw it in my home city of Brooklyn, New York 9 years
ago with Superstorm Sandy, and we continue to see it right now
with the remnants of Hurricane Ida that cause wide-spread
flooding and devastation across New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, and Connecticut.
Equity needs to be front and center in how we approach this
issue and plan for the future. So I am very glad that we are
having this conversation today. But let us be very clear,
equity does not mean treating everybody the same. To the
contrary, it means targeting resources and outreach to
prioritize those with the greatest needs and vulnerabilities.
We need to do this before disaster strikes, when disaster
strikes, and after disaster strikes. Only then will our
emergency management system be truly equitable and just.
In FEMA's National Advisory Council's 2020 report, the
Council notes that ``First responders do not rescue people who
can evacuate themselves. They only rescue people who need help.
Recovery programs, however, seem to do just that. They provide
an additional boost to wealthy homeowners and others with less
need while lower-income individuals sink further into poverty
after disasters.''
FEMA's assistance programs inherently favor wealthier White
communities. This is true of both homeowners and renters alike.
We saw this play out in Brooklyn after Superstorm Sandy where
low-income families and people of color were disproportionately
dislocated from their homes and communities, many permanently.
So, Mr. Currie, to what extent does FEMA take into
consideration the needs of low-income renters in disaster
recovery?
Mr. Currie. Ma'am, thank you for the question.
So the income level of a jurisdiction is supposed to be
part of and one of the factors that is considered when FEMA is
working with the jurisdiction and the State to decide whether
it reaches the level of needing Federal assistance. So it is
built into the process and it is mentioned.
I think the question is how much information, how much
distinction is being made between vulnerable populations in
low-income districts versus others. It is--as I mentioned
earlier, I think there is not really any strict criteria for
doing that and it is somewhat vague, which I think makes it
difficult to really target the assistance in a way that is
probably necessary.
Because you made a great point about equality versus
equity. I mean I think the posture in the past has been that we
are going to implement these programs the very same for
everybody in every jurisdiction. Over time what that has
created is--you know, as we know, not everyone has the same
level of capacity and resources, so it is going to affect
people differently. That is what has happened over time.
Ms. Clarke. So as we look to create an equitable recovery
system, how can we ensure that assistance programs are better
targeted toward and designed to support under-served
communities? Particularly in areas with large numbers of
renters and where folks live predominantly in multi-unit
dwellings?
Mr. Currie. Well, I think the first thing we need to do is
figure out where those areas are. We already know. It wouldn't
take that much for work for a State or a jurisdiction to
identify their most vulnerable communities and come up with a
criteria for why they are vulnerable. Then we need to look at
these programs and figure out how they need to be tailored to
better address those communities.
Ms. Clarke. So my--let me shift gears very quickly here. My
FEMA Climate Change Preparedness Act would create a
subcommittee within FEMA's National Advisory Committee
dedicated to helping the agency incorporate the risk and
impacts of human-caused climate change.
As I was reviewing the National Advisory Council's 2020
report, I noticed that they had a similar recommendation around
equity. The report recommends the establishment of a Federal
advisory committee focused specifically on how to best measure
equity and incorporate an equity standard into the agency's
preparedness, mitigation, and recovery efforts.
So my question is, do you agree with the report's
recommendation that an advisory committee would be a useful
tool in helping FEMA incorporate an equity-based approach into
the agency's programs and policies? If yes or no, could you
tell us why?
Mr. Currie. Yes, ma'am.
I think an advisory committee would be a great idea to
ensure they are consulting with the right people when they do
this. But I also think--and one of our findings is that the key
recovery agencies, FEMA, HUD, SBA, and others, they need to
directly work together to take this issue on too.
Ms. Clarke. Very well.
Dr. Peek or Ms. Willis, your comments on an advisory
committee?
Ms. Willis. Mm-hmm. Yes, I would agree that that is
critical. I think that trained equity strategists could really
benefit FEMA in developing policies and also understanding how
to properly communicate with those that are disadvantaged and
that have been historically excluded and marginalized by their
policies. Many of their policies are complex and complexity is
in itself inequitable.
Ms. Clarke. Mr. Joseph.
Mr. Joseph. Thank you, ma'am.
I would agree that advisory committees are important, but
as Mr. Currie mentioned, it takes the agencies to come together
to actually put that into action. The advisory committee will
make recommendations, but unless there is a requirement or a
deadline to take action by a certain time or a certain date, it
is not going to happen.
My kids have meetings all the time about what to have for
dinner, but it is mom and I that do the cooking. So it is
important that while there is recommendations, there still has
to be action taken at the agencies responsible for carrying
that out.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Didn't realize I was over time.
Thank you for very much for your testimony here today.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you. Thank you very much.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from New Jersey, Ms.
Watson Coleman.
Ms. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
this hearing.
Mr. Joseph, I want to ask you a question. Could you tell me
specifically what are some of the requirements in the red tape
that exist that interferes with getting minority students on as
interns and hiring from the colleges into the Federal
Government? Could you speak to them?
Mr. Joseph. Yes, ma'am. Yes, ma'am. Thank you.
I don't want to say that there is red tape that prevents a
minority from being hired in Federal Government. I want to
speak to----
Ms. Watson Coleman. Well, just tell me what makes it so
confusing.
Mr. Joseph. Absolutely.
What was very difficult, No. 1, the process by which
someone has to apply for an internship or apply for a job is
confusing and difficult to many that have never----
Ms. Watson Coleman. Like what?
Mr. Joseph. I am sorry?
Ms. Watson Coleman. Like what? Like what? I am trying to
get some specifics here. Like what?
Mr. Joseph. There is very specific requirements on how
resumes are--the types of documents they may need to submit,
the types of forms that may need to completed. They are not
always the same in every job posting or job hiring. There is
most often even for internship programs an absolute veteran's
preference. So if you are an individual that was not a
veteran--I am not saying that we should remove any veteran's
preference, but those are hindrances. There is a competitive
process that need to apply to different positions that has been
part of the red tape.
Ms. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
Mr. Joseph, through the Chairman, may I ask that you kind-
of send me a list of those things that we need to look at?
Mr. Joseph. I will. Absolutely. I will----
Ms. Watson Coleman [continuing]. That you feel represent
some impediment. I would like to look at that. Thank you.
Mr. Joseph. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Watson Coleman. For Mr. Currie and Ms. Peek, could you
tell me what flexibility FEMA has and what could FEMA do in
Puerto Rico since only a third of the money allocated for its
disaster recovery has actually been spent and because Puerto
Rico is in the financial straits that it is in? (A) Does FEMA
have flexibility in being able to help Puerto Rico on these
situations and (B) what would that be? Could I have that kind-
of quickly because I have got one more other question I really
want to sneak in here.
Mr. Currie. Thank you, ma'am. I will try to answer it
quick.
So my understanding is that FEMA does not have a lot of
flexibility with the funding the way the program is structured.
Because public assistance is a reimbursement program which
requires the money to come later after it's started. What we
have told FEMA to do is work with Puerto Rico hand-in-hand,
which they have done since the beginning, since Hurricane
Maria, on a strategy to help them identify priorities for
funding within their own budget and how to secure additional
funding to start some of these projects so that reimbursement
process can start. That is what we have recommended that FEMA
do.
Ms. Watson Coleman. Yes, well, if you don't have any money
and you can't get any loans, so how is FEMA addressing that?
That sounds like a Catch-22 situation there.
Mr. Currie. Yes, absolutely. Well, there is some
flexibility in how much funding Puerto Rico can provide to
start the projects and then FEMA can start reimbursing them
right away. I mean traditionally they would wait until the
project was done or big pieces of it were done. There is
flexibility and they are looking at that too, because they
realize Puerto Rico is in a special financial situation. So----
Ms. Watson Coleman. But beyond looking at it, are they
doing anything to improve the situation?
Mr. Currie. Well----
Ms. Watson Coleman. Is it moving any faster?
Mr. Currie. They are trying to move faster and dedicate a
lot of resources toward reimbursing Puerto Rico to do that. So,
you know, we are going to continue to look at that and stay on
them about the process and how quickly they are actually
spending this money in the years to come.
Ms. Watson Coleman. So a question for each of you really
quickly, and it is yes and no. Is FEMA currently configured,
organized, prioritized in a way that is responsive to the
objectives of this discussion that we are having today? Or is
there a need for a massive reorganization?
We will start with Mr. Currie, then Mr. Joseph and Ms.
Peek, and then Ms. Willis.
Mr. Currie. Well, you know, what we have seen is that--I
know reorganization is often something that people turn to as a
quick action because it is very tangible and specific. I don't
know that it is so much a reorganization or moving the deck
chairs in FEMA, but I think it is kind-of a top-to-bottom
cultural change. I think as the new administrator, you know,
Deanne Criswell, has come in, I think she has set that tone.
But you have to start at the top and move your way through the
programs culturally.
Ms. Watson Coleman. Thank you. I appreciate that. I think
that is where I am trying to end here. Yes.
Mr. Joseph and Ms. Willis and Ms. Peek, do you agree with
that?
Mr. Joseph. Ma'am, I would agree with Mr. Currie that it
does need an overall reorganization or a reorganization of
thought and greater advocacy. That has already occurred through
the Office of Equal Rights in FEMA as well as Administrator
Criswell. I am not speaking for FEMA now, but appointing senior
advisor of the senior executive service to be her advisor on
equity and inclusion, so----
Ms. Watson Coleman. OK.
Mr. Joseph. There are things that are happening which are
great.
Ms. Watson Coleman. May I hear from you, Ms. Willis?
Ms. Willis. Yes. I would agree that FEMA needs to be
reorganized to prioritize equity and to prepare for the on-
going and upcoming climate change crisis, which will impact
more people, particularly those who are disadvantaged. It is
not structured right now to address equity in all areas,
regardless of advisement to the administrator.
Ms. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I have heard a lot of things that I think
need some legislative response, particularly as it relates to
sharing information, collecting information, and doing the kind
of valued calculus to get to people with the greatest need. I
look forward to working with you on that and with our Ranking
Member.
Thank you so much. I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Rice.
Ms. Rice. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
In 2018, years after Hurricane Sandy devastated Long Island
and the Northeast, my constituents learned that local officials
conducting property damage assessments failed to notify many
homeowners that their homes had experienced substantial long-
term damage during the storm. May of those homeowners only
learned the true extent of the storm's devastation when they
tried to sell their homes and at that time discovered mold,
foundation damage, or other issues that made their homes
unsellable.
Now, I know that these experiences are not unique and
individuals all over the United States can speak to the uneven
administration of Federal relief following natural disasters.
Whether due to poor State, local, and Federal coordination,
understaffing, or even a lack of political will, the elderly
and people of color do not benefit from Federal disaster relief
compared to other Americans.
Now, the Stafford Act assumes that the Federal Government,
States, and localities will work seamlessly together to deliver
the right amount of relief to the right people after a natural
disaster, but we know this does not happen in practice. So this
has been a common theme throughout this hearing.
I would just ask Dr. Peek and Ms. Willis, where does the
system most often fall short? Is it at the local, State, or
Federal level? How can we create or encourage a more holistic
approach to disaster relief that improves intergovernmental
coordination? I don't know, can the Federal Government support
workforce development and build capacity and expertise at the
State and local levels? Because when these disasters happen
people turn most immediately to their local authorities, but
then FEMA comes in and it is just a mishmosh of applications
they have to fill and duplication of benefits. It is just such
a mess and it is impossible for people to actually navigate
these very treacherous waters.
So just, you know, to you, what--how can we make this
system more responsive so that we don't have local officials
pointing to FEMA and FEMA pointing to local officials? The big
loser is the homeowner in the middle.
Ms. Peek. Chauncia, would you like to lead off? Or would
you like me to?
OK. So first, thank you, Representative Rice, for the
question. I really want to acknowledge colleagues at New York
University, Columbia University, and Rutgers University who
have been leading a Sandy child and family health study that
has been looking at the mental health impacts on people in your
district and beyond in terms of these protracted recovery
processes. These are some serious, serious findings about how
that second disaster that follows the first can have such a
profound impact on people's lives and ultimately their
livelihoods. So I really want to acknowledge that first.
Then I would like to pick up on your second point about
this opportunity for work force development. There is a team of
sociologists who have been conducting long-term studies in
Alaska following the Exxon Valdez oil spill. One of the most
innovative things that they did, I believe in addition to their
extraordinary research, is that as they recognized the long-
term mental health and physical health impacts of that disaster
they started to establish a series of survivor councils. They
said who is better positioned to not just counsel and advocate
for fellow survivors, but also to help articulate the needs at
the local, State, and Federal level. Those survivor councils
have made such a profound difference in empowering those who
have lived through the trauma of disaster and helping to move
the needle on this issue that we are talking about today.
So I really hope that you will follow up on that.
I will turn this over to Ms. Willis now. Thank you.
Ms. Rice. Thank you for that. I think--is Ms. Willis
unmuted?
Chairman Thompson. Ms. Willis, unmute yourself.
Ms. Willis. Yes, I am here now. It was having some
difficulty unmuting.
But thank you so much for that question.
I really think answer to establishing better coordination
and collaboration at the local and State level really rely on
understanding the communities. I have been an emergency manager
for over 20 years and I can tell you that many emergency
managers do not do community assessments or really understand
all aspects and all communities located within their
jurisdiction. In addition, there is a disconnect with
understanding the under resourced and why those who are more
vulnerable are under-resourced. So there is a disconnect there.
I also want to mention that I recently returned from
Louisiana and working with the Pawnushan, you know, Tribal
nations and other groups that have been disenfranchised and
have experienced many disasters where they have not received
consideration by the local jurisdiction nor the State. So as we
discussed earlier, this exclusion is something that must be
accounted for by FEMA and the other Federal organizations when
considering who received mitigation funding and infrastructure
support.
Many communities are just not provided with a platform for
recovery and now a significant amount of funding is going to
more established communities and not into those vulnerable
communities that really need assistance prior to a disaster.
Ms. Rice. Thank you to the witnesses and thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from California, Ms.
Barragan, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
FEMA regulations state unhoused individuals may access very
specific forms of support. Advocates have voiced concerns that
FEMA does to provide sufficient assistance for unhoused
individuals.
Ms. Willis, could you describe the extent to which FEMA
takes into account the needs of individuals experiencing
homelessness before a disaster?
Ms. Willis. That is an excellent question, Representative.
I am not sure if I am the one that really needs to answer
that because I have never worked directly with FEMA. However, I
can tell you the perspective of the communities and those that
have experienced working with FEMA would say that they have not
been provided with a full recognition. In some cases working
with Hurricane Harvey survivors, our team partners, West Coast
Recovery, has actually seen survivors report that they felt
like they were expendable. They felt like their skin and their
lack of education and their income level make them less of a
priority to the Federal Government. In fact, housing inspectors
in some cases did not even cross the threshold into some
houses. Those that were, you know, impacted by disaster and had
housing damage, the inspectors never even came in in certain
communities. They just assumed that because they were
impoverished or African American communities that the damage
was preexisting.
So when you are dealing with inspectors that haven't been
trained to be culturally respectful or practice and prioritize
equity, we see these outcomes where entire groups, entire
neighborhoods, entire communities are disenfranchised and their
recovery is delayed and impeded and other communities are
prioritized and allowed to rebuild in a timely fashion.
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you, Ms. Willis. It is very
disturbing to hear, but this is why we are doing this hearing,
to get to testimony and hear what is happening, how we can fix
it.
Mr. Currie, what actions could FEMA take to improve
programming for unhoused individuals?
Mr. Currie. So in regard to the homeless, I think one
challenge here that has been talked about already today is that
a lot of these programs are designed around property owners or
people that can prove their link to property. So they have a
deed to the property, they can establish home ownership, they
own a car. You know, owning a property is a big indicator of
who is likely to get assistance.
So obviously for the homeless that is going to be a huge
challenge. So a lot of these programs are not directed toward
the needs of people that don't own property.
Ms. Barragan. Got it. Thank you.
Mr. Currie, this next question is for you as well. FEMA's
regulations and guidance for individual assistance did not
include specific monetary thresholds nor specific damage
requirements, but instead there are a number of different
considerations that FEMA is supposed to take into account when
recommending the authorization of individual assistance.
However, anecdotal evidence points to the contrary.
Mr. Currie, from your perspective, does the present system
result in fewer individual assistance awards to low-income and
rural communities with lower property values?
Mr. Currie. So two things on this, ma'am. Great question.
First of all, I think one of the things we have found is
that FEMA doesn't have the data to really be able to say
whether that is the case or not, and that is a problem. They
need to go back and they need to look at this information,
looking at the factor versus areas that were declared, the
assistance that was provided, and make an assessment of what
the case has been across the country historically over the last
few years.
But I will say this, that while these factors, like such as
vulnerable populations, low-income communities, unemployment--
lack of insurance is another huge thing--those are supposed to
be factored in when the declaration recommendation is made to
the President. These factors are very, very vague and it is not
quantitative. So, you know, what could happen in rural
Mississippi could be completely different than what happens in
another part of the country. I think this has been a major
source of frustration by local officials over the years. They
might even see a neighboring county in another State be
declared for the same disaster and they weren't. They don't
know why and they weren't given any rationale.
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you, Mr. Currie.
I don't have a lot of time left but I would be interested
in following up with each of you afterward about my next issue,
and that is, you know, the Biden administration launched its
Justice40 initiative, which will prioritize his work on climate
change and directs 40 percent of Federal climate benefits to go
to the disadvantaged communities, and that following the
announcement of this we have seen FEMA award grants to its
programs, like Building Resilient Infrastructure in
Communities, the Hazard Mitigation Grant program, and the Flood
Mitigation Assistance. Maybe in a follow-up in writing you all
can let me know, but what more FEMA can do to help
disadvantaged communities win climate grants. Climate is
definitely a big topic. You know, we have Glasgow coming up
next week.
We will look forward to seeing your responses in writing.
Mr. Chairman, I am out of time. I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The gentlelady
yields back.
We have gone through all our Members, but I have a question
I would like to frame for all the witnesses. It talks about the
Red Cross' role in mass care responsibilities.
In the State of Mississippi there are 32 full-time Red
Cross employees. I represent the capital city, I have the
largest land area in the State, but there is not one full-time
Red Cross employee in my entire district. So inequities start
off physically with just nobody there.
So the Red Cross, often staff and volunteers, are not
representative of the communities they serve. How important is
cultural competency in disaster response? How does it affect
disaster response when emergency personnel don't reflect the
communities they are serving?
Some of us have talked about Katrina. I remember the
Katrina experience because the Red Cross at that point even
refused to go into certain low-income communities. It became
quite an issue. But here we are. The Red Cross of today is not
representative of the constituencies that are adversely
impacted the most in disasters.
So just as your own opinion. We will start with Dr. Peek,
Ms. Willis, Mr. Currie, and Mr. Joseph.
Ms. Peek. Thank you for bringing this issue of cultural
competence into the conversation, Chairman. It is absolutely
critical--absolutely critical. My understanding is that FEMA
has actually made a commitment to engage in cultural competence
training for all of their employees. Again, this is an
important first step. But then it is crucial that we measure
what a difference a training like that might make.
We actually have developed a training module for disaster
researchers and practitioners that focuses specifically on
cultural competence.
A final point that I want to make about this is actually
related to an extraordinary organization called the Bill
Anderson Fund, which is dedicated to ensuring that the disaster
professionals and researchers of the next generation are
reflective of the communities that we are studying and serving.
So they are training, mentoring, empowering, and bringing to
the table black and LatinX and Indigenous students as a next
generation work force and leadership in the space. So I think
this is a really important forward step in our community.
Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. Ms. Willis.
Ms. Willis. Thank you.
Cultural competence is important. As you have mentioned,
Chairman, that is disturbing that so many from the Red Cross
have not been providing, you know--there hasn't been any
representation within your district from the Red Cross.
When I think about the historic bias that is interwoven
within volunteer agencies that also provides a disconnect with
the community. Any time there is a disconnect there is a
failure to provide adequate resources and a failure to restore
and recover. I can tell you that I was just on the phone with a
friend prior to my deployment for Hurricane Ida and she
mentioned that 8 men showed up at her door, which is located--
her home was in an African American community outside of New
Orleans--8 White men showed up, 2 with guns, and she hung up
with the phone and I called her back and I asked her, who was
that on the phone and she mentioned that it was a search-and-
rescue team. Now, in a location like Louisiana, where there
have been significant problems with law enforcement and the
mistreatment of African Americans, it would seem to me--and
probably anyone else--that it is not a good idea to show up at
the door, 8 White men, 2 with guns. That is cultural
competence, a failure to provide that cultural competence and
respect. That is disturbing. We can't just stay that it is a
disaster response, anything goes. That is not the case.
Cultural competency and cultural sensitivity is required even
in times of disaster, even more so where people are
experiencing mental trauma and distress. When we are dealing
with disadvantaged communities and under-represented
communities, that consideration is not provided.
So, yes, cultural competency is needed and it must be
present within disaster response and recovery.
Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. Mr. Currie.
Mr. Currie. Thank you, sir.
I agree with what has been said. Cultural competence is
huge. I mean we have seen this play out in other areas. I will
give you an example. For example, Tribes. Over the last few
years we have made a number of recommendations to FEMA both
during prior disasters and COVID that they do a better job of
outreaching with Tribal nations on disaster assistance because
they have unique needs. The truth is that all vulnerable
communities have extremely unique needs, as Ms. Willis just
said, that you have to factor in if you want response and
recovery to be effective and you want to be able to use the
programs we have.
So I completely agree that that is important.
One thing I will say on the Red Cross issue is that often
times challenges come up during a response phase and we learn
that maybe, you know, we don't have the right resources we need
in a community. In my opinion, there really is no excuse for
that. We have time and there are so many efforts between the
Federal, State, and local level on the preparedness side before
a disaster happens that we can work these issue out before-
hand. We don't have to be surprised when they happen in a
response. I think that is something that should be looked at
during blue sky days so they don't pop up when there is a
disaster.
Chairman Thompson. Mr. Joseph.
Mr. Joseph. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In short I would say yes, it is important that we have more
cultural competency training and education. I am proud of the
work that while at FEMA we were able to deal with the Emergency
Management Institute to provide and integrate into all training
classes the types of training that you are talking about. We
did that under the leadership of our former administrators and
our then-chief of staff, Eric Heighberger, to bring that
importance, to highlight in all the training that is delivered
to State and local emergency management agencies. But I also
think there needs to be more. We can continue to do more. Not
just with State and local agencies, but within the systems
within the Federal Government that exist as it is.
Thank you, sir.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Florida, Ms.
Demings, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Demings. Mr. Chairman, thank you so very much and thank
you to the witnesses for joining us today.
On September 10, 2017 Hurricane Irma made landfall in the
Florida Keys and left a path of damage across Florida. In
Florida we certainly understand the life-threatening conditions
of major hurricanes. The National Hurricane Center estimates
that 6 million residents evacuated from coastal areas ahead of
Irma's landfall. Still, too many Floridians needlessly lost
their lives. We are told that over 400 nursing home residents
died from heat-related conditions after their facilities lost
power and did not have generators to power air conditioning
units against the early September tropical heat.
This question is for all witnesses or any or all who want
to answer. I understand that the Department of Health and Human
Services and State health care agencies play a significant role
in regulating health and safety standards for nursing homes and
other facilities. Has FEMA provided adequate guidance, or any
guidance, to States and local governments to prepare for
disasters impacting such facilities? Where can they improve?
That is for any witness who would like to answer.
Mr. Joseph. Madam Congresswoman, I will go first.
Having been a local, State, and Federal emergency manager,
yes, there is guidance. Most of it comes from Health and Human
Services. I think what needs to be improved upon more--because
as FEMA works with the States on what the gaps may be in their
plans in advance of a disaster, there needs to be more
integration of the emergency management and the health care
emergency management structures. I think we saw that play out
over the last several years in the pandemic response. There are
areas of great success across every level of Government where
emergency management and health care worked well together.
There are also opportunities for improvement, several of them
that we have seen over the last several years.
So I would say, yes, there are efforts of planning that are
there. There could be more exercising, there could be more
coordination. There is always the question that comes up, well,
who is in charge? Ultimately it doesn't matter who is in
charge. As an emergency manager I was never the director of
anything. I was the coordinator of things. That is what we need
to focus on in emergency management, coordinating all those
efforts together for the greater good of the people we serve.
Ms. Demings. I really appreciate that answer and I thank
you for understanding that you are right, it is about
protecting people during tough times. Certainly in Florida we
are still in the middle of hurricane season. So are we better
prepared now than we were in 2017?
Anyone else who would like to answer this question? Because
it is about being prepared. Anyone else?
Ms. Peek. I just wanted to thank the representative for
this question and bringing this issue to light and--sincere
condolences for the loss of life in 2017 and critical to
recognize that also in 2005 in Hurricane Katrina that we also
saw the exact same thing play out with some of the most frail
and vulnerable older persons in our society perishing in
nursing homes and other assisted care facilities. So this is a
crucial, crucial issue and I think FEMA adding the disability
coordinators, for example, in the different regions--again it
is one step forward to draw attention to the issue of persons
with disabilities, the elderly, people in institutionalized
settings. But the fact that people in your State died in 2017
in the same way we saw in 2005 and that we may see again in
future disasters, this is unacceptable and this is where
breaking down those barriers across agencies, putting resources
toward those who get hurt first and worst in disasters. This is
where the reality really comes to light.
Thank you.
Ms. Demings. No, thank you as well. And how can we--as
Members of Congress, how can we help or assist to make sure
that we are better prepared now than we were in 2017 and 2005?
That question goes to anyone who needs to answer the question
because we can't get behind this, we have got to stay in front
of this and learn from the tragedies that we have seen.
Anyone else can answer that question for me?
Ms. Willis. Yes, ma'am. I will. Chauncia Willis here.
I would say that one of the key points to mention is more
diversity in representation is needed within the field of
emergency management. I too experienced Hurricane Irma where I
lived the recovery for our city, Tampa, for that terrible
hurricane. You are right, health and human services, public
health, the health and medical system, there is a disconnect
with emergency management. Unfortunately, there is a
disproportionate impact amongst the lower-income and the those
who are minorities who are living within those facilities. It
is unfortunate. A lot of our emergency managers are not from
diverse backgrounds and do not identify with the levels of
diversity seen within their communities.
So we have been advocating from our organization the use of
social determinants of health paired with emergency management
vulnerability assessments. The way that we do emergency
management, the way that we integrate the other critical
functions must be reviewed and in some cases modified.
Ms. Demings. Thank you.
Finally, Mr. Currie, anything to add?
Mr. Currie. In terms of being better prepared from fiscal
year 2017, I think one thing that we often find in our work is
that after a disaster all sorts of after-action reviews are
done at the local, State, or Federal level and they typically
identify a lot of gaps. Not just the thing we saw go bad, but
the things that could have gone bad. But you know what, we
don't follow up on those gaps later because the disaster is
past and we just want to forget it. It is hard because
resources to follow up on gaps.
So I think it is--to answer your question, as a Member of
Congress I think you can push folks in your State and your
district to really follow up on those gaps so we don't have the
problems that we know we are going to happen in the next
disaster happen.
Ms. Demings. To all of you, thank you so very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes the Vice Chair of the full committee,
the gentleman from from New York, Mr. Torres.
Mr. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The National Low Income Housing Coalition has reported that
FEMA interprets the nondiscrimination clause in the Stafford
Act and civil rights law to mean that the agency cannot provide
tailored assistance for disadvantaged communities.
I find FEMA's interpretation to be an anomaly because there
is ample precedent for the Federal Government providing
tailored assistance to disadvantaged communities and doing so
within the boundaries of civil rights law. FEMA's
misinterpretation has arguably led to racial inequities in the
disbursement of housing assistance.
Research has shown that the lowest-income homeowners
receive half as much assistance as higher-income homeowners to
rebuild and lower-income applicants were twice as likely to be
denied FEMA housing assistance due to ``insufficient damage''.
So my first question is for Ms. Willis. What actions should
FEMA take to radically reduce the racial inequities that have
arisen in the disbursement of FEMA funding?
Ms. Willis. Thank you for that question, Representative
Torres.
I would like to state that FEMA has created some policies
that are inherently inequitable. As we have discussed today, a
lot of those policies are impacting the most vulnerable,
historically marginalized communities the most.
Within our written testimony and here today within our
verbal testimony we have been outlining different
recommendations that we feel would be critical. One of the
recommendations would be to re-frame and consider new
definitions for impoverished communities. We need to understand
that that definition does not take into account the impact on
communities, such as population growth, economic indicators,
financial conditions, and wage stagnation, also climate impacts
to the community. All of these things, including resident
demographics, must be considered. In addition, we would
recommend that population limit be adjusted from 3,000 to
25,000 or 50,000. We would recommend that more demographic data
be added to the definition to clearly define what community
indicators demonstrate economic distress prior to and during
and after disasters.
Thank you.
Mr. Torres. Thank you, Ms. Willis.
I have a second question, and I will start by way of
analogy. A 2018 report by the Brookings Institute found that
implicit biases in appraisals led to a systematic
undervaluation of Black homes compared to similarly-situated
White homes. It found that the typical Black home is worth
$150,000 compared to $230,000 for the typical White home. It
found that Black homes amid Black majority neighborhoods are
appraised at a level 23 percent lower than White homes in White
majority neighborhoods. It found that Black homes on average
are undervalued by $48,000, which translates into a cumulative
loss of $156 billion.
Are you concerned that the implicit biases that distort
home valuations could be the same kinds of biases that could
potentially distort FEMA home inspections?
Ms. Willis. I am. I am. That is an excellent point to make.
The people that are appraising these properties are the same
people that we see and that we live with day-to-day. Many of
them bring their bias to the table, they bring it to the job,
they bring it to their volunteer response. So when they are
evaluating properties, when they are determining value for
properties using in some cases a cost-benefit analysis, they
always undervalue the homes that are located in lower-income
neighborhoods or that are housing African Americans, Latinos,
or even our Tribal nations. It is unfortunate because their
internal inherent bias impacts their ability to provide an
unbiased objective response. In many cases they are outright
denying assistance to many homeowners.
So that is unfortunate and, yes, that is something that
must be examined very closely. I believe the data has already
shown that this is the case.
Mr. Torres. I share the concern. Just like an appraisal
with an implicit bias can lead to under evaluation, a home
inspection with implicit bias can lead to under funding by
FEMA. It is an area that we should explore in greater detail.
Mr. Currie, do you have any thoughts on the persistence of
racial inequities in the disbursement of FEMA funding and how
to best address them?
Mr. Currie. Well, I think Ms. Willis talked about a lot of
these, but on the home inspection issue, so we know from the
data that the primary reason for denials for individual
assistance from FEMA is what is called insufficient damage.
That is a very, very broad term that is completely reliant on
the inspector's decision based on the inspection itself.
So what you said is right, it is up to the inspector. But
also the other thing to factor in there is that, you know, the
inspections are done consistently for everybody. So, you know,
a hole in somebody's roof that has 0 savings and no insurance
is a lot different from a hole in somebody's roof that has
savings and has insurance. The second person can fix that hole
easily, the first person may never be able to fix the hole. The
hole in the roof leads to secondary-level damage and problems
down the road and mold and things like that. It is a domino
effect.
So while I think FEMA has tried--and this gets to the first
part of your question, they have tried to be consistent for
every single person, do things in the same way, that doesn't
mean that that doesn't lead to disparate outcomes for different
people.
Mr. Torres. My time has long expired. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Thompson. Well, you are very kind. You're the only
somebody to recognize their time. Thank you very much.
I ask unanimous consent to submit for the record a letter
from the Board of Supervisors of Leflore County, Mississippi on
the devastation from the delta flooding, a statement by the
National Low Income Housing Coalition, and a 2019 NPR article
entitled How Federal Disaster Money Favors the Rich*.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The information has been retained in committee files and can be
found at: https://www.npr.org/2019/03/05/688786177/how-federal-
disaster-money-favors-the-rich.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
[The information follows:]
Letter From the Board of Supervisors, Leflore County, MS
October 22, 2021.
TO: Lauren McClain, Subcommittee Director/Emergency Preparedness,
Response, and Recovery, Committee on Homeland Security

Rep. Bennie G. Thompson (D-MS),
Chairman, H2-176 Ford House Office Building, Washington, DC 20515.

RE: Disaster Preparedness, Response and Recovery in the MS Delta

The purpose of this letter is to give an account of the tragic
flooding event that occurred June 8-12, 2021.
As a life-long resident of Leflore County, MS, never have I seen
the amount of flood water cover mailboxes and submerge cars and SUVs
such as we experienced in the June flooding. Over 150 homes were
damaged and people had to be rescued from their homes. Many of our
residents that live in the flooded areas are elderly, disabled, and
live on fixed incomes. The response by emergency management entities
left people in a hopeless state. FEMA guidelines state that if 18
inches of water could not be measured inside the dwelling, then no
disaster declaration could be put in place. Low-income people without
flood insurance needed immediate assistance. Many residents were forced
to abandon their homes for weeks. People were forced to stay with
relatives, at hotels, and wherever they could find a dry bed and food.
Entergy disconnected power to these homes and all lost whatever food
they had in freezers and refrigerators. The process to attain
assistance is too exhaustive. Many residents don't have access to the
internet to submit pictures, upload documents, and fill out
applications. After the local governmental body makes an emergency
declaration and submits it to MEMA (Executive Director--Administrative
Order) and the Governor's office, there is still a 30-day period for
review. A month is too long when people have been displaced from their
homes, which in most cases are the largest investments that people
make. There is a disconnect between Federal assistance/State assistance
and getting people the assistance needed. There are Long-Term Recovery
Committees that are helping put people's homes and lives back together
but again the process is too exhaustive and time-consuming. Several
weeks, and months pass before the necessary visits and assessments
could be conducted. There is a need for a Rapid Response and Recovery
entity. Counties in the MS Delta need FEMA/MEMA to restructure the
process of evaluating disasters and the response to assist citizens in
need. Income level should not dictate who gets assistance. There has to
be a better way to get assistance and recover from a natural disaster
for the very least of us.
Sincerely,
Reginald Moore,
President, Leflore County Board of Supervisors.
______

Statement of the National Low Income Housing Coalition
October 27, 2021
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Katko, and Members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to submit this statement on
ways to ensure that our Nation's disaster housing recovery and response
efforts address the unique and often overlooked needs of the lowest-
income and most marginalized survivors, including people of color,
people with disabilities, people experiencing homelessness and others.
The National Low Income Housing Coalition (NLIHC) is dedicated
solely to achieving socially just public policy that ensures people
with the lowest incomes in the United States have affordable and decent
homes. NLIHC leads the Disaster Housing Recovery Coalition of more than
850 National, State, and local organizations, including many working
directly with disaster-impacted communities and with first-hand
experience recovering after disasters. We work to ensure that Federal
disaster recovery efforts prioritize the housing needs of the lowest-
income and most marginalized people in impacted areas.
NLIHC has worked on disaster housing recovery since Hurricane
Katrina, and from this experience, we have come to a simple conclusion:
America's disaster housing recovery system is fundamentally broken and
in need of major repair and reform. It is a system that was designed
for middle-class people and communities--a system that never
contemplated, and so does not address, the unique needs of the lowest-
income and most marginalized people. Because of this fundamental design
flaw, these families are consistently left behind in recovery and
rebuilding in disaster after disaster. The disaster recovery system not
only ignores the needs of the lowest-income people, but it exacerbates
many of the challenges they faced prior to the storm: Disaster response
and recovery often worsens the housing crisis, solidifies segregation,
and deepens inequality.
When disasters strike, the lowest-income and most marginalized
survivors are often hardest-hit. They have the fewest resources and
face the longest, steepest path to recovery. Despite the clear need,
Federal efforts frequently leave these survivors without the assistance
needed to recover and leave their communities less resilient to future
disasters. Without this critical assistance, many of the lowest-income
and most marginalized survivors return to uninhabitable homes, sleep in
cars or at shelters, double- or triple-up with other low-income
families, or pay more than half of their limited incomes on rent,
putting them at increased risk of displacement, eviction, and, in worst
cases, homelessness.
These barriers and opportunities are reflected in ``Fixing
America's Broken Disaster Housing Recovery System,'' a two-part report
published by NLIHC and Fair Share Housing Center of New Jersey.
Our policy recommendations reflect 9 core principles that should
guide our country's disaster housing response and recovery:
1. Recovery must be centered on survivors with the greatest needs
and ensure equity among survivors, especially for people of
color, low-income people, people with disabilities, immigrants,
LGBTQ people, and other marginalized people and communities;
2. Everyone should be fairly assisted to fully and promptly recover
through transparent and accountable programs and strict
compliance with civil rights laws, with survivors directing the
way assistance is provided;
3. Securing help from Government must be accessible,
understandable, and timely;
4. Everyone in need should receive safe, accessible shelter and
temporary housing where they can reconnect with family and
community;
5. Displaced people should have access to all the resources they
need for as long as they need to safely and quickly recover
housing, personal property, and transportation;
6. Renters and anyone experiencing homelessness before the disaster
must quickly get access to quality, affordable, accessible
rental homes in safe, quality neighborhoods of their choice;
7. All homeowners should be able to quickly rebuild in safe,
quality neighborhoods of their choice;
8. All neighborhoods should be free from environmental hazards,
have equal quality and accessible public infrastructure, and be
safe and resilient; and
9. Disaster rebuilding should result in local jobs and contracts
for local businesses and workers.
These core principles and the following policy recommendations
should serve as a guidepost for this committee and other Federal policy
makers as you work to reform our Nation's disaster housing recovery
framework.
barriers to an equitable housing recovery
After a disaster, displaced families must have a safe, accessible,
and affordable place to live while they recover. FEMA programs can
provide crucial assistance to help survivors recover from a disaster by
providing temporary shelter and financial assistance and making basic
structural repairs to homes. However, FEMA created unnecessary and
often insurmountable barriers to accessing these programs, leaving many
low-income survivors at increased risk of displacement, eviction, and,
in worst cases, homelessness.
FEMA programs are not designed to serve lower-income people with
the greatest needs; these households are consistently denied
assistance. Applicants for assistance with the lowest incomes were
denied FEMA Individual Assistance (IA) at very high rates after
Hurricane Harvey. The vast majority of higher-income households were
approved \1\ (see Figure 1).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Adams, A. 2018. Low-income Households Disproprtionately Denied
by FEMA Is a Sign of a System that is Failing the Most Vulnerable.
Retrieved from https://texashousers.org/2018/11/30/low-income-
households-disproportionately-denied-by-fema-is-a-sign-of-a-system-
that-is-failing-the-most-vulnerable/.

Although the early available data from FEMA's response to Hurricane
Ida show an improvement in IA eligibility rates overall, data from
other disasters in 2021 show similar denial rates to the past disaster
responses. Further analysis and access to granular application
information will be needed to determine if this trend holds for
applications by lower-income disaster survivors.
FEMA's Failure to Address Housing Needs
Despite the clear need, FEMA housing programs neglect the housing
needs of America's lowest-income disaster survivors and exacerbate
housing insecurity. Without the affordable and accessible homes
survivors need, many return to uninhabitable homes, sleep in cars or
tents, stay at shelters, double- or triple-up with other low-income
families, or pay more than half of their limited incomes on rent,
putting them at increased risk of eviction and, in worst cases,
homelessness.
Research from NLIHC demonstrates that disasters exacerbate the
existing rental housing crisis for households with the lowest
incomes.\2\ After Hurricane Sandy, households already dealing with
housing instability were further destabilized through displacement and
increased rents. Two years after Sandy, few new affordable homes had
been completed yet survivors were no longer eligible for Federal rental
assistance.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ National Low Income Housing Coalition. 2019. Long-term Recovery
of Rental Housing: A Case Study of Highly-Impacted Communities in New
Jersey after Superstorm Sandy. Retrieved from https://nlihc.org/sites/
default/files/Sandy-Rental-Recovery-Report.pdf.
\3\ Fair Share Housing Center, Latino Action Network & NAACP New
Jersey State Conference. 2015. The State of Sandy Recovery (Second
Annual Report). Retrieved from http://fairsharehousing.org/images/
uploads/State_of_Sandy_English_2015.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The impact of disasters on low-income people's housing needs is
made worse by FEMA's continued refusal to activate the Disaster Housing
Assistance Program (DHAP), rendering some survivors homeless.\4\ During
past disasters, both Republican \5\ and Democratic \6\ \7\
administrations upheld DHAP as a best practice for disaster housing
recovery. DHAP was created after hard-won lessons from Hurricane
Katrina, and it has been used successfully in some major disasters
since that time. Under DHAP, displaced families receive longer-term
direct rental assistance and case management services provided by local
housing professionals with extensive knowledge of the local housing
market. This assistance helps families find permanent housing
solutions, secure employment, and connect to public benefits as they
rebuild their lives.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ National Low Income Housing Coalition. 2018. Setting the Record
Straight: FEMA 's Failure to Address Long-Term Housing Needs of
Survivors. Retrieved from https://nlihc.org/sites/default/files/
FEMA_Setting-The-RecordFEMA-TSA.PDF.
\5\ Homeland Security and Counterterrorism. 2006. The Federal
Response to Hurricane Katrina: Lessons Learned. Retrieved from https://
permanent.access.gpo.gov/lps67263/katrina-lessons-learned.pdf.
\6\ Federal Emergency Management Agency. 2009. National Disaster
Housing Strategy. Retrieved from https://www.fema.gov/media-library-
data/20130726-1819-25045-9288/ndhs_core.pdf.
\7\ Federal Emergency Management Agency. 2011. National Disaster
Recovery Framework: Strengthening Disaster Recovery for the Nation.
Retrieved from https://www.fema.gov/pdf/recoveryframework/ndrf.pdf.
\8\ National Low Income Housing Coalition. 2017. Disaster Housing
Assistance Program. Retrieved from https://nlihc.org/sites/default/
files/DAHP-Program.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
After recent disasters, FEMA instead relied on its Temporary
Shelter Assistance (TSA) program and other programs that are
inaccessible to many low-income survivors. TSA is intended to reduce
the number of survivors in congregate shelters by covering the cost of
staying in an approved hotel or motel for an initial period of up to 14
days. Once again, this is a program better suited to middle-class
households than to low-income people.
Low-income families are often unable to access TSA motels due to
financial and other barriers, including the practice of motels charging
daily ``resort'' fees and requiring security deposits or credit cards.
Because TSA must be renewed every 14 days, those disaster survivors who
are able to access the program face arbitrary deadlines that cause them
to scramble to submit required paperwork or leave the motel before
finding a permanent housing solution. While FEMA is authorized to
provide TSA for at least 18 months, the Trump administration abruptly
terminated \9\ the program for nearly 2,000 Puerto Rican families
displaced to the mainland after Hurricane Maria, forcing them to find
alternative housing or to return to their uninhabitable homes on the
island with just a few hours' notice. Without DHAP, States that
received large numbers of displaced Puerto Rican survivors--including
Massachusetts and Connecticut--saw increased homelessness by 14 percent
and 17 percent respectively.\10\ \11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ National Low Income Housing Coalition. 2018. NLIHC's Response
to Court Ruling Allowing FEMA to Move Forward on Evicting Hurricane
Maria Survivors. Retrieved from https://nlihc.org/news/nlihcs-response-
court-ruling-allowing-fema-move-forward-evicting-hurricane-maria-
survivors.
\10\ Martini T. 2019, After a Long Road, Hurricane Maria Evacuees
Settle in Massachusetts. Retrieved from https://www.wgbh.org/news/
local-news/2019/01/23/after-a-long-road-hurricane-maria-evacuees-
settle-in-massachusetts.
\11\ Skahill, P. 2018. Hurricane Maria Drives Up Connecticut's
Homelessness Numbers. Retrieved from https://www.wnpr.org/post/
hurricane-maria-drives-connecticuts-homelessness-numbers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To date, the Biden administration has failed to activate DHAP for
survivors of Hurricane Ida and other major disasters.
FEMA's other temporary housing assistance programs--Rental
Assistance and Direct Temporary Housing Assistance--are also
problematic for low-income families. Through its Rental Assistance
program, FEMA provides financial assistance to survivors to rent
temporary housing. The amount of assistance provided to survivors is
based on the impacted area's Fair Market Rent (FMR), which is often
considerably less than rental costs in the area to which survivors have
been displaced. Moreover, FEMA rental assistance covers rent and
utilities for only 2 months at a time, which is too short a time frame
for many of the lowest-income survivors. Many landlords are often
unwilling to enter into leases with survivors when only 2 months of
rental assistance is assured.
Under FEMA's Direct Lease program, FEMA enters into lease
agreements with property owners to provide rent assistance for
survivors. A similar program, the Multi-Family Lease and Repair
program, allows FEMA to enter into lease agreements with multi-family
housing property owners and to make repairs to provide temporary
housing. Both programs, however, have extremely low rates of
participation by property owners and are inadequate to meet post-
disaster rental needs.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ AP. 2020. FEMA Looks to Provide Hurricane Victims Temporary
Housing. Retrieved from: https://apnews.com/article/louisiana-
9541dafbac6b890535bb21dc58844d29.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
After Hurricane Harvey, FEMA piloted a program where States take on
the responsibility of implementing and managing temporary housing
programs. These State-run disaster housing programs face significant
delays and do not address the full scale of housing needs because FEMA
continues to retain control over eligibility and the program-assignment
process. According to FEMA, only a few hundred families were served
under State-administered housing programs following Hurricanes Harvey
and Irma, despite damage to or destruction of more than 307,000 homes
in Texas \13\ and 65 percent of all homes in the Florida Keys.\14\
Other programs like Multi-family Lease and Repair were wholly
unsuccessful because property owners declined to participate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ CBS News. 2019. We're Still Here: Volunteers Rebuilding Homes
2 Years After Hurricane Harvey. Retrieved from https://www.cbsnews.com/
news/hurricane-harvey-houston-meet-the-volunteers-rebuilding-homes-all-
hands-hearts-2019-08-24/.
\14\ CNN. 2017. Florida Official: Death toll rises to 12 in State,
Retrieved from: https://www.cnn.com/2017/09/12/us/irma-damage-
aftermath/index.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A similar situation is currently occurring in Louisiana during the
aftermath of Hurricane Ida. FEMA is reimbursing State-level agencies to
provide travel trailers to disaster survivors to utilize prior to the
deployment of FEMA Temporary Housing Units (THUs)--which typically take
4 months to deploy. While the State has procured hundreds of travel
trailers, few families have received them as of this writing. In the
mean time, disaster survivors are being encouraged to sleep in tents on
their properties or utilize large tent encampments in several locations
around Southeast Louisiana.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Muller, W. 2021. As trailers trickle in, push for temporary
housing continues 6 weeks after Hurricane Ida. Retrieved from https://
www.houmatoday.com/story/news/2021/10/16/trailers-trickle-in-push-
temporary-housing-continues-6-weeks-after-hurricane-ida/8468315002/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Due to the lack of housing assistance, 1 year after Hurricane
Harvey nearly 20 percent of individuals experiencing homelessness in
Houston reported that they became homeless as a result of the
disaster.\16\ Without DHAP, homelessness increased in Houston by 18
percent.\17\ This is a colossal failure of the Federal Government's
disaster recovery efforts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Vigh, E. 2019. Hurricane Harvey Caused Homelessness Lingers in
Harris County 2 Years Later. Community Impact. Retrieved from https://
bit.ly/3hEvKHW.
\17\ Ward, A. 2018. Homeless after Harvey: For Some, the Historic
Flooding in Houston Washed Away Shelter and Security. Retrieved from
https://www.houstonchronicle.com/news/houstonweather/hurricaneharvey/
article/Homeless-after-Harvey-For-some-the-historic-13171309.php.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
During the current COVID-19 pandemic, FEMA should have activated
DHAP to provide housing and shelter for people experiencing
homelessness. DHAP could have been used to quickly move people out of
congregate shelters or encampments and into affordable homes, where
they can more easily keep themselves and their neighbors healthy.
Instead, FEMA has worked with some States and localities under its
Public Assistance program to place a very limited number of people
experiencing homelessness into temporary motels for self-quarantine and
self-isolation.
Before Public Assistance funding for these motels end, FEMA should
activate DHAP to help transition these individuals into permanent
housing, rather than allowing individuals to be pushed back into
homelessness as is already beginning to happen. For example, after
funding for a hotel voucher program in Fort Lauderdale, Florida ran out
on July 17, over 70 people experiencing homelessness who had been
temporarily residing at a Rodeway Inn & Suites were forced to leave,
even if they did not have a permanent housing plan.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Kelley, E. 2020. Fort Lauderdale Ending Program to House
Homeless in Hotels This Weekend. Retrieved from https://www.sun-
sentinel.com/coronavirus/fl-ne-fort-lauderdale-evicts-homeless-
20200717-h5vjhwlndnf6batks4rgegk3va-story.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
fema neglects the needs of marginalized populations
People Experiencing Homelessness
People experiencing homelessness are often most at risk during a
disaster and have the fewest resources to recover. People experiencing
homelessness are unlikely to have the resources needed to adequately
prepare for or evacuate prior to a disaster, and their unique needs are
often overlooked by emergency managers when planning for disasters.
During the recovery, homelessness resources are stretched thin to
accommodate those households that became housing insecure as a result
of the disaster and resources for pre-disaster homeless populations are
deprioritized. Communities are often unable to return to the level of
care provided to people experiencing homelessness before the disaster.
Despite the clear need, people experiencing homelessness are often
excluded from or face additional barriers to FEMA resources, including
mass shelters and individual assistance. Following Hurricane Irma,
there were reports of people experiencing homelessness being forced to
wear armbands and be separated from other disaster survivors.\19\ Pre-
disaster homeless populations are often denied FEMA assistance, even if
all their belongings were destroyed in the disaster.\20\ These actions
further stigmatize people experiencing homelessness and often prevent
them from accessing the resources they need to stay safe.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Dearen, J., & Kennedy, K. 2017. Yellow Wristbands,
Segregation/or Florida Homeless in Irma. Retrieved from https://
www.usnews.com/news/us/articles/2017-09-29/yellow-wristbands-
segregation-for-florida-homeless-in-irma.
\20\ Ehrlich, A. 2019. After Wildfires, Homeless People Left Out of
Federal Disaster Aid Programs, Oregon Public Broadcasting. Retrieved
from https://www.opb.org/news/article/fema-disaster-aid-wildfires-
homeless-people/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
During the current COVID-19 pandemic, people experiencing
homelessness are particularly at risk of severe illness and death from
coronavirus, yet many of these individuals have been unable to access
the assistance they need to self-isolate and self-quarantine.
Narrow eligibility criteria for FEMA reimbursement, however,
created significant barriers to moving people experiencing homelessness
to safety in hotels and motels. In San Francisco, for example, people
experiencing homelessness must be over the age of 60 or have documented
underlying health conditions in order to be deemed eligible. This
narrow interpretation of eligibility criteria has limited the
efficiency of San Francisco's hotel program.\21\ Additionally, FEMA
reimbursement of non-congregate shelter for people experiencing
homelessness is only made available if a Governor requests it; people
who are homeless in States with Governors who do not prioritize their
needs are left with no assistance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Karlis, N. 2020. How Bureaucracy Kept the Bay Area from
Housing the Houseless. Retrieved from https://www.salon.com/2020/06/21/
how-bureaucracy-kept-the-bay-area-from-housing-the-houseless/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Seniors and People with Disabilities
People with disabilities face barriers to assistance. They are 2 to
4 times more likely to die or sustain a critical injury during a
disaster than people without disabilities.\22\ Despite an increased
risk of death and injury, many emergency plans do not address how local
officials can reach those with disabilities during a disaster. People
with disabilities are often diverted to ``special needs'' or ``medical
shelters,'' even if they do not require the level of care provided
there. This practice fosters forced institutionalization and places
people with disabilities at greater risk of injury or death.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Timmons, P. ``Disaster Preparedness and Response: The Special
Needs of Older Americans,'' Statement for the Record, Special Committee
on Aging, U.S. Senate, September 20, 2017, available at https://
www.aging.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/SCA_Timmons_09_20_17.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
During Hurricane Harvey, elderly residents in a Galveston, Texas
nursing home were photographed with floodwaters up to their waists,\23\
and 14 nursing home residents in the largely unregulated State nursing
home industry died in 2017 from heat exhaustion when their facility
lost power in Hurricane Irma.\24\ The COVID-19 pandemic has devastated
people residing and working in nursing homes, psychiatric hospitals,
and other congregate settings for people with disabilities. People
living in these settings comprise less than 1 percent of the U.S.
population, but nearly 50 percent of coronavirus deaths.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Ferguson, J.W. 2017. Eighteen People Rescued from Flooded
Assisted Living Facility. Retrieved from https://www.galvnews.com/news/
free/article_elffff8e-435d-5c78-ab46-57d6bc7dc6a5.html.
\24\ CNN. 2017. Husband and Wife Among 14 Dead After Florida
Nursing Home Lost A/C. Retrieved from https://www.cnn.com/2017/10/09/
health/florida-irma-nursing-home-deaths-wife/index.html.
\25\ Mizner, S. 2020. COVID-19 Deaths in Nursing Homes are not
Unavoidable--They are the Result of Deadly Discrimination. Retrieved
from https://www.aclu.org/news/disability-rights/covid-19-deaths-in-
nursing-homes-are-not-unavoidable-they-are-the-result-of-deadly-
discrimination/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Immigrants and People with Limited English Proficiency
Individuals with limited English proficiency often face difficulty
in accessing FEMA resources. For example, in Puerto Rico, FEMA
struggled to find translators or provide basic information in Spanish,
which is the predominant language on the island.\26\ While FEMA's
regulations require that such documents are produced, advocates
commonly express concern that the agency and its grantees regularly
distribute forms only in English or with limited translated versions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Davidson, J. 2020. How a lack of diversity at Federal agencies
can have serious consequences. Retrieved from https://
www.washingtonpost.com/politics/how-a-lack-of-diversity-at-federal-
agencies-can-have-serious-consequences/2020/02/29/ceec904e-5a65-11ea-
8753-73d960- 00faaestory.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
onerous title documentation requirements
For decades, eligible applicants were wrongfully denied FEMA
assistance due to inflexible and arbitrary requirements, rigid
interpretations of rules, and confusing and bureaucratic processes.
FEMA consistently requires disaster survivors to provide title
documentation in order to prove eligibility for the agency's Individual
Assistance (IA)\27\ program and other recovery aid, even though its own
guidance on Individual and Household Assistance allows alternative
documentation of ownership. Low-income homeowners, residents of
manufactured housing, renters without written leases, and other
individuals frequently lack such documentation or the ability to
quickly procure proper documents. FEMA's rigid and unnecessary policy
has harmed low-income disaster survivors since at least 1995.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Individual Assistance (IA) programs provide financial and
program assistance directly to disaster survivors, as opposed to
governments or eligible nonprofits. See: https://www.fema.gov/media-
library-data/l565194429982-5674cd8-399feaeb00cc72ab7fc4d84f/FACT-
SHEETIndividualAssistanceProgram.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
After Hurricane Maria, FEMA denied assistance to at least 77,000
survivors due to title docmnentation issues.\28\ For months, NLIHC's
Disaster Housing Recovery Coalition pushed FEMA to remove this
unnecessary obstacle to low-income Puerto Ricans receiving needed
assistance. Finally, FEMA's Office of Chief Counsel engaged and worked
with DHRC members Ayuda Legal Huracan Maria, Fundacion Fondo de Accesso
a la Justicia, and Servicios Legales de Puerto Rico to prepare a
``sworn statement'' that would allow Puerto Rican homeowners without
title documents to prove ownership of their homes so that they can
receive the assistance to which they are entitled. While FEMA allowed
survivors to use this method to apply for assistance, FEMA refused to
make the sworn statement available on its website or on social media.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ National Low Income Housing Coalition. 2019. Impact of
Hurricane Maria. Retrieved from https://nlihc.org/sites/default/files/
Hurricane-Impact-Maria.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These same issues occurred in the continental United States. In
North Carolina and other parts of the American South, rural,
historically African American communities often do not use title
systems, instead implementing informal systems like those used in
Puerto Rico. After Hurricane Katrina, thousands of poor Alabamians were
denied assistance due to lack of formal title on their damaged homes.
After Hurricane Michael, FEMA denied assistance to as many as 50
percent of applicants in certain parts of the panhandle largely due to
elderly households and mobile homeowners lacking FEMA-required title
documentation.\29\ After California's wildfires, FEMA denied assistance
to 70 percent of applicants due to title issues.\30\ Those denied were
predominantly rural mobile homeowners, many of them farmworkers or
other low-income workers, who do not have title to their homes. In all
cases, FEMA refused to modify its programs to accommodate the
situation, choosing instead to deny eligible applicants needed
assistance to which they were entitled.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ National Low Income Housing Coalition. 2019. Impact of
Hurricane Michael. Retrieved from https://nlihc.org/sites/default/
files/Hurricane-Impact-Michael.pdf.
\30\ National Low Income Housing Coalition. 2019. Impact of the
2018 California Wildfires. Retrieved from https://nlihc.org/sites/
default/files/Califonia_Wildfire-2018.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Work to reform FEMA's harmful policy began with efforts by NLIHC,
disaster survivors, and partners in Louisiana, Alabama, and Mississippi
after Hurricane Katrina, and they were continued by the DHRC and
advocates in Texas and Florida after Hurricanes Harvey and Michael, in
California after several wildfires, and in Puerto Rico in the aftermath
of Hurricane Maria.
After sustained advocacy, FEMA issued substantial changes in
September 2021 to how it conducts verification for occupancy and
ownership of disaster damaged homes.\31\ Under FEMA's new policy, these
survivors can now self-certify ownership of their homes when they do
not have other documentation, overcoming a major hurdle to recovery.
FEMA will also allow all survivors to submit a broader array of
documents to prove occupancy and ownership of their homes. These
changes are much-needed and long overdue. In addition, attention must
be given to the implementation of these rules, which anecdotally have
not been applied evenly in the response to Hurricane Ida.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ NLIHC. 2021. FEMA Announces Major Improvements for Low-Income
Disaster Survivors. Retrieved from: https://nlihc.org/resource/fema-
announces-major-improvements-low-income-disaster-survivors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Disincentives to apply for assistance like title documentation
requirements and resulting high denial rates not only limit immediate
assistance for low-income survivors, but also distort the entire
disaster recovery process because IA application data is used to make
funding determinations throughout the Federal disaster recovery
process.
fema's systemic lack of transparency
FEMA has consistently refused to clarify or make public important
information about its aid application process. By not releasing
this information, FEMA makes it difficult, if not impossible,
to determine who is eligible to receive assistance and why
assistance is denied. A confusing appeals process leads to
higher denial rates for low-income disaster survivors.
While FEMA, SBA, and HUD offer assistance programs to disaster
survivors, basic information on program eligibility is not made
publicly available. Without such information, disaster survivors often
apply to all programs with the hopes that at least some assistance will
be provided. For low-income individuals who may lack internet or phone
access or who may need special accommodations to allow them to apply,
completing multiple applications can be especially problematic. As a
result, many of the disaster survivors with the lowest incomes forgo
applying for assistance all together, despite their need.
FEMA has consistently refused to give survivors reasons up-front
for denials or opportunities for applicants to correct errors or
provide more information. Instead of receiving guidelines or
clarification from FEMA, survivors and advocates must work through a
lengthy administrative process in order to be given a reason for their
denial. The lack of clarity makes it more difficult for assistance
organizations attempting to inform and assist low-income survivors
after a disaster. As a result, appeals take longer and are more costly.
The FEMA appeals process is confusing and difficult. A denied
applicant must first submit a form explaining the dispute and providing
supporting documentation. FEMA denial letters, however, provide only
very vague reasons for the initial denial of assistance. The denied
applicant must refute all possible interpretations of the reason, or
they will lose their appeal. As a result, low-income survivors with
little access to legal representation or the money for a protracted
legal fight simply do not appeal at all.
It is extremely difficult to access basic data about FEMA programs
and processes. Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests to FEMA often
go months or years without being answered. NLIHC filed a FOIA request
in December 2018 requesting basic materials, including FEMA's
application for assistance, procedure manuals for determining
eligibility, and data-sharing agreements with HUD and other Federal
agencies. To date, FEMA has not provided these materials. In other
cases, FEMA refuses to provide basic information, claiming grounds of
privilege. In recent years, some progress has been made with the
release of data after major disasters through FEMA's OpenFEMA portal.
These changes, while a welcome development, are not enough and may not
be continued.
fema's inflexibility and inability to adjust to new conditions
Climate change means disasters are more destructive, more frequent,
and impact a broader geographic scope, posing new challenges for FEMA
and disaster recovery efforts. FEMA is not adapting its thinking or its
programs to respond to these challenges, instead sticking to a rigid
system of disaster aid and recovery based on responding to contained
local disasters. FEMA has little capacity to effectively deal with both
large, regional disasters and the unique circumstances and needs of a
specific community impacted by a disaster.
FEMA has a rigid allegiance to protocol over outcomes, a stubborn
reliance on programs inaccessible to low-income survivors and
repeatedly refuses to release important data on recovery outcomes. FEMA
relies heavily on protocol written in Washington, DC and not on what
the agency hears from advocates, survivors, FEMA employees in the
field, and other stakeholders. FEMA systems are not designed to adapt
to situations on the ground. As a result, predictable issues repeatedly
arise after each disaster and go unaddressed by the agency, further
harming low-income survivors.
FEMA has consistently failed to learn larger lessons from past
disasters and apply them to future disaster recovery efforts. FEMA's
own internal watchdog, the Department of Homeland Security Office of
the Inspector General, removed criticisms from reports on the agency's
disaster response and replaced them with success stories, praising
FEMA's work.\32\ As a result of this lack of internal critique and
self-adjustment, FEMA repeats the same mistakes, and does similar harm,
disaster after disaster.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ U.S. Department of Homeland Security Office of Homeland
Security. 2019. Special Report: Review Regarding DHS OIG's Retraction
of Thirteen Reports Evaluating FEMA 's Initial Response to Disasters.
Retrieved from https://www.oversight.gov/sites/default/files/oig-
reports/OIG-19-41-May19.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
equitable solutions centered on the needs of survivors
A reformed disaster housing recovery system that is centered on the
needs of the lowest-income and most marginalized survivors and their
communities must ensure opportunities for resident and public
engagement, systemic transparency, full accountability and due process,
robust equity and civil rights enforcement, fair mitigation practices,
and a focus on increased local capacity and benefit. These priorities
must be reflected in every stage of disaster recovery and response,
from pre-disaster emergency planning through long-term recovery and
post-recovery mitigation, to help address the systemic racism and
classism that have resulted in our broken current disaster housing
system.
Resident and Public Participation
A reformed disaster housing recovery and response framework must
ensure robust, on-going, and timely opportunities for public engagement
through structured collaboration with stakeholders beginning with
emergency planning and response and continuing through the closeout of
recovery and mitigation programs. Residents must be empowered to make
decisions for themselves and their communities, and their input must be
given substantial weight.
Current disaster housing response and recovery efforts effectively
limit opportunities for impacted residents to meaningfully engage and
contribute to the rebuilding of their communities after a disaster.
State officials are under enormous pressure to respond and rebuild as
quickly as possible, often making any public input process rushed and
ineffective. Engagement is often limited because residents are unaware
of emergency response, rebuilding, and mitigation plans, whether
because State officials fail to announce public meetings or because
materials are provided only in English or in formats that are not
accessible, including to people with disabilities. Moreover, plans
often do not include essential information--including information about
how funds will be spent and who will be eligible for which funds--that
is needed for the public to engage effectively. Opportunities for
engagement are limited, irregular, and occur too late in the process.
Systemic Transparency
Basic, essential information about Federal disaster response and
recovery efforts must be made publicly available in a timely manner.
This transparency must be systemized, so that it is not provided on an
ad hoc basis. Data transparency is critical to ensuring informed public
policy decisions, allowing greater public participation in disaster
recovery efforts, and helping public and private entities better
recognize gaps in services and identify reforms needed for future
disaster recovery efforts.
The current Federal disaster response and recovery, however,
suffers from a systemic lack of data transparency. After past
disasters, this failure to provide basic transparency--ranging from
damage assessments, determination of unmet needs, program design and
implementation, grantee and subgrantee performance, and how Federal
dollars are spent--has hampered efforts to effectively target and
distribute aid to those most in need.
Full Accountability and Due Process
Accountability and due process must be central in any reformed
disaster housing recovery and response framework. Federal efforts must
ensure that all eligible survivors receive the assistance needed to get
back on their feet.
The daunting application process for disaster aid discourages
survivors from applying for assistance. The application and appeals
processes are confusing, time-consuming, and frustrating. As a result,
low-income survivors--especially seniors, people with disabilities, and
people with limited English proficiency, and other individuals--face
high, unnecessary, and counterproductive barriers to receiving Federal
disaster housing recovery assistance and many forgo applying for
assistance altogether. By not providing full accountability,
transparency, and due process to applicants, the Federal Government has
made it difficult--if not impossible--to determine who is eligible to
receive assistance and why assistance was denied, leading to higher
denial rates for low-income disaster survivors.
Robust Equity and Civil Rights Enforcement
Equity must be a central and explicit goal of Federal disaster
housing response and recovery efforts, and each stage of the response
and recovery must be examined and reformed to ensure that Federal,
State, and local efforts actively dismantle systems of oppression. All
emergency response, long-term recovery, and mitigation actions must be
designed and pursued in a manner that addresses and prioritizes the
needs of the lowest-income survivors, people of color, seniors, people
with disabilities, immigrants, and other protected classes. All such
actions must also be explicitly anti-racist: Analyzed to determine if
they exacerbate, leave in place, or ameliorate existing or historic
patterns of segregation and discrimination in housing and
infrastructure, and remedied accordingly.
Fair Mitigation Practices
All emergency response, long-term recovery, and mitigation efforts
must be designed and pursued in a manner that provides survivors with
the choice to relocate or rebuild their communities resiliently,
minimizing displacement. As the climate changes, disasters will be both
more frequent and more destructive. In response, local and State
officials have begun to focus on mitigation and infrastructure
improvement. Too often, such upgrades go to more affluent communities,
while the needs of lower-income people and people of color are ignored.
Moreover, Federal, State, and local recovery efforts may actively
contribute to displacement by failing to provide survivors with
meaningful choices to rebuild resiliently, relocate, or improve
infrastructure (such as storm drainage, floodplain management, and
other common mitigation measures) in their disaster-affected
communities. This effectively leaves low-income survivors at greater
risk for future disasters than they were prior to the disaster.
Increased Local Capacity and Benefit
All emergency response, long-term recovery and mitigation efforts
must maximize the engagement of local contractors and workers and build
the capacity of local community-based organizations, putting as much
Federal resources as possible into the impacted economy and impacted
survivors.
Local community-based organizations and networks are in the best
position to engage with and have intimate awareness of the unique needs
of the lowest-income survivors. These local organizations often do not
receive the support needed to build capacity to scale up efforts
quickly after a disaster. By relying on out-of-town contractors for
everything from debris removal to repair of electrical grids, State and
local governments miss an opportunity provide employment, job training,
and contracting opportunities to low-income local workers and small-
and minority-controlled businesses, who often are in severe need of
work as a result of disasters' disruption to local business.
first steps to fix america's broken disaster housing recovery system
The ``Fixing America's Broken Disaster Housing Recovery System''
report provides specific policy recommendations to reimagine and
redesign a new disaster housing recovery framework that is centered on
the needs of the lowest-income and most marginalized survivors. This
work will take many years. However, there are a number of actions
Congress can take to immediately address some of the biggest challenges
facing survivors.
Permanently Authorize and Automatically Activate the Disaster Housing
Assistance Program (DHAP)
Congress should permanently authorize DHAP and automatically
activate it after every major disaster to provide longer-term housing
assistance and wrap-around services to low-income survivors. Such
assistance should be provided to eligible survivors until the long-term
housing recovery--including the rebuilding of affordable rental housing
stock--is complete.
Enact the ``Housing Survivors of Major Disasters Act''
Congress should enact the ``Housing Survivors of Major Disasters
Act,'' (H.R. 3037)\33\ introduced by Representative Adriano Espaillat
(D-NY) and Representative Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon (R-PR). The bill,
which passed unanimously out of the House Transportation and
Infrastructure Committee in February 2020, contains critically-needed
reforms to ensure that the lowest-income and most marginalized
survivors can access the housing assistance they need to rebuild their
lives. We thank the committee for its work on this bill and ask that
you attach the legislation to any upcoming emergency disaster
supplementals or appropriations language.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ H.R. 3037, ``Housing Survivors of Major Disasters Act of
2021.'' Retrieved from https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/
house-bill/3037/related-bills?1=38&s?1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The ``Housing Survivors of Major Disasters Act'' would address the
significant title/documentation challenges that have resulted in tens
of thousands of eligible disaster survivors being wrongfully denied
FEMA assistance. The bill would cement and expand upon recent FEMA
application process reforms in statute while also extending the
benefits of the new policy to those denied assistance in the past. It
would provide a new framework to make it easier for disaster survivors
to prove residency in disaster-impacted areas, either by completing a
``declarative statement'' form or by submitting a broader range of
acceptable documents such as utility bills, credit card statements, pay
stubs, and school registration in lieu of a formal title to property or
leases.
Ensure Equity is an Explicit Policy Goal
Congress must ensure that equity is a central and explicit goal of
Federal disaster housing response and recovery efforts. Our current
disaster housing recovery framework exacerbates and reinforces racial,
income, and accessibility inequities at each stage of response and
recovery. Survivors of color and communities of color are
disproportionately harmed by the current disaster housing recovery
system.
Federal disaster housing response and recovery efforts must address
and prioritize the needs of the lowest-income and most marginalized
survivors, including people of color, people with disabilities,
immigrants, and other protected classes. All actions must be explicitly
anti-racist: Analyzed to determine if they exacerbate, leave in place,
or ameliorate existing or historic patterns of segregation and
discrimination in housing and infrastructure and remedied accordingly.
Congress must ensure that disaster housing recovery efforts undo
the racial, income, and accessibility inequities embedded in our
current disaster housing recovery framework. Disaster recovery
efforts--which often include significant, robust funds--represent a
unique opportunity to rebuild in a way that addresses, rather than
entrenches, these disparities.
Require Full Transparency
Congress should require that FEMA provide basic, essential
information about Federal disaster response and recovery efforts,
including damage assessments, determination of unmet needs, program
design and implementation, grantee and subgrantee performance, and how
Federal dollars are spent. Congress should require FEMA to provide full
transparency on program eligibility, the aid application process, and
reasons for denials of assistance. Data collected by the Government
must be open and accessible at the most granular and comprehensive
level, while protecting personally identifiable information. This
information must be made publicly available in a timely manner and this
transparency must be systemized, so that it is not only provided on an
ad-hoc basis.
Data transparency allows policy makers and advocates to be informed
about program results and make policy improvements and incorporate best
practices into future activities. Issues of equity clearly exist in the
disaster recovery process, and Congress must require FEMA to implement
better transparency practices so the problems can be identified and
rectified.
Ensure Survivor-Centered Approaches to Assistance
Congress must ensure that every survivor receives assistance to
which they are entitled. FEMA maintains a culture of rigid allegiance
to narrowly-defined protocol over outcomes; as a result, many disaster
survivors, including many of the lowest-income survivors, are
wrongfully denied needed assistance. Congress should require FEMA to
prioritize categorical eligibility, simplify the application and
appeals process, and track and report on outcomes to ensure recovery
aid reaches those in need.
Rather than creating and implementing numerous categories of
ineligibility, disaster assistance programs should employ broad-based
categories of eligibility, with the aim that every survivor receives
the recovery assistance to which they are entitled. Through the use of
damage assessments, geographic information, and other data, a reformed
Federal disaster housing recovery system can provide categorical
eligibility to survivors in disaster-impacted areas. With a shift in
emphasis to categorical eligibility, many of the convoluted rules and
requirements employed by recovery assistance programs will no longer be
necessary, allowing for an easier, quicker, and more flexible
application process.
FEMA should allow for a flexible system of documentation for
distributing disaster recovery assistance. Applying the least
restrictive guidance regarding alternative documentation--and doing so
consistently across all jurisdictions--would cut down on wasted time
and confusion on the parts of both applicants and advocates alike. In
order to employ full categorical eligibility, there must be a system in
place that permits alternative documentation to ensure all survivors
can receive assistance.
Congress should also require FEMA, HUD, and other Federal agencies
involved in disaster recovery efforts to work together and create a
single, universal application for aid to make the process easier,
quicker, and more flexible, reducing the administrative burden and
speeding the process.
Address the Unique Needs of People Experiencing Homelessness
Congress should enact legislation to ensure equitable treatment of
individuals experiencing homelessness through the response and recovery
effort. Pre-disaster homeless populations are often denied FEMA
assistance. Even if they lost all of their belongs in the disaster,
FEMA will often deny survivors any benefits once their status as pre-
disaster homeless is established.\34\ With no resources to adequately
prepare or recover from a disaster, people experiencing homelessness
are among the most harmed disaster survivors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ Ehrlich, A. 2019. After Wildfires, Homeless People Left Out of
Federal Disaster Aid Programs, Oregon Public Broadcasting. Retrieved
from https://www.opb.org/news/article/fema-disaster-aid-wildfires-
homeless-people/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
FEMA has interpreted current law to deny assistance to people
experiencing homelessness prior to a disaster, despite their
exceptional needs. Congress should enact clarifying legislation to
ensure that people experiencing homelessness prior to the disaster have
access to the same emergency shelter and disaster relief assistance as
other survivors, including rental assistance.
conclusion
Our country must develop a new disaster housing recovery system
that centers the housing needs of the lowest-income survivors,
including people of color, people with disabilities, and others. In
addition to addressing immediate housing needs caused by the pandemic,
Congress should address our Nation's pervasive structural and racial
inequities and reform Federal disaster planning and response efforts to
be inclusive and intersectional. We must reform existing programs by
centering racial equity and equity for all historically marginalized
people to ensure that affordable housing investments and Federal
disaster recovery resources reach all impacted households.

Chairman Thompson. Let me thank the witnesses personally
for their testimony and the Members for their questions.
Clearly some of the things outlined here today I am convinced
that a conversation with the FEMA administrator and others we
can resolve, but others I think, in conversation with the
Ranking Member, we are going to have to produce some
legislation. But your testimony has made our job much easier
because many of the things you brought--highlight here today
are things we have been talking about internally among staff
and ourselves.
So I want to thank you very much for that.
The Chair reminds Members that the committee's record will
remain open for 10 business days.
Without objection, the committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:32 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
