- CYBER THREATS IN THE PIPELINE: LESSONS FROM THE FEDERAL RESPONSE TO THE COLONIAL PIPELINE RANSOMWARE ATTACK

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CYBER THREATS IN THE PIPELINE: LESSONS FROM
THE FEDERAL RESPONSE TO THE COLONIAL
PIPELINE RANSOMWARE ATTACK

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY,
INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION,
AND INNOVATION

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 15, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-18

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-310 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2021

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            John Katko, New York
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island      Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Clay Higgins, Louisiana
J. Luis Correa, California           Michael Guest, Mississippi
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri            Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Al Green, Texas                      Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Yvette D. Clarke, New York           Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
Eric Swalwell, California            Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Dina Titus, Nevada                   Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey    Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Val Butler Demings, Florida          Peter Meijer, Michigan
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California    Kat Cammack, Florida
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          August Pfluger, Texas
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey
Ritchie Torres, New York
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Daniel Kroese, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, AND
INNOVATION

Yvette D. Clarke, New York, Chairwoman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York,
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island          Ranking Member
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Ritchie Torres, New York             Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex  Jake LaTurner, Kansas
officio)                         John Katko, New York (ex officio)
Moira Bergin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Austin Agrella, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
Mariah Harding, Subcommittee Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey, Chairwoman
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida,
Dina Titus, Nevada                       Ranking Member
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex  Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
officio)                         John Katko, New York (ex officio)
Alex Marston, Subcomittee Staff Director
Kathryn Maxwell, Minority Subcomittee Staff Director
Alice Hayes, Subcomittee Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Yvette D. Clarke, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York, and Chairwoman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................     5
Prepared Statement.............................................     7
The Honorable Andrew R. Garbarino, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................     9
The Honorable Bonnie Watson Coleman, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New Jersey, and Chairwoman, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Carlos A. Gimenez, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Florida, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    10

Witnesses

Ms. Sonya T. Proctor, Assistant Administrator for Surface
Operations, Transportation Security Administration, U.S.
Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    12
Prepared Statement.............................................    13
Mr. Eric Goldstein, Executive Assistant Director for
Cybersecurity, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency, U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    16
Prepared Statement.............................................    18

Appendix

Question From Honorable Jefferson Van Drew for Sonya T. Proctor..    45
Question From Honorable Jefferson Van Drew for Eric Goldstein....    45

CYBER THREATS IN THE PIPELINE: LESSONS FROM THE FEDERAL RESPONSE TO THE
COLONIAL PIPELINE RANSOMWARE ATTACK

----------

Tuesday, June 15, 2021

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure
Protection, and Innovation, and the
Subcommittee on Transportation
and Maritime Security,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:37 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. Bonnie Watson Coleman [Chairwoman of the
Subcommittee on Transportation & Maritime Security] presiding.
Present: Representatives Clarke, Watson Coleman, Langevin,
Titus, Slotkin, Gottheimer, Rice, Luria, Thompson (ex officio),
Garbarino, Gimenez, Van Drew, Harshbarger, Miller-Meeks, Clyde,
and LaTurner.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. The Subcommittee on Transportation &
Maritime Security and the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation will come to order
for today's hearing titled ``Cyber Threats in the Pipeline:
Lessons from the Federal Response to the Colonial Pipeline
Ransomware Attack.''
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare the
subcommittee in recess at any point.
Thank you to Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Gimenez,
Ranking Member Garbarino, and our panel of witnesses for
joining us.
The impacts of the May 7 ransomware attack on Colonial
Pipeline were far-reaching. As we all know now, nearly half of
the East Coast's fuel is supplied by the Colonial Pipeline.
When the pipeline was shut down, Americans struggled to fill up
their gas tanks, and the incident threatened to cause major
disruptions to the economy and well-being of our country. That
is why it is so important for us to have a conversation today
about the Federal Government's response to the Colonial
incident and its role in ensuring the cybersecurity of our
critical infrastructure.
Last week, we heard from the CEO of Colonial Pipeline about
how his company responded to the ransomware attack against it.
I also asked him why his company, prior to the attack, appears
to have resisted TSA's efforts to assess its pipeline security
prior to the attack.
Today, we will hear from TSA and CISA, the DHS components
that are charged with ensuring the cybersecurity of our
Nation's pipelines and responding to cyber incidents. I am
looking forward to learning, not only about TSA and CISA's
engagement with Colonial before and after this incident, but
also about their plans to ensure we are better prepared next
time. Unfortunately, we know that there will be a next time.
In recent weeks, we have seen 2 transportation systems fall
victim to ransomware attacks in New York City and in
Massachusetts. Hospitals have been brought to a halt. Even one
of our Nation's largest meat-packers was shut down.
We must ask ourselves what is next. Our power grid? Our
aviation system? Maybe the next time it won't be foreign
hackers looking for a quick payday but, rather, a nation-state
looking to cripple our economy. Given the magnitude of these
threats, we need to ensure CISA and sector-specific agencies
like TSA have the tools and the authorities that they need to
take action and that they use them.
In the pipeline context, since TSA's establishment nearly
20 years ago, it has been the principal Federal entity
responsible for pipeline security. To this end, TSA publishes
pipeline security guidance and conducts pipeline security
assessments and inspections, including assessments that focus
specifically on cybersecurity. To date, these assessments have
been voluntary and, unfortunately, voluntary standards have
proven insufficient.
According to TSA, prior to the attack, TSA had asked
Colonial Pipeline on no less than 13 occasions to participate
in physical and cyber pipeline security assessments. Citing
COVID-19, Colonial repeatedly delayed and chose not to
participate. On multiple occasions Colonial didn't even bother
responding to TSA's emails. In fact, Colonial still has not
agreed to participate in a physical assessment, and only agreed
to cooperate with TSA's cybersecurity assessment 3 weeks after
the ransomware attack occurred.
What's more, when a Member of this committee asked
Colonial's CEO whether he would accept CISA's assistance, he
politely but firmly declined. If this is at all indicative of
how pipeline owners and operators view their regulators and
their Federal partners, we have a problem. Although many of
these systems may be owned by private companies, when you
operate infrastructure that we all depend on, you have a
responsibility to the public.
The good news is that the TSA administrator has existing
authority--statutory authority--to address this. Just a few
weeks ago, TSA used this authority to impose the first
mandatory cybersecurity requirements on pipeline owners and
operators. Specifically, now they must report breaches,
designate cybersecurity coordinators, and self-assess their
compliance with TSA security guidance.
This is an important first step, but there is clearly more
that needs to be done. We must resource and empower TSA and
CISA to act boldly and swiftly to ensure operators of pipelines
and all other forms of transportation harden their systems.
Meanwhile, it is similarly important that other agencies in the
Federal Government respect TSA and CISA's experience and
expertise on these matters.
The cybersecurity of our critical infrastructure is too
serious for us to reinvent the wheel by providing duplicative
authorities to the Department of Energy. DHS has the existing
statutory authority and technical talent that we need to tackle
this challenge.
Finally, before I conclude, I must note my disappointment
that the FBI declined an invitation to attend this hearing. It
is critical that Members fully understand the FBI's role and
efforts to counter cyber threats, and I look forward to their
participation in future events on these topics.
That said, I am looking forward to hearing from today's
witnesses about how the attack on Colonial Pipeline will inform
their approaches going forward.
[The statement of Chairwoman Watson Coleman follows:]
Statement of Chairwoman Bonnie Watson Coleman
June 15, 2021
The impacts of the May 7 ransomware attack on Colonial Pipeline
were far-reaching. As we all know now, nearly half of the East Coast's
fuel is supplied by the Colonial Pipeline. When the pipeline was shut
down, Americans struggled to fill up their gas tanks, and the incident
threatened to cause major disruptions to the economy and well-being of
our country. That's why it's so important for us to have a conversation
today about the Federal Government's response to the Colonial incident
and its role in ensuring the cybersecurity of our critical
infrastructure.
Last week, we heard from the CEO of Colonial Pipeline about how his
company responded to the ransomware attack against it. I also asked him
why his company, prior to the attack, appears to have resisted TSA's
efforts to assess the pipeline's security prior to the attack. Today,
we will hear from TSA and CISA--the DHS components charged with
ensuring the cybersecurity of our Nation's pipelines and responding to
cyber incidents. I am looking forward to learning not only about TSA
and CISA's engagement with Colonial before and after this incident, but
also about their plans to ensure we are better prepared next time.
Unfortunately, we know there will be a next time.
In recent weeks, we've seen 2 transportation systems fall victim to
ransomware attacks in New York City and Massachusetts. Hospitals have
been brought to a halt. Even one of our Nation's largest meatpackers
was shut down. We must ask ourselves: What's next? Our power grid? Our
aviation system? Maybe next time it won't be foreign hackers looking
for a quick pay day, but rather a nation-state looking to cripple our
economy. Given the magnitude of these threats, we need to ensure CISA
and sector-specific agencies like TSA have the tools and authorities
they need to take action--and that they use them.
In the pipeline context, since TSA's establishment nearly 20 years
ago, it has been the principal Federal entity responsible for pipeline
security. To this end, TSA publishes pipeline security guidance and
conducts pipeline security assessments and inspections--including
assessments that focus specifically on cybersecurity. To date, these
assessments have been voluntary--and unfortunately, voluntary standards
have proven insufficient.
According to TSA, prior to the attack TSA asked Colonial Pipeline
on no less than 13 occasions to participate in physical and cyber
pipeline security assessments. Citing COVID-19, Colonial repeatedly
delayed and chose not to participate. On multiple occasions, Colonial
didn't even bother responding to TSA's emails. In fact, Colonial still
has not agreed to participate in the physical assessment, and only
agreed to cooperate with TSA's cybersecurity assessment 3 weeks after
the ransomware attack occurred. What's more, when a Member of this
committee asked Colonial's CEO whether he'd accept CISA's assistance,
he politely but firmly declined. If this is at all indicative of how
pipeline owners and operators view their regulators, we have a problem.
Although many of these systems may be owned by private companies,
when you operate infrastructure that we all depend on, you have a
responsibility to the public. The good news is that the TSA
administrator has existing statutory authority to address this. Just a
few weeks ago, TSA used this authority to impose the first mandatory
cybersecurity requirements on pipeline owners and operators.
Specifically, now they must report breaches, designate cybersecurity
coordinators, and self-assess their compliance with TSA's security
guidance. This is an important first step, but there is clearly more
that needs to be done.
We must resource and empower TSA and CISA to act boldly and swiftly
to ensure operators of pipelines and all other forms of transportation
harden their systems. Meanwhile, it is similarly important that other
agencies in the Federal Government respect TSA and CISA's experience
and expertise on these matters. The cybersecurity of our critical
infrastructure is too serious for us to reinvent the wheel by providing
duplicative authorities to the Department of Energy. DHS has the
existing statutory authority and technical talent we need to tackle
this challenge.
Finally, before I conclude, I must note my disappointment that the
FBI declined an invitation to attend this hearing. It is critical that
Members fully understand the FBI's role and efforts in countering cyber
threats, and I look forward to their participation in future events on
these topics.

Mrs. Watson Coleman. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee on Transportation & Maritime
Security, the gentleman from Florida, for an opening statement.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Chairwoman Watson Coleman,
Chairwoman Clarke, and Ranking Member Garbarino.
I am pleased that the CIPI and TMS subcommittees are
holding this joint hearing today on cyber threats to pipelines.
As we saw with the recent ransomware attack on the Colonial
Pipeline, securing our Nation's 2.7 million miles of pipeline
is of utmost importance.
I look forward to hearing today from Mr. Eric Goldstein of
CISA and Ms. Sonya Proctor of TSA on how CISA and TSA work
together to ensure pipelines are secure from cyber threats. I
thank the witnesses for their time today.
I am interested to hear from TSA on the pipeline industry's
compliance with the security directive that TSA issued last
month. I look forward to Ms. Proctor detailing what plans TSA
has for additional directives in the near future.
I am concerned with the approach to move pipeline security
oversight from the Department of Homeland Security and into the
Department of Energy. I wholeheartedly agree that there is more
that TSA can do in terms of increasing its resources and
expertise, but I believe TSA or the Department of Homeland
Security is the appropriate agency to oversee pipeline
security.
TSA's close corroboration with CISA serves to ensure that
there is a strong DHS effort in securing all transportation
modes against cyber threats. As a committee, we need to
continue to strengthen our Nation's cybersecurity by
strengthening CISA and giving them all the tools and
responsibilities needed to keep all of our cyber infrastructure
safe and secure.
I look forward to the discussion today of finding ways to
improve security of our Nation's pipelines against continued
threats of cyber attacks and, frankly, all of our Nation's
security threats and how we can protect the United States of
America from cyber threats in the future.
Madam Chairwoman, I also share your displeasure that the
FBI did not participate today.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I yield back the balance of my
time.
[The statement of Ranking Member Gimenez follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Carlos A. Gimenez
Thank you, Chairwoman Watson Coleman, Chairwoman Clarke, and
Ranking Member Garbarino. I am pleased that the CIPI and TMS
subcommittees are holding this joint hearing today on cyber threats to
pipelines. As we saw with the recent ransomware attack on Colonial
Pipeline, securing our Nation's 2.7 million miles of pipeline is of
utmost importance.
I look forward to hearing today from Mr. Eric Goldstein of CISA and
Ms. Sonya Proctor of TSA on how CISA and TSA work together to ensure
pipelines are secure from cyber threats. I thank the witnesses for
their time today.
I am interested to hear from TSA on the pipeline industry's
compliance with the Security Directive that TSA issued last month. I
look forward to Ms. Proctor detailing what plans TSA has for additional
directives in the near future.
I am concerned with the push to move pipeline security oversight
from the Department of Homeland Security and into the Department of
Energy. I wholeheartedly agree that there is more that TSA can do in
terms of increasing its resources and expertise, but I believe TSA or
the Department of Homeland Security are the appropriate agency to
oversee pipeline security.
TSA's close collaboration with CISA serves to ensure that there is
a strong DHS effort in securing all transportation modes against cyber
threats. As a committee we need to continue to strengthen our Nation's
cybersecurity by strengthening CISA and giving them all the tools and
responsibilities needed to keep all of our cyber infrastructure safe
and secure.
I look forward to the discussion today and finding ways to improve
the security of our Nation's pipeline against the continued threat of
cyber attacks and frankly, all of our Nation's security threats and how
we can protect the United States from cyber attacks in the future.
Madam Chairwoman, I also share your displeasure that the FBI did not
participate today. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I yield back the
balance of my time.

Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Ranking Member.
The Chair now recognizes the Chairwoman of the Subcommittee
on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation,
the gentlelady from New York, for an opening statement.
Ms. Clarke. I thank you, Madam Chairwoman, Bonnie Watson
Coleman. To Ranking Members Gimenez and Garbarino, I thank you
for working with me on today's hearing, and to our witnesses
for joining us today.
The ransomware attack on Colonial Pipeline was a reminder
to us all that cyber attacks can do more than compromise our
data. We have seen ransomware attacks cripple hospitals,
manufacturers, municipalities, and meat packers. We have seen
ransom demands skyrocket, operations brought to a standstill,
and organizations left without many viable options aside from
paying an unknown group of criminals who may or may not be
subject to U.S. sanctions.
Unfortunately, the takeaway for many of our criminals
behind these attacks is ransomware is easy money. These attacks
are not the stuff of SolarWinds. They are simple,
unsophisticated, and rely on common cybersecurity missteps
present in most organizations.
I say this not to be fatalistic but to acknowledge the
tremendous challenge we face. These attacks are not going to
slow down, and adversaries have learned that the higher the
stakes for the victim, the higher the payout they will likely
get.
If there is one message I hope to drive home today it is
that this administration needs to have a plan for responding to
cyber incidents and be ready to execute that plan at a moment's
notice, specifically the National Cyber Incident Response Plan,
which lays out clear roles for CISA, FBI, and other parts of
the Federal Government that play a role in responding to cyber
attacks on critical infrastructure.
We also have long-standing directives, like PPD-21 and PPD-
41, that makes CISA responsible for coordinating Federal
efforts to secure critical infrastructure and doing so hand-in-
hand with Sector Risk Management agencies like TSA, which
oversees security for the pipeline sector.
It appears the administration deviated from that plan in a
number of ways, and I want to understand why that happened and
what is being done to fix it. I want to see this administration
become a well-oiled machine when it comes to responding to
these attacks because that is what will be demanded moving
forward.
The second point I hope to make today is this: Although
CISA has come a long way in a short amount of time, there is
still parts of its mission that we need to clarify, and there
are parts of its mission that we need to authorize and resource
commensurate to the enormous job we are asking this new agency
to do.
Right now, CISA is tasked with leading asset response
activities during a significant cyber incident, but what if the
victim organization hires FireEye instead? What if they decline
CISA's offer to provide technical assistance and delay or
refuse to share information about the incident with CISA? What
if they never report the incident to the Federal Government in
the first place?
This undermines our National security. CISA needs access to
information it can use to understand the threat landscape and
develop technical indicators that will help other entities
prepare for similar attacks.
As I have said before, I am working on legislation that
will require critical infrastructure to report certain
cybersecurity incidents to CISA, so that we are developing the
muscle memory and the institutional knowledge to improve our
cyber defenses over time. But this is only half of the battle.
CISA also needs real-time visibility into threats on private-
sector networks, so they are empowered to collaborate with
owners and operators before, during, and after an attack, or
prevent the attack from happening in the first place.
This is especially true for the industrial control systems
that power pipeline operations, energy generation, and
countless other industrial functions we rely on each and every
day. These systems are increasingly connected to business and
IT networks, which makes them vulnerable, and simply severing
those connections is not always feasible.
For the past few years, CISA has been piloting a program
called CyberSentry that gives CISA the ability to monitor and
detect cyber threats on participating critical infrastructure
partner networks and work proactively with owners and operators
to address threats in real time. This is exactly the kind of
operational role that Congress envisioned CISA playing on
critical infrastructure cybersecurity, and I am currently
working on legislation to strengthen and codify these efforts.
I would be remiss if I did not mention that the Federal
Government can only do so much. We need private-sector critical
infrastructure to step up, not just by investing in their own
cybersecurity, but also by partnering with the Federal
Government. We need the private sector to open the door to CISA
and TSA, not just because it benefits them, but because it
benefits our collective National security.
In conclusion, I will also echo the Chairwoman's
disappointment and our Ranking Member's disappointment that the
FBI declined our invitation to participate in today's hearing.
You cannot espouse the virtues of a whole-of-Government
response 1 minute and then refuse to appear before the Congress
with your interagency partners the next. But I, nevertheless,
look forward to hearing from the DHS officials who have
answered the call to testify before us today.
With that, Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
[The statement of Chairwoman Clarke follows:]
Statement of Chairwoman Yvette D. Clarke
June 15, 2021
The ransomware attack on Colonial Pipeline was a reminder to us all
that cyber attacks can do more than compromise our data. We've seen
ransomware attacks cripple hospitals, manufacturers, municipalities,
and meatpackers. We've seen ransom demands skyrocket, operations
brought to a standstill, and organizations left without many viable
options aside from paying an unknown group of criminals who may or may
not be subject to U.S. sanctions. Unfortunately, the takeaway for many
of criminals behind these attacks is: Ransomware is easy money.
These attacks are not the stuff of SolarWinds--they're simple,
unsophisticated, and rely on common cybersecurity missteps present in
most organizations. I say this not to be fatalistic, but to acknowledge
the tremendous challenge we face. These attacks are not going to slow
down--and adversaries have learned that the higher the stakes for the
victim, the higher the payout they'll likely get.
If there is one message I hope to drive home today, it's that this
administration needs to have a plan for responding to cyber incidents,
and be ready to execute that plan in a moment's notice. Specifically,
the National Cyber Incident Response Plan--which lays out clear roles
for CISA, FBI, and other parts of the Federal Government that play a
role in responding to cyber attacks on critical infrastructure. We also
have long-standing directives, like PPD-21 and PPD-41, that make CISA
responsible for coordinating Federal efforts to secure critical
infrastructure, and doing so hand-in-hand with Sector Risk Management
agencies like TSA, which oversees security for the pipeline sector.
It appears the administration deviated from that plan in a number
of ways--and I want to understand why that happened, and what's being
done to fix it. I want to see this administration become a well-oiled
machine when it comes to responding to these attacks--because that's
what will be demanded moving forward. The second point I hope to make
today is this: Although CISA has come a long way in a short amount of
time, there are still parts of its mission that we need to clarify.
And, there are parts of its mission that we need to authorize and
resource commensurate to the enormous job we're asking this new agency
to do.
Right now, CISA is tasked with leading asset response activities
during a significant cyber incident--but what if the victim
organization hires FireEye instead? What if they decline CISA's offer
to provide technical assistance and delay or refuse to share
information about the incident with CISA? What if they never report the
incident to the Federal Government in the first place? This undermines
our National security. CISA needs access to information it can use to
understand the threat landscape and develop technical indicators that
will help other entities prepare for similar attacks.
As I've said before, I'm working on legislation that will require
critical infrastructure to report certain cybersecurity incidents to
CISA so that we're developing the muscle memory and the institutional
knowledge to improve our cyber defenses over time. But this is only
half the battle. CISA also needs real-time visibility into threats on
private-sector networks, so they're empowered to collaborate with
owners and operators before, during, and after an attack--or, prevent
the attack from happening in the first place.
This is especially true for the industrial control systems that
power pipeline operations, energy generation, and countless other
industrial functions we rely on every day. These systems are
increasingly connected to business and IT networks, which makes them
vulnerable--and simply severing those connections is not always
feasible.
For the past few years, CISA has been piloting a program called
CyberSentry that gives CISA the ability to monitor and detect cyber
threats on participating critical infrastructure partner networks, and
work proactively with owners and operators to address threats in real
time. This is exactly the kind of operational role that Congress
envisioned CISA playing on critical infrastructure cybersecurity, and I
am currently working on legislation to strengthen and codify these
efforts. I would be remiss if I did not mention that the Federal
Government can only do so much.
We need private-sector critical infrastructure to step up--not just
by investing in their own cybersecurity, but also by partnering with
the Federal Government. We need the private sector to open the door to
CISA and TSA--not just because it benefits them, but because it
benefits our collective National security. In conclusion, I will echo
the Chairwoman's disappointment that the FBI declined our invitation to
participate in today's hearing. You cannot espouse the virtues of a
whole-of-Government's response 1 minute, then refuse to appear before
Congress with your interagency partners the next.

Mrs. Watson Coleman. I thank the gentlelady from New York.
I now recognize the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation, the
gentleman from New York, for an opening statement.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Chairwoman.
First, I would like to thank you, as well as Chairwoman
Clarke and Ranking Member Gimenez, for calling this important
hearing. I thank our witnesses for being here today.
Last week's full committee hearing on this topic was an
important opportunity to peer into the decision-making process
at Colonial and to better understand the business or victim-
facing side of an attack. This week's hearing affords us a
unique opportunity to closer examine the Federal Government's
coordination and response efforts following an attack.
While Ranking Member Katko, myself, and our partners on the
other side of the aisle have all expressed concern with the
White House's decision to have the Department of Energy leading
the Federal response to this attack instead of CISA and TSA as
the lead agencies for the pipeline sector, we should all
recognize that the decision was not any of yours to make. We
are very appreciative of your efforts in response to this hack
and many others, but there are clearly still many questions
regarding this attack that need answers, and I hope we are able
to get clarity on the outstanding issues here today.
I am also interested in learning more about the value CISA
is providing to industry leadership such as organization CEOs
and CIOs. CISA provides a treasure trove of helpful guidance
and resources for organizations to bolster their cyber posture,
but it is increasingly clear that it should be hitting the
desks of our Nation's CEOs and CIOs who are making the tough
investment decisions.
While many of the Members of our subcommittees understand
the inherent value that CISA provides to agencies and industry
alike, the truth is that CISA still has a lot to prove to the
Hill, and it is important that you all are able to demonstrate
that value. As the newest agency with the newest department,
you are going to have to be forceful in staking your claim to
ensure you are all leading the charge on major cyber incidents.
The White House also shoulders some responsibility. It must
empower CISA with the stature to be successful and
appropriately delineate responsibilities between CISA, the
Sector Risk Management agencies, and the incoming National
cyber director. Cyber threats are rarely isolated to one
sector, but CISA's role as the central agency that can connect
the dots and share threat information across multiple sectors
will help secure all critical infrastructure across our Nation.
It is also important that you all are not bashful when it
comes to highlighting areas that need strengthening and areas
that require additional resources, personnel, or authorities.
Thank you all for being here today. I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Garbarino follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Andrew R. Garbarino
I thank our Chairs for calling this important hearing, and I thank
our witnesses for being here today.
Last week's full committee hearing on this topic was an important
opportunity to peer into the decision-making process at Colonial and to
better understand the business or victim-facing side of an attack.
This week's hearing affords us a unique opportunity to closer
examine the Federal Government's coordination and response efforts
following an attack.
While Ranking Member Katko, myself, and our partners on the other
side of the aisle have all expressed concern with the White House's
decision to have the Department of Energy leading the Federal response
to this attack, instead of CISA and TSA as the lead agencies for the
pipeline sector, we should all recognize that the decision was not any
of yours to make. We are very appreciative of your efforts in response
to this hack, and many others.
But there are clearly still many questions regarding this attack
that need answers, and I hope we're able to get clarity on the
outstanding issues here today.
I'm also interested in learning more about the value CISA is
providing to industry leadership, such as organization CEOs and CIOs.
CISA provides a treasure trove of helpful guidance and resources for
organizations to bolster their cyber posture, but it's increasingly
clear that it should be hitting the desk of our Nation's CEOs and CIOs,
who are making the tough investment decisions.
While many of the Members of our subcommittees understand the
inherent value that CISA provides to agencies and industry alike, the
truth is that CISA still has a lot to prove to the Hill, and it's
important that you all are able to demonstrate that value.
As the newest agency within the newest department, you are going to
have to be forceful in staking your claim to ensure you all are leading
the charge on major cyber incidents. The White House also shoulders
some responsibility. It must empower CISA with the stature to be
successful and appropriately delineate responsibilities between CISA,
the Sector Risk Management agencies, and the incoming National cyber
director. Cyber threats are rarely isolated to one sector, thus CISA's
role as the central agency that can connect the dots and share threat
information across multiple sectors will help secure all critical
infrastructure across our Nation.
It is also important that you all are not bashful when it comes to
highlighting areas that need strengthening, and areas that require
additional resources, personnel, or authorities.
Thank you all for being here today.

Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you very much to the Ranking
Member.
Members are also reminded that the committees will operate
according to the guidelines laid out by the Chairman and the
Ranking Member in their February 3 colloquy regarding remote
procedures.
The Chair now recognizes the Chairman of the full
committee, the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Thompson, for an
opening statement.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much.
Good afternoon. I want to thank Chairwoman Watson Coleman
and Chairwoman Clarke for holding this important hearing on the
Federal response to the recent ransomware attack on Colonial
Pipeline.
The attack on May 7 that resulted in a week-long shutdown
of 5,500 miles of petroleum pipeline on the East Coast clearly
represents a significant cyber attack on critical
transportation infrastructure. It is clear that the future will
bring more attacks like this, whether they are by organizations
like DarkSide that seek to exploit cybersecurity weaknesses for
profit or foreign enemies seeking to weaken our Nation. The
Federal Government must be prepared to fight off attacks and
respond to successful security breaches swiftly and
effectively.
The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency is the
lead Federal coordinator for securing critical infrastructure
from cyber attacks, and the Transportation Security
Administration is the designated Sector Risk Management agency
for pipelines. Yet Colonial failed to properly engage with TSA
in recent months in order to safeguard their pipeline against
attacks, and repeatedly rejected technical assistance from CISA
following the ransomware incident.
While I am pleased that Colonial has finally agreed to a
virtual cybersecurity assessment from TSA, I am alarmed that
they refused to do so until 3 weeks after an attack that
resulted in the full shutdown of their pipeline. Despite
authority placed within the Department of Homeland Security to
respond to cyber attacks on pipelines, including through TSA's
authority to issue emergency security directives, the
Department of Energy was made the lead agency for response to
the Colonial incident.
Additionally, the Federal Government did not deem the
attack a significant cyber incident, as defined by policy,
despite its substantial impact. If you don't believe me, ask
those folks who were trying to find gasoline all over,
everywhere, while this event was going on. It was a significant
cyber event.
Cyber incident response plans have been carefully crafted
to ensure proper Government response to incidents, and we must
ensure they are followed appropriately. The attacks on Colonial
and others provide opportunities to learn and improve the
resiliency of the pipeline sector and critical infrastructure
across the United States.
I was pleased to see TSA take initial action by issuing the
first-ever mandatory cybersecurity requirements for pipelines.
These new requirements went into effect on May 28 and will be
critical to improving coordination among the pipeline industry,
CISA, and TSA.
More must be done to increase protections for our pipelines
and allow Federal authorities greater ability to assess
weaknesses in critical transportation infrastructure.
Unfortunately, cyber criminals are not going anywhere anytime
soon. In fact, they are getting smarter, and cyber attacks are
likely to become more common. We must ensure the Department of
Homeland Security remains at the forefront of protecting our
critical infrastructure from these threats.
I look forward to our testimony. I yield back, Madam Chair.
[The statement of Chairman Thompson follows:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
June 15, 2021
The attack on May 7 that resulted in the week-long shutdown of
5,500 miles of petroleum pipeline on the East Coast clearly represents
a significant cyber attack on critical transportation infrastructure.
It is clear that the future will bring more attacks like this, whether
from organizations like DarkSide that seek to exploit cybersecurity
weaknesses for profit or foreign enemies seeking to weaken our Nation.
The Federal Government must be prepared to fight off attacks and
respond to successful security breaches swiftly and effectively. The
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency is the lead Federal
coordinator for securing critical infrastructure from cyber attacks,
and the Transportation Security Administration is the designated Sector
Risk Management agency for pipelines. Yet Colonial failed to properly
engage with TSA in recent months in order to safeguard their pipelines
against attack and repeatedly rejected technical assistance from CISA
following the ransomware incident.
While I am pleased that Colonial has finally agreed to a virtual
cybersecurity assessment from TSA, I am alarmed that they refused to do
so until 3 weeks after an attack that resulted in the full shutdown of
their pipeline. Despite the authority placed within the Department of
Homeland Security to respond to cyber attacks on pipelines, including
through TSA's authorities to issue emergency security directives, the
Department of Energy was made the lead agency for response to the
Colonial incident. Additionally, the Federal Government did not deem
the attack a ``significant cyber incident'' as defined by policy,
despite its substantial impact.
Cyber incident response plans have been carefully crafted to ensure
proper Government response to incidents, and we must ensure they are
followed appropriately. The attacks on Colonial and others provide
opportunities to learn improve the resiliency of the pipeline sector
and critical infrastructure across the United States. I was pleased to
see TSA take initial action by issuing the first-ever mandatory
cybersecurity requirements for pipelines. These new requirements went
into effect on May 28 and will be critical in improving coordination
among the pipeline industry, CISA, and TSA.
More must be done to increase protections for our pipelines and
allow Federal authorities greater ability to assess weaknesses in
critical transportation infrastructure. Unfortunately, cyber criminals
are not going anywhere anytime soon. In fact, they are getting smarter,
and cyber attacks are likely to become more common. We must ensure the
Department of Homeland Security remains at the forefront of protecting
our critical infrastructure from these threats.

Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you very much, Chairman.
I now would like to welcome our panel of witnesses.
Ms. Sonya Proctor is the assistant administrator for
surface operations at the Transportation Security
Administration. In her role, she is responsible for strategic
surface transportation security operations, not only agency-
wide but also on a National level and scope, for all surface
transportation modes, including mass transit, freight, rail,
highway, motor carrier, and pipelines.
Ms. Proctor has served in several roles at TSA previously,
including in leadership roles at Ronald Reagan Washington
National Airport and within the Office of Law Enforcement and
Federal Air Marshal Service. Prior to joining TSA, Ms. Proctor
served 25 years in the Metropolitan Police Department, rising
from a patrol officer to interim chief of police, and she
served as the chief of police for the Amtrak police department.
Mr. Eric Goldstein serves as the executive assistant
director for cybersecurity for the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency. In his role, Mr. Goldstein
leads CISA's mission to protect and strengthen Federal civilian
agencies and the Nation's critical infrastructure against cyber
threats.
Previously, Mr. Goldstein was the head of cybersecurity,
policy strategy, and regulation at Goldman Sachs, and he served
in various leadership roles at CISA's precursor agency, the
National Protection and Programs Directorate. Mr. Goldstein has
also practiced cybersecurity law at an international law firm,
led cybersecurity research and analysis projects at a
Federally-funded research and development center, and served as
a fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Without objection, the witnesses' full statements will be
inserted in the record.
I now ask each witness to summarize his or her statement
for 5 minutes, beginning with Ms. Proctor.

STATEMENT OF SONYA T. PROCTOR, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR FOR
SURFACE OPERATIONS, TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Ms. Proctor. Good afternoon, Chairwomen Watson Coleman and
Clarke, Ranking Members Gimenez and Garbarino, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittees. I appreciate the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss TSA's role in
securing our Nation's pipeline systems. I also thank you for
your indulgence as I resolved my own technology issues this
afternoon.
Our Nation's pipeline systems are vital to the economy, our
National security, and the livelihood of our country. There are
more than 2.8 million miles of natural gas and hazardous liquid
pipelines owned and operated by over 3,000 private companies.
Pipelines are susceptible to physical attacks and, as
recently evidenced, cyber intrusions as well. These threats
have the potential to negatively impact our National security,
economy, commerce, and well-being.
For these reasons, TSA remains committed to securing our
Nation's pipelines against evolving and emerging risks. To
support this commitment, in October 2019, TSA established the
Office of Surface Operations, and expanded its pipeline
security staff from 6 positions to 34 positions, working on
field and headquarters operations and policy development.
TSA has had a long-established, productive private-public
partnership with partners in the pipeline industry to protect
the transport of hazardous liquids and natural gas.
To support pipeline owners and operators in securing their
systems, TSA developed and distributed security training
materials for industry employees and partners to increase
domain awareness and ensure security expertise is widely
shared. In conjunction with the pipeline industry and our
Government partners, TSA developed the Pipeline Security
Guidelines, to provide a security structure for pipeline owners
and operators to use in developing their security plans and
programs. While the guidelines are not mandatory, the
recommended security measures for both physical and
cybersecurity serve as the de facto industry standard.
TSA works with industry partners to assess and mitigate
vulnerabilities and improve security through collaborative
efforts, including intelligence briefings, exercises,
assessments, and on-site reviews. Two key examples would be the
Validated Architecture Design Reviews, to promote a secure and
resilient cybersecurity posture, that TSA conducts, in
coordination with CISA, to inspect a pipeline operator's
critical infrastructure, including information technology and
operational technology systems, and the pipeline Corporate
Security Reviews and pipeline Critical Facility Security
Reviews that assess the degree to which the pipeline company is
adhering to the Pipeline Security Guidelines' physical and
cybersecurity measures.
In response to the recent pipeline cyber intrusion, TSA
used its statutory authority and issued a security directive,
which has the force of a regulation, aimed to strengthen the
cybersecurity and resilience of pipeline owners and operators.
TSA is committed to using its authority to implement
appropriate security measures to elevate both the physical and
cybersecurity of the pipeline industry.
In addition, TSA, in close coordination with the Department
and CISA, continues to explore ways to mitigate threats through
additional cybersecurity measures, to ensure that critical
pipeline owners and operators are engaging in baseline cyber
hygiene and have contingency plans in place to reduce the risk
of significant disruption of operations if a breach occurs.
The pipeline system is crucial to U.S. National security,
transportation, and energy supply, and that drives TSA's work
to continue collaborating with our Government and private
partners to expand the implementation of intelligence-driven,
risk-based policies and programs.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss TSA's pipeline
security program, and I look forward to your questions today.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Proctor follows:]
Prepared Statement of Sonya T. Proctor
June 15, 2021
Good morning, Chairwomen Watson Coleman and Clarke, Ranking Members
Gimenez and Garbarino, and distinguished Members of the subcommittees.
I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the
Transportation Security Administration's (TSA) role in securing our
Nation's pipeline systems.
TSA has engaged with the pipeline industry since 2001 and has taken
clear and specific actions to address cybersecurity gaps and
vulnerabilities with the pipeline industry. Our Nation's pipeline
systems are vital to the economy, our National security, and the
livelihood of our country. There are more than 2.8 million miles of
natural gas and hazardous liquid pipelines owned and operated by over
3,000 private companies. Besides the pipelines themselves, the system
includes critical facilities such as compressor and pumping stations,
metering and regulator stations, interconnects, main line valves, tank
farms and terminals, and the automated systems used to monitor and
control them. Pipelines are susceptible to physical attacks such as
improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and vehicle-borne IEDs, small arms,
and stand-off weapons. Additionally, as recently evidenced, cyber
intrusions into pipeline computer networks have the potential to
negatively impact our National security, economy, commerce, and well-
being. For these reasons, TSA remains committed to securing our
Nation's pipelines against evolving and emerging risks.
pipeline staffing, resourcing, and expanding internal capabilities
TSA has historically devoted staff to developing surface
transportation policies supporting the grant process for surface
transportation-related security enhancements, and conducting
inspections and assessments. In support of the TSA Modernization Act of
2018 (H.R. 302), in October 2019, TSA established the office of Surface
Operations under the Office of Security Operations, which reports to
the executive assistant administrator for security operations. During
this time TSA expanded its pipeline security staff from 6 positions to
34 positions working in field operations, headquarters operations, and
policy development. These resources allow TSA to advance our pipeline
and cybersecurity mission.
In fiscal year 2020, TSA created and trained a field-based 20-
member Pipeline Security Assessment Team (PSAT), which is comprised of
Transportation Security Inspectors (TSIs) located around the Nation.
For cybersecurity efforts, we now have 8 members from the PSAT team and
headquarters who successfully completed comprehensive cybersecurity
training, provided by Idaho National Labs (INL) in partnership with the
Department of Homeland Security's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA), and are receiving additional cybersecurity
certification in support of TSA's pipeline cybersecurity mission.
TSA continues to expand its cybersecurity staffing and resourcing
capabilities through establishing a Cybersecurity Operations Support
Branch, which is currently in the hiring process. The branch will be
staffed by 11 specialized cybersecurity personnel, 6 of which will be
hired in fiscal year 2021 as part of 34 positions as previously
mentioned. Five additional cyber security personnel will be hired in
fiscal year 2022. This new branch within Surface Operations aims to
enhance transportation systems' cybersecurity posture through a multi-
layered approach, which includes conducting cybersecurity assessments
and engagements; targeted stakeholder educational efforts; evaluation
of cybersecurity best practices across the sector; and Government
coordination and collaboration on surface cyber programs and
engagements.
The TSA Surface Policy Division within the Office of Policy, Plans,
and Engagement is also increasing its cybersecurity efforts and will
have a total of 9 positions by the end of fiscal year 2021 to expand
its Cybersecurity Section. This section will focus on the development
of cybersecurity-related policy and guidance for surface transportation
security.
stakeholder partnership
TSA's focus on pipeline security began in 2001 and through our
expanding pipeline efforts, we have focused on enhancing the security
preparedness of the Nation's hazardous liquid and natural gas pipeline
systems. TSA has established a productive public-private partnership
with Government partners and the pipeline industry to protect the
transport of hazardous liquids and natural gas. This partnership
includes collaboration with our Federal partners, such as Department of
Homeland Security (DHS), the Department of Transportation (DOT), the
Department of Energy (DOE), the Department of Justice (DOJ), and the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) through the Energy
Government Coordinating Council (EGCC), while providing input and
support to the activities and initiatives of the industry-led Oil and
Natural Gas Subsector Coordinating Council (ONG SCC) and the Pipeline
Working Group (PWG). Through these partnerships, TSA continues to seek
input on current efforts to develop mandatory cybersecurity measures in
Security Directives (SD); collaboratively develops security guidelines
and training materials, and offer cybersecurity assessments for
pipeline industry partners to increase security awareness and
preparedness.
To support pipeline owners and operators in securing their systems,
TSA developed and distributed security training materials for industry
employees and partners to increase domain awareness and ensure security
expertise is widely shared. Security training products include a
security awareness training program highlighting signs of terrorism and
each employee's role in reporting suspicious activity; an IED awareness
video for employees; an introduction to pipeline security for law
enforcement officers; a cybersecurity toolkit for small and midsize
businesses offering guidance on how to incorporate cyber risk into
their transportation system; and a pocket-sized guide for front-line
employees to outline the most common types of cybersecurity threats and
explain how transportation systems can protect their data, computer
systems, and personal information.
Additionally, in conjunction with the pipeline industry, TSA
developed the TSA Pipeline Security Guidelines (Guidelines) in 2011 to
provide a security structure for pipeline owners and operators to use
in developing their security plans and programs. The Guidelines are
non-regulatory but recommended security measures for both physical and
cyber security that serve as the de facto industry standard. The
Guidelines were updated and republished in March 2018 with a
significant emphasis on cybersecurity measures that are aligned with
the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Cyber
Security Framework. In April of this year, the criteria for identifying
critical pipeline facilities in the Guidelines were further updated.
The Guideline's cybersecurity measures were developed in coordination
with industry and with Industrial Control System (ICS) expertise from
the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA).
Established by TSA in 2019, the Surface Transportation Security
Advisory Committee (STSAC) consists of 35 industry voting members, of
which 3 are pipeline subject-matter experts, and 14 Government non-
voting members. This committee advises, consults with, reports to, and
makes recommendations to the TSA administrator on surface
transportation security matters, including the development, refinement,
and implementation of policies, programs, initiatives, rulemakings, and
security directives pertaining to surface transportation security.
exercises, assessments, and site reviews
TSA works with industry partners to assess and mitigate
vulnerabilities, and improve security through collaborative efforts
including intelligence briefings, exercises, assessments, and on-site
reviews. Through the Intermodal Security Training and Exercise Program,
TSA provides exercises, trainings, and security planning tools to the
pipeline community to strengthen company security plans, policies, and
procedures. Working with pipeline operators' security personnel, TSA
conducts Pipeline Corporate Security Reviews, which assess the degree
to which the Pipeline Security Guidelines' physical and cybersecurity
measures are integrated into the operator's corporate security plan.
In addition, TSA also conducts Pipeline Critical Facility Security
Reviews on critical pipeline facilities of the 100 most critical
pipeline operators to collect site-specific information on facility
security policies, procedures, and cyber and physical security
measures. To promote a secure and resilient cybersecurity posture,
through specific Congressional funding TSA works directly with CISA to
collaborate with pipeline owners and operators to offer Validated
Architecture Design Reviews to assess a pipeline operator's critical
infrastructure including information technology (IT) and operational
technology (OT) systems. This assessment is intended to determine if OT
systems are designed, built, and operated in a reliable and resilient
manner. This assessment examines a series of cybersecurity technical
domains that goes beyond a questionnaire-type assessment and also
includes traffic analysis from selected critical network segments as
well as a network architecture diagram and functionality review. While
these security reviews are not mandatory, they have been welcomed over
the years by pipeline owners and operators who appreciate and
understand the value of identifying and mitigating vulnerabilities to
help better secure their physical and cyber systems.
cybersecurity
On behalf of the Department of Homeland Security, TSA serves as the
co-Sector Risk Management agency alongside DOT and the United States
Coast Guard for the transportation systems sector and is responsible
for developing, deploying, and promoting Transportation Systems Sector-
focused cybersecurity initiatives, programs, assessment tools,
strategies, and threat and intelligence information sharing products
that support the implementation of Executive Orders on cybersecurity.
TSA is in close alignment with CISA and coordinates on both a tactical
and strategic level to raise the cybersecurity baseline across the
transportation sector. As noted earlier, TSA participates in the Energy
Government Coordinating Council and regularly collaborates with the ONG
SCC and its PWG on programmatic issues affecting the cybersecurity of
pipeline systems.
TSA supports DHS's cybersecurity efforts in alignment with the NIST
Cybersecurity Framework (Framework). The Framework is designed to
provide a foundation for industry to better manage and reduce their
cyber risk. TSA shares information, resources, and develops products
for stakeholders to support their adoption of the Framework. TSA works
closely with the pipeline industry to identify and reduce cybersecurity
vulnerabilities, including facilitating classified briefings to
increase industry's awareness of cyber threats.
In response to the recent pipeline cyber intrusion, TSA is using
its statutory authority to strengthen the cybersecurity and resilience
of pipeline owners and operators. The first security directive issued
following the recent incident requires pipeline owners and operators of
critical hazardous liquid and natural gas pipelines or a liquefied
natural gas pipelines facility designate a cybersecurity coordinator;
report cybersecurity incidents to CISA; and assess their current
cybersecurity posture against a specific set of measures within the
Pipeline Security Guidance. As part of this assessment, the owner/
operators must identify any gaps, develop a remediation plan if
necessary, and report the results to TSA.
All information reported to CISA pursuant to this directive is
shared with TSA and other Federal agencies as appropriate. Similarly,
all information provided to TSA is shared with CISA. By requiring the
reporting of cybersecurity incidents, the Federal Government is better
positioned to understand the changing threat of cyber events and the
current and evolving risks to pipelines. The designation of
cybersecurity coordinators will give TSA a known and consistent point
of contact with critical pipeline owners and operators, allowing TSA to
easily share security information and intelligence. The assessments
will assist the owners and operators and TSA to better understand the
current state of cybersecurity practices in individual companies and
across the industry. In addition, TSA, in close coordination with the
Department and CISA, is also exploring ways in which immediate threats,
such as ransomware, can be mitigated through additional cybersecurity
measures to ensure that critical pipeline owners and operators are
engaging in baseline cyber hygiene and have contingency plans in place
to reduce the risk of significant disruption of operations, if a breach
occurs.
conclusion
The pipeline system is crucial to U.S. National security,
transportation, and energy supply. These pipelines provide connections
to other critical infrastructure upon which we depend, such as airports
and power plants. TSA is dedicated to protecting our Nation's pipeline
networks against evolving threats and continues to work collaboratively
with our Government and private partners to expand the implementation
of intelligence-driven, risk-based policies, and programs. TSA is
committed to using its authority to implement the appropriate security
measures to elevate both the physical and cybersecurity posture of the
pipeline industry in alignment with the threat environment. Thank you
for the opportunity to discuss TSA's Pipeline Security Program and I
look forward to your questions.

Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Ms. Proctor.
Now I will recognize Mr. Goldstein to summarize his
testimony for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ERIC GOLDSTEIN, EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR
CYBERSECURITY, CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY
AGENCY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Goldstein. Chairman Thompson, Chairwomen Watson Coleman
and Clarke, Ranking Members Gimenez and Garbarino, Members of
the committee, thank you for the chance to testify today.
As noted in the Members' opening statements, cybersecurity
threats represent an urgent risk to our National security,
economic security, and public health and safety. The committee
is to be commended for your continued focus on this issue and
for your support of CISA's essential role therein.
As the lead agency for civilian cybersecurity, CISA plays
several key roles in managing the risk of ransomware and other
intrusions. In particular, recognizing that most ransomware
intrusions exploit known vulnerabilities and common security
weaknesses, CISA develops and shares best practices to help
organizations reduce the likelihood and impact of a ransomware
intrusion.
To this end, in January of this year, CISA unveiled our
Reduce the Risk of Ransomware Campaign. A few months later in
April, Secretary Mayorkas initiated a high-profile Ransomware
Sprint that included a series of National events intended to
ensure that leaders across the country understand the
criticality of these risks and take urgent action in response.
Our work has continued as we further release updated guidance
and consider novel approaches to drive risk reduction. CISA
additionally serves a critical role in providing support to
victims of cybersecurity incidents and sharing actionable
information to protect future possible victims.
Upon learning of the Colonial Pipeline intrusion, CISA
immediately began to collaborate with the FBI and other Federal
partners to gather information that could be used to help
protect other potential victims of these sorts of serious
campaigns. Within 4 days of the intrusion, CISA and the FBI
published a cybersecurity advisory, with specific mitigations
to reduce the likelihood and impact of similar events. We then
updated this advisory with technical indicators of compromise
and amplified the alert to maximize use by network operators,
including through a stakeholder call with nearly 9,000
participants from across critical sectors. These activities
reflect CISA's role in National cybersecurity.
While CISA's expert network defenders are available to
provide incident response and threat hunting, upon request, of
equal importance is our role in quickly using information from
intrusions to protect others.
Well before the Colonial intrusion, CISA was taking action
to address cybersecurity risks facing the pipeline sector. In
particular, through the Pipeline Cybersecurity Initiative, CISA
works closely with TSA and pipeline companies to conduct
vulnerability assessments, analyze risk to the sector, and
implement a key pilot program called CyberSentry, which, as Ms.
Clarke noted, leverages commercial technologies and sensitive
threat information to monitor certain highly critical
infrastructure networks for sophisticated threats.
But going forward, it is very clear, as a Nation, we must
do more to address the risks of ransomware and other cyber
intrusions affecting our Nation's critical infrastructure. To
this end, CISA is urgently driving progress in several key
areas.
First, we must gain increased visibility into cybersecurity
risks and use this visibility to produce targeted guidance,
share actionable information, and prioritize incidents that do
occur. TSA's recent security directive that requires reporting
of cybersecurity incidents to CISA is one key step, and we
continue to evaluate potential ways to drive further reporting
of incidents and cybersecurity risks to CISA in order to
further enable this essential visibility.
Second, we must continue to invest in and mature our
voluntary partnerships with critical entities across the
country. Going forward, we are implementing our Joint Cyber
Planning Office to plan, exercise, and coordinate cyber defense
operations between Government and the private sector.
Third, we must leverage lessons learned and capabilities
matured through our Federal cybersecurity mission, including
through activities undertaken in executing the President's
recent Executive Order to support our partners across critical
infrastructure, including by conducting persistent hunts,
ingesting, analyzing, and acting upon security data, and
driving adoption of defensible network architectures. Funding
provided in the American Rescue Plan Act is a critical
downpayment in driving this essential change.
Additionally, the establishment of a Cyber Response and
Recovery Fund, or a CRRF, will ensure that CISA has sufficient
resources and capacity to respond rapidly to cyber incidents.
Recommended by the Cyberspace Solarium Commission and recently
passed by the Senate, we do hope that the CRRF will be
considered soon by the House and provide CISA with additional
resources to conduct our rapidly-evolving and essential
mission.
In conclusion, our Nation is facing unprecedented
cybersecurity risk, and the list of significant incidents in
recent months is long and growing. Now is the time to act, and
CISA is leading our National call to action. We will deepen our
partnerships, enhance our visibility into National
cybersecurity risk, and drive targeted action. In collaboration
with our partners in the public and private sectors, our
international allies, and with Congress, we will make progress
in addressing this risk and maintaining the availability of
critical services to the American people.
Thank you again for the chance to appear today, and I very
much look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goldstein follows:]
Prepared Statement of Eric Goldstein
June 15, 2021
Chairwoman Clarke, Chairwoman Coleman, Ranking Member Garbarino,
Ranking Member Gimenez, and Members of the committees, thank you for
the opportunity to testify today on behalf of the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) regarding the Federal response to
the Darkside ransomware incident against the Colonial Pipeline company
and the broader cyber threat facing our Nation's critical
infrastructure.
CISA leads the Nation's efforts to advance the cybersecurity,
physical security, and resilience of our critical infrastructure. In
particular, CISA serves as the Nation's ``cybersecurity quarterback''
and acts as the focal point to exchange cyber defense information and
enable operational collaboration among the Federal Government, State,
local, Tribal, and territorial (SLTT) governments, the private sector,
and international partners. In this role, we are particularly focused
on reducing cybersecurity risks to entities that provide or support
National Critical Functions, including companies like Colonial
Pipeline.
To accomplish this mission, CISA leads a collaborative effort to
identify and drive reduction of the most significant cyber risks to
critical infrastructure. This requires first identifying cyber risks
through robust multi-directional information sharing, conducting risk
and vulnerability assessments, and deploying threat detection
technologies to critical assets. We work to prioritize identified
risks, including by leveraging the capabilities of our National Risk
Management Center to understand relative criticality of critical
infrastructure assets and working with our partners across Government
to understand our adversaries' potential intent and capabilities.
Finally, we drive collective action to reduce cybersecurity risks,
including by providing incident response and threat-hunting services,
issuing alerts and guidance, and coordinating joint cyber defense
operations that bring together capabilities from Government and
private-sector partners.
Cyber intrusions over the past several months have further
reflected the fact that our country is facing an immediate threat to
our National security, economic prosperity, and public health and
safety. Nation-state actors and criminal groups continue to increase in
their sophistication and in their willingness to target organizations
across all sectors of the economy. The impacts of these malicious
activities continue to increase, impacting the provision of critical
functions from health care to energy to agriculture. This hearing
provides a timely opportunity to emphasize the urgency of this
challenge, discuss CISA's critical role in helping our Nation manage
this risk, and consider necessary steps to drive further progress.
ransomware: a growing threat
Ransomware is an ever-evolving form of malware that encrypts files
on a device, rendering the systems that rely on them unusable.
Malicious actors then demand ransom in exchange for decryption, and
often threaten to sell or leak the victim's data if the ransom is not
paid. Malicious actors continue to evolve their ransomware tactics over
time, and CISA remains vigilant of ransomware intrusions and associated
tactics, techniques, and procedures across the country and around the
world.
Recently, ransomware directed at SLTT governments and critical
infrastructure organizations has surged. In fact, it is estimated that
over 100 Federal, State, and municipal agencies, over 500 medical
centers, and 1,680 educational institutions in the United States were
hit by ransomware in 2020 and ransom demands exceeded $1 billion
dollars.\1\ This epidemic is now affecting our Nation's most critical
infrastructure: Municipal governments, police departments, hospitals,
schools, manufacturing facilities, and of course, pipelines.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Emisoft, The State of Ransomware in the US: Report and
Statistics 2020, https://blog.emsisoft.com/en/37314/the-state-of-
ransomware-in-the-us-report-and-statistics-2020/; Emisoft, The Cost of
Ransomware in 2020: A Country-by-Country Analysis, https://
blog.emsisoft.com/en/35583/report-the-cost-of-ransomware-in-2020-a-
country-by-country-analysis/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CISA, and the broader Department of Homeland Security, has acted
urgently to catalyze National action around this risk. In January 2021,
CISA unveiled the Reduce the Risk of Ransomware Campaign to raise
awareness and combat this on-going and evolving threat. The campaign is
a focused, coordinated, and sustained effort to encourage public and
private-sector organizations to implement best practices, tools, and
resources that mitigate ransomware risk. Additionally, in coordination
with the Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis Center (MS-ISAC),
CISA released a joint Ransomware Guide that details industry best
practices and a response checklist that can serve as a ransomware-
specific addendum to State and local government's cyber incident
response plans.
In February, during his first remarks dedicated to cybersecurity,
Secretary Mayorkas issued a call for action to tackle ransomware more
effectively. To further drive a call to action, Secretary Mayorkas
initiated a Ransomware Sprint in April 2021 that has included a series
of high-profile National events intended to ensure that leaders across
all sectors of the economy understand the criticality of this risk and
take urgent action in response.
Ransomware is a critical challenge and the risks posed to our
Nation's critical infrastructure are severe. But the challenge is not
insurmountable. Ransomware intrusions generally do not use zero-day
vulnerabilities or exquisite tradecraft, but rather exploit known
security weaknesses or a failure to adopt generally accepted best
practices. By investing in improved cybersecurity as recommended in
CISA guidance, organizations can reduce the risk of a ransomware
intrusion and limit the potential impacts.
an example of a broader risk: colonial pipeline ransomware intrusion
The ransomware that impacted Colonial Pipeline was one of the first
cyber intrusions in our Nation to have a direct effect on many
Americans' daily lives. But the intrusion itself was not unique: The
Darkside ransomware-as-a-service group has been associated with
hundreds of intrusions in recent months and ransomware intrusions have
impacted essential services on a smaller scale, from elementary schools
to hospitals. Upon learning of the intrusion, CISA immediately began to
collaborate with the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and other
interagency partners to gather information that could be used to help
protect other potential victims. Within 4 days of the intrusion, CISA
and the FBI published a cybersecurity advisory on the incident, which
included detailed information on how to reduce risk across critical
infrastructure. This advisory contained specific mitigation measures to
reduce the likelihood of a ransomware intrusion and, critically, steps
to reduce the consequences. This latter element cannot be overstated:
All critical infrastructure organizations should assume that they can
be compromised by a ransomware intrusion and take steps to reduce
impacts, including by ensuring that their essential functions can
remain operable even if their primary business network is unavailable.
CISA and the FBI subsequently enriched this advisory with specific
indicators of compromise associated with the Darkside ransomware group
and the Colonial Pipeline intrusion.
In order to further amplify the importance of these mitigation
steps, CISA convened a broad stakeholder call with over 8,000 attendees
from across U.S. critical infrastructure to provide an overview of the
incident, threat actor, and impacts. CISA also convened a meeting under
its Critical Infrastructure Partnership Advisory Council with
leadership from the 16 critical infrastructure sectors to discuss
potential operational impacts for critical infrastructure due to the
ransomware intrusion. This contributed to CISA's ability to assess
potential impact to the 55 National Critical Functions from a sustained
shutdown, and anticipate cross-sectoral impacts, including from
transportation slow-downs and impacts to chemical facilities. Finally,
CISA leveraged our regional personnel deployed across the country, and
particularly in areas impacted by the Colonial Pipeline outage, to
provide focused guidance to other critical infrastructure organizations
and provide the U.S. Government with detailed information on cascading
impacts across sectors.
managing a broader risk: cisa's role in pipeline cybersecurity
Well before the Colonial Pipeline intrusion, CISA was addressing
cybersecurity risks to pipelines. Over the past several years, CISA and
the Transportation Security Agency (TSA), in conjunction with the
Department of Energy, National Laboratories, and private industry, have
been focused on addressing cybersecurity risks to the Nation's 2.7
million miles of pipeline infrastructure through the Pipeline
Cybersecurity Initiative (PCI). The PCI was formed in response to
increasing dependence on automation within the oil and natural gas
(ONG) pipeline industry and the growing attack surfaces of assets using
connected technology.
As part of PCI, CISA collects, aggregates, and analyzes data to
inform a holistic view of vulnerabilities, threats, and consequences to
the ONG pipeline industry. Importantly, CISA also provides incident
response and intelligence support for pipeline activities with a focus
on industrial control systems and coordinates activities related to the
PCI. In February 2021, CISA released a Pipeline Cybersecurity Resources
Library to provide pipeline facilities, companies, and stakeholders
with a set of free, voluntary resources to strengthen their
cybersecurity posture.
To inform CISA's analysis of pipeline risk, CISA routinely partners
with the TSA and pipeline companies to conduct in-depth vulnerability
assessments, or Validated Architecture Design Review (VADR)
assessments, on their infrastructure. Importantly, VADRs assess
pipeline critical infrastructure information technology (IT) and
operational technology (OT) systems to determine if they are designed,
built, and operated in a reliable and resilient manner. These
assessments, which are free to participating companies, help identify
gaps across infrastructure operators. TSA and CISA are on track to
complete 52 VADRs on pipeline entities by the end of this fiscal year.
To build on the VADR assessment recommendations, CISA and TSA are
working with the ONG Subsector Coordinating Council (SCC) to analyze
VADR findings, conduct follow-on analysis, and develop recommendations
for pipeline owners to voluntarily implement.
Given the criticality of certain pipeline entities and certain
other critical infrastructure assets, CISA offers a pilot program
called CyberSentry, which deploys technologies and analytic
capabilities to monitor an organization's business (IT) and operational
technology/industrial control system (OT/ICS) network for sophisticated
threats. CyberSentry is a voluntary partnership with private-sector
critical infrastructure companies using CISA's unique statutory
authorities, policy and privacy solutions. This capability is not a
replacement for commercial solutions; rather, the capability
complements such solutions by allowing CISA to leverage sensitive
threat information. CyberSentry has shown significant benefit in
practice and has been used to drive urgent remediation of threats and
vulnerabilities.
Separately, in partnership with a National Laboratory, CISA is
developing a suite of tools to assess cyber resilience through
scenarios using specialized threat models and simulations to identify
``crown jewel'' components within pipeline OT. Going forward, the PCI
is planning a pipeline cyber table-top exercise to better understand
the impacts of an OT compromise at a major natural gas transmission
line and is collaborating with industry to integrate pipeline
considerations into CyberStorm VIII--a CISA-led biennial exercise
series that provides the framework for the Nation's largest
cybersecurity exercise--in Spring 2022. PCI's future efforts will
center around determining the prevalence of major components within
pipeline OT systems to identify potential vulnerabilities and inform
supply chain risk efforts. CISA will continue leveraging CyberSentry
and move to expand the entities receiving such services. Last, CISA
will lead the development of a pilot tool focused on liquid pipelines
that will allow users to explore how disruptions to pipelines can have
cascading consequences on National Critical Functions.
mitigating future risks
The Colonial Pipeline intrusion and the more recent intrusion into
JBS Foods must serve as an urgent call to action to address our
Nation's cybersecurity risks. We must collectively and with great
urgency strengthen our Nation's cyber defenses, invest in new
capabilities, and change how we think about cybersecurity, recognizing
that all organizations are at risk, and we must focus on assuring the
resilience of essential services. To that end, CISA is acting with the
utmost resolve to drive reduction of cyber risk across the National
Critical Functions. Achieving the progress we seek will require
consideration of several key areas.
First, CISA is currently investing in, and growing capabilities to
increase visibility into cybersecurity risks across Federal agencies
and across non-Federal entities. This necessitates a fundamental
change, in which CISA must gain the ability to conduct persistent hunts
for threat activity, ingest and analyze security data at all levels of
the network, and conduct rapid analysis to identify and act upon
identified threats. At the same time, CISA is driving adoption of
defensible network architectures, including implementation of zero-
trust environments in which the perimeter is presumed compromised and
security must focus on protecting the most critical accounts and data.
President Biden's Executive Order on Improving the Nation's
Cybersecurity will drive critical progress in advancing cybersecurity
across the Federal Government. Going forward, we must take lessons
learned from our investments in Federal cybersecurity to support
organizations across sectors in driving similar change.
Second, CISA must work with all possible partners to gain increased
visibility into National risks. With increased visibility, we are able
to better identify adversary activity across sectors, which allows us
to produce more targeted guidance, and identify particular incidents
requiring a specialized CISA response team. Our support to TSA to
develop a recent Security Directive requiring reporting of
cybersecurity incidents to CISA is an important step and an example of
such collaboration. We look forward to working with Congress to further
encourage reporting of cybersecurity incidents to CISA in order to
further enable this essential visibility.
Third, CISA must continue to invest in and mature our voluntary
partnerships with critical infrastructure entities. For example, our
Cyber Information Sharing and Collaboration Program (CISCP) serves as a
bi-directional forum in which CISA and private industry are
collaborating on significant risks, developing sector- and threat-
focused products, and providing briefings on new trends, threats, and
capabilities across the sectors. With information-sharing protections
available through the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015 and
the Protected Critical Infrastructure Information Act, the program
enables trusted sharing between CISA and a network of high-impact
companies, Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs), and
service providers. Within CISCP, the Mutual Interest Initiative brings
together cyber threat companies and internet service providers to work
with CISA and the broader Government community to exchange analysis and
collaboratively work on threat actor-focused products. Furthermore,
CISCP enables CISA to work in close coordination with software vendors
and endpoint detection companies to both assess impact and mitigate
risk of critical vulnerabilities. From a technical standpoint, these
partnerships with industry enable us to better understand the nature of
vulnerabilities pre- and post-disclosure and in turn provided timely
and thorough mitigation guidance to Government agencies and critical
infrastructure. Going forward, CISA is establishing a Joint Cyber
Planning Office, as required by the Fiscal Year 2021 National Defense
Authorization Act, to further mature our capabilities to plan,
exercise, and coordinate cyber defense operations with partners across
the government and private sector.
Last, recognizing that we cannot prevent all intrusions, we must
drive a focus on resilience and functional continuity even as we drive
improvements in security. We must advance business continuity exercises
even as we catalyze adoption of cybersecurity best practices; we must
ensure that operational technologies are segmented from, and can run
independently of business networks, even as we advance our ability to
detect threats in both environments; and, we must reduce single points
of failure across our National Critical Functions as we identify and
harden identified nodes of systemic risk.
conclusion
Our Nation is facing unprecedented risk from malicious cyber
activities undertaken by both nation-state adversaries and criminals.
The list of significant incidents in recent months is long and growing.
Now is the time to act--and CISA is leading our National call to
action. We will deepen our partnerships with critical infrastructure
partners, enhance our visibility into National cybersecurity, and drive
targeted action to reduce vulnerabilities and detect our adversaries.
In collaboration with our Government partners, critical infrastructure
entities, our international allies, and with the support of Congress,
we will make progress in addressing this risk and maintain the
availability of critical services to the American people under all
conditions.
Thank you again for the opportunity to be to appear before the
committee. I look forward to your questions.

Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Goldstein.
I want to thank both of the witnesses for their testimony.
I will remind Members of each subcommittee that we will each
have 5 minutes to question the panel.
I will now recognize--oh, I am sorry. I will now recognize
myself for questions.
The TSA pipeline security assessments are currently
voluntary. Although a new security directive does require
operators to self-assess their compliance with TSA's
cybersecurity security guidance, this security directive also
requires critical pipeline operators to report cyber incidents
and designate a cybersecurity coordinator who will be available
24/7.
So, Ms. Proctor, I would like to ask you first, would you
please discuss the process that led up to this security
directive? How did TSA determine the directive was needed? How
did you decide to include these specific elements?
You have to unmute yourself, Ms. Proctor.
Ms. Proctor.
Ms. Proctor. Madam Chairwoman, I am sorry if that was
directed to me. I am having some connection problems again. I
beg your indulgence again.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. OK.
Ms. Proctor. I am requesting some assistance.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Can you hear me now? Can you hear me?
I don't have any questions for Mr.--why don't we skip me
and----
Ms. Proctor. Madam Chair, can you hear me?
Mrs. Watson Coleman. I can.
Ms. Proctor. OK. I am having some technical problems again.
The voice is going in and out. I am requesting some assistance,
so I beg your indulgence one more time here.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
Mr. Goldstein, then, may I ask you a question?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Beyond pipelines, have you considered
promulgating cybersecurity standards for other surface
transportation modes and like mass transit and airports?
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, ma'am, for that question. In
general, CISA's goal is to be a source of cybersecurity
expertise across all sectors. Where a given sector is subject
to regulations by a regulator with particular jurisdiction, we
certainly engage in discussions with regulators like TSA to
ensure that they are benefiting from CISA's cybersecurity
expertise when they are developing regulations that are
applicable to entities within their given jurisdiction. We have
a robust collaboration with TSA along those lines, and
certainly look forward to similar conversations with other
regulators based upon their own unique authorities.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. So I am going to take that as a yes? I
took that as a yes.
Mr. Goldstein. We totally support strong cybersecurity
across all sectors, ma'am, that is correct.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, thank you.
I did have some questions for Ms. Proctor but,
unfortunately, she is not able to answer those questions. So if
we clear this up in the next few minutes, I will ask her her
questions.
But now I will go to the Ranking Member, Mr. Gimenez, for
his 5 minutes.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I really
appreciate it.
This is for Mr. Goldstein. Mr. Goldstein, is there any real
difference--you know, I understand that, you know, TSA has
jurisdiction, I guess, over pipeline security, but I look at
cybersecurity a little bit different than, say, physical
security over the physical aspect, the pipeline itself. We know
that there are threats to the pipelines, somebody does
sabotage, et cetera. Those are things that we need to protect,
and TSA needs to do that.
But in terms of cybersecurity, is there really a difference
between the control systems for the computer network, the thing
that is going to be hacked, for a pipeline and, say, an airport
or a bank or any such thing? Isn't ransomware really attacking
the computer systems themselves and it really doesn't matter
what industry that computer system is controlling?
Mr. Goldstein. Sir, thank you for that question. I think
there are 2 ways to answer it. The first is, I think your last
statement is absolutely correct. Ransomware is a threat that
can impact any organization in any sector big or small--
financial, energy, hospitality, across the board--which is why
CISA has been so focused on promulgating these cross-cutting
best practices and guidance, including our advisory promulgated
after the Colonial intrusion, that is equally applicable to any
organization because, as you imply, these sorts of
cybersecurity best practices are generalizable across sectors.
Now, it is also the case that different sectors may use
different specific technologies. They may have different
network architectures or different ways to use devices to
achieve their operational needs. But when it comes to these
cybersecurity practices that we want to see--things like making
sure that your software is patched, making sure that you are
using multifactor authentication, leveraging off-line backups--
those are practices that are generalizable across sectors and
regardless of the size of company.
Mr. Gimenez. So when CISA makes a recommendation, do you
make a recommendation to the agencies across the Federal, you
know, spectrum and say, these are the things we recommend that
you then recommend or write a regulation for your specific
sector? Is that the way it works here in the Federal
Government?
Mr. Goldstein. So, in general, CISA puts out guidance and
best practices, and in the case of Federal agencies, directives
that are generally applicable. Occasionally, we will put out
guidance that is specific to control systems, or certainly if
we know about a given threat or incident that is affecting a
particular sector, we may produce a targeted alert or warning
focused on a nuanced risk to a given sector or even a given
device where we have information that a certain device is being
exploited.
Regarding our interaction with regulators, generally
regulators, including TSA, may seek CISA's expert advice and
consultation on how to produce cybersecurity regulations that
actually drive improved security and can be expected to reduce
the likelihood of damaging incidents affecting that sector. But
given the unique authorities and independence of many
regulators, CISA is generally a source of expertise for those
regulators to exercise their authorities in this space most
effectively.
Mr. Gimenez. That is where I have a problem. OK. That would
be, the problem that I have is that it appears to me that CISA
is there to protect, basically, the thing that we are
communicating with right now. OK. That is the control systems--
the control systems that are controlling most of America now,
energy, the electricity, the pipelines, banks, is coming out of
the computer, and the computers are being hacked, and that is
where vulnerability lies.
My concern is that different agencies may put different
emphasis on the vulnerability that we have for cyber attacks
and that it is really not focused. You know, TSA's focus for
the most part, I see as, the real focus is airport security,
port security, and all that, physical security, and then cyber
attacks, yes, OK, but that may not be our core mission, whereas
your core mission is cyber attacks.
So wouldn't it be better for the Federal Government to
kind-of gel that into, you know, your agency and you become the
voice on what needs to be done on cybersecurity? That is an
opinion I am asking from you, and I know that it is a loaded
question. So if you can answer it, please do.
Mr. Goldstein. Without question, CISA's key role today is
being the Federal civilian Government lead voice on
cybersecurity, and our goal is to use every single platform to
make sure that business leaders, that Federal agencies, that
regulators, understand the criticality of this risk and act on
it with urgency and immediacy.
Certainly under current law, our goal is to work with
agencies that have unique authorities to drive change, to help
them use those authorities to maximize security improvement
within their sector. But to your point, we strongly agree that
cybersecurity needs to be a top-of-mind issue in every
boardroom, in every C-suite, and in every Federal agency.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you. I see that my time is up.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Ranking Member.
I now recognize the Chairlady from--the gentlelady from New
York for her 5 minutes.
Ms. Clarke. I thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Goldstein, as I said in my opening remarks, I believe
that for CISA to carry out its broad cyber mission effectively
it needs, No. 1, greater access to information about major
cyber incidents and, No. 2, greater visibility into threats
targeting private-sector networks in real time.
That is why I am working on 2 pieces of legislation. One
would require critical infrastructure owners to report cyber
incidents to CISA, and the other would authorize the capability
CISA has built through the CyberSentry pilot. I see these
efforts as complementary, giving CISA the ability to monitor
threats today and also learn how and why they are successful,
so we can prevent them from happening tomorrow.
Can you talk about how CyberSentry works and some of the
ways that it helps CISA partner more effectively with the
private sector?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am, absolutely. To begin, thank you
for your on-going support of CISA. It is deeply appreciated.
You know, as you noted, one of the challenges that CISA
and, frankly, our country faces is a lack of visibility into
cybersecurity risks facing our Nation's critical
infrastructure. When we say ``cybersecurity risks,'' we should
be precise about what we are speaking about. What we are
talking about is the possibility of criminal groups or nation-
states breaking into our critical infrastructure with the
intent to do harm.
Without that visibility, CISA is unable to fully conduct 2
of our core functions. The first is to understand systemic risk
across our country and provide actionable information that can
protect others, so they can either detect and block these
threats before break-ins occur or they can evict adversaries
from their networks once the intrusion happens.
We are also not able to fully understand those entities
that may need our voluntary assistance in order to help
understand the intrusion, remediate, and recover.
CyberSentry provides a unique capability to help protect
the most critical infrastructure in this country. What we have
learned from a long history of cybersecurity intrusions is that
many intrusions impacting critical infrastructure and
particularly control systems actually begin on business
networks. So CyberSentry provides commercial off-the-shelf
technology that helps detect cybersecurity threats that are
attempting to move from business networks to the operational
technology or control systems network and provides coverage of
both, and allows CISA to use sensitive information about
particular adversaries or threats to help understand and
rapidly identify those kind of threats manifesting across the
most critical networks.
Now, CyberSentry is only a pilot today. It is deployed
across a limited number of highly critical entities, but we
have seen significant success with this program thus far. It
both provides CISA with the added visibility, ma'am, that you
mentioned and also provides real concrete benefits to the
owner-operators that are using CyberSentry in the first
instance, and we look forward to further maturing the pilot as
we go forward.
Ms. Clarke. [Inaudible] today as part of our--as part of
your pilot so that it can be instructive as we are drafting
this authorization. So thank you so very much for your work in
this space.
I know Ms. Proctor has joined us again. Can you hear us,
Ms. Proctor?
You may be muted.
Ms. Proctor. Yes, and please accept my apologies.
Ms. Clarke. No, no. Understood. You know, everything is not
perfected yet. So we are just happy you are able to join us.
I would like to ask just a quick question about PPD-41, the
National Cybersecurity Incident Response Plan. Is that
something that you are familiar with?
Ms. Proctor. Yes, ma'am, I am.
Ms. Clarke. OK. There is a little delay, I guess, in your
audio.
On this committee, we spend a lot of time talking about the
need for all organizations--large, small, public, and private--
to have incident response plans in place before an emergency,
whether it is a flood, a fire, or a ransomware attack. It is
important that in a crisis, there is a framework to guide
decision making and everyone knows what role they are supposed
to play.
The PPD-41 National Cyber Incident Response Plan lays out
the Federal roles and responsibilities or lines of effort.
Would you agree with me that the Colonial Pipeline cyber
incident was likely to result in demonstrable harm to National
security interests or the economy of the United States as
defined under PPD-41?
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Ms. Proctor, you may answer this
question.
Ms. Clarke. She is delayed on her audio.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Yes. I just wanted to let you know
that your time has expired, but she certainly may respond to
your question, ma'am.
Ms. Clarke. Appreciate that.
Ms. Proctor. Yes, ma'am, I would agree with you on that,
that it was a significant incident.
Ms. Clarke. Very well.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Madam Chairlady.
I now recognize Mr. Garbarino.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Goldstein, the committee has concerns with the White
House's decision to place the Department of Energy at the helm
of the Federal Government's response to the ransomware attack
on Colonial Pipeline. In this case, DOE is not the Sector Risk
Management agency, nor does it have a lead role in the cyber
incident response in this case.
DHS, via TSA, is the co-lead Sector Risk Management agency
for pipeline sector, along with the Department of
Transportation. Additionally, the National Cyber Incident
Response Plan designates DHS, via CISA, as the lead agency for
the response.
What rationale were you and Acting Director Wells given for
DOE being given the lead response to this incident? Did you or
any of CISA's leadership raise concerns with the White House
about that, about DOE being put in charge?
Mr. Goldstein. Certainly. Congressman, I think it is useful
to separate the various elements of this incident, because it
is one of the first incidents that we have seen in this country
where a cyber event led to a decision to disrupt a physical
function upon which Americans depend.
There really were, I think, 3 distinct aspects to the
incident. The first was the cyber intrusion itself. The cyber
intrusion, insofar as the Federal response went, was managed in
accordance with PPD-41. The FBI, of course, led the threat
response, and CISA led the asset response.
Now, it happened to be in this circumstance, as Colonial
CEO testified last week, that Colonial chose to engage a third-
party incident response firm rather than accepting CISA's offer
of incident response assistance. Under current law, that is
certainly the prerogative of a company to do.
Not providing on-the-ground incident response assistance,
CISA focused on our broader asset response role of protecting
others. As mentioned in my opening statement, we shared urgent
alerts, warnings, and advisories with detailed information to
protect other organizations from this specific ransomware group
and the broader ransomware threat.
The second element of this incident is the broad
coordination of the National response. Of course, under PPD-21,
the Secretary of Homeland Security plays a critical role in
coordinating the response to cyber or physical incidents
affecting critical infrastructure. Here, Secretary Mayorkas
certainly played that role, in close coordination with the
White House and with our partners in the interagency and, of
course, our Secretary was at the White House podium and was one
of the key National figures communicating about their response.
The third aspect, of course, was the fuel supply issue,
assuring that Americans actually had fuel available to fill
their tanks and that businesses were able to keep operating.
That is an issue within the remit of DOE and was one of the
core focuses of the Government's interaction with Colonial,
recognizing that, as advised by the company, the cyber incident
was being managed by a well-regarded third party.
So DOE's role in this incident, and part of the reason for
their centrality, was the justifiable National focus on the
fuel supply issue and DOE's unique expertise and equities in
assuring appropriate provision of fuel across the eastern
seaboard during the duration of this incident.
Mr. Garbarino. I get that, but this was the team--they were
put in charge of the team, the Government's response to the
ransomware attack. You know, this right now is a pipeline. Next
time we don't know what it is. So don't you think that--or do
you feel that further clarification is needed on the Federal
level as to who is--you know, should CISA be the lead on all of
these? Or, you know, because with the ransomware, it is always
going to be ransomware. We just don't know what other industry
it is going to hit. So I don't know if that makes sense that,
you know, having DOE in charge of this one but then somebody
else in charge of another one.
Do you think there should be more--that clarification is
needed on the Federal level of who is actually in charge or at
the top, you know, when there is a cyber incident?
Mr. Goldstein. So in this case, certainly, CISA did
undertake our asset response role. Of course, the advisories
and communications that we put out were joint with the FBI,
consistent with PPD-41 and not with other agencies outside of
that construct. But, certainly, we are deeply conscious that as
we see the potential for these sort of incidents that bring
together cyber intrusions and very real functional impacts that
affect Americans lives, it is deeply important for the U.S.
Government to communicate clearly and concretely about how we
approach these incidents and how we manage them as a whole-of-
Government effort to both reduce their prevalence and minimize
impacts to the American people.
Mr. Garbarino. I get that. Under PPD-41--I know my time is
about to end--but why was this not a significant cyber incident
under PPD? This seems pretty significant. Why was this not?
Mr. Goldstein. This was absolutely a significant event. Any
time when we have Americans worried about cessation of an
essential function like fuel, it is absolutely a significant
event. Here, however, based upon information received from
Colonial, the cyber incident aspects of this event were well-
managed by a trusted third party. So based upon that
information, the event itself was unequivocally significant and
certainly dealt with as such at the highest levels of the U.S.
Government. But the cyber incident aspect of it was well-
managed by a third party and was a very well-known type of
ransomware that likely didn't reach the cyber-specific
threshold of significance that would usually trigger that
designation under PPD-41.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
Mr. Garbarino. I yield back.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Garbarino.
Mr. Thompson, I recognize you.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much. Let me thank the
witnesses for their testimony.
Mr. Goldstein, it is always good to see you as a witness.
You are good.
I want you to tell me what authorities you think CISA lacks
at this point in time that this committee could help you with.
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, sir. It is always good to see you
as well. I would like to harken back to Ms. Clarke's eloquent
statement, which is, we need the ability to get visibility into
National cybersecurity risks. We need to understand where
adversaries are intruding into networks across this country. We
need to understand the techniques that they are using to break
in. We need to understand what they are doing or trying to do.
The more of that kind of information that we get, we can then
protect others, and we can work as a whole of Government to
reduce the risk facing our country.
Mr. Thompson. So how do we codify that authority that you
are describing?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. So, certainly, the more that we as
a country can do to drive reporting on cybersecurity incidents
to CISA, as TSA recently did with their security directive, and
certainly as several of your colleagues have suggested via the
other avenues, that will help drive that change.
The second part, sir, is, you know, we need the ability to
address resource gaps across far too many entities in this
country, particularly, our State, local, Tribal, and
territorial partners. The more that we can do to help
organizations that may be underresourced to invest in core
cybersecurity, build cybersecurity programs, including in the
context of incident response through the Cyber Response and
Recovery Fund, or through other mechanisms that allow SLTT
partners to get the funding they need, that will all help raise
the bar.
Mr. Thompson. Well, thank you. So, do we need voluntary
compliance on the part of companies? Or do you see something
down the road where we will have to require companies to take a
test for their systems?
Mr. Goldstein. Certainly, sir. CISA right now is urgently
focused on making best use of the voluntary partnership model
where we are encouraging companies and giving companies help
and resources to drive security across their systems and manage
National risks. They are absolutely----
Mr. Thompson. Well----
Mr. Goldstein [continuing]. Please, sir.
Mr. Thompson [continuing]. OK. I don't want to go over my
time, but that is a good point. So what did Colonial do?
Mr. Goldstein. Sir, I don't have deep visibility into
Colonial's security posture at the time of the intrusion. It is
certainly the case today that there are many organizations in
this company that--pardon me, in this country, for a variety of
reasons, are unable to invest in the security they need. The
U.S. Government must take urgent steps to incentivize, drive,
and require those companies to make the investments that they
need to make.
Mr. Thompson. OK. Well, thank you. Now Ms. Proctor, what is
your knowledge of what TSA did on the security side?
Ms. Proctor. Thank you so much for that question, sir. TSA
has had a long relationship, security relationship, with
Colonial. That goes back to the beginning of our Pipeline
Security Guidelines. We have conducted Corporate Security
Reviews with Colonial in the past. We have had--as you are
aware, we have done Critical Facility Security Reviews with
them. Last year, during the pandemic, we approached Colonial to
engage in a Validated Architecture Design Review. That
conversation was on-going over a period of time. They recently
submitted their approval to participate in the VADR. It is now
scheduled for the last week of July of this year. So we have
conducted----
Mr. Thompson. So----
Ms. Proctor [continuing]. OK.
Mr. Thompson [continuing]. Thank you. My concern is that if
there is no regulatory requirement for companies to allow TSA
or whomever to look at their security protocols, they will tell
you to come back next month, they will tell you to come back in
6 months. I am just concerned that given the expansion of
ransomware attacks, a voluntary system without some compliance
mandated puts us at risk. You don't have to comment. That is,
you know, my thoughts on it.
Ms. Proctor. Sure.
Mr. Thompson. You know, you can have relationships with
companies, but if that company knows that they don't have to,
at the end of the day, comply, then I just don't see us working
to a threshold for security. So, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I now
recognize Representative Harshbarger for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you, Madam Chair, and Ranking
Members, and witnesses. I have a question for Mr. Goldstein.
You know, CISA needs to engage directly with our Nation's
business leaders, and, my goodness, receiving a voluntary
program where they will assess their vulnerabilities.
But most of these companies, you know, they won't do it. I
totally understand why they are afraid that their customer base
may see that they have vulnerabilities. They may not want them
to know that they somehow would have their information
compromised. There are things like their stock prices may drop.
They may be afraid that they will be hauled in front of
Congress if this vulnerability is shown. So I do understand
that.
I guess my question is, what is CISA's position on whether
a victim of ransomware should pay the ransom or not? Who
decides that?
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you for that question, ma'am. It is
the position of the U.S. Government to strongly discourage the
payment of ransoms. This is the case for 2 reasons. First of
all, paying a ransom offers no assurance that the victim
organization will actually have their data restored or have
stolen data returned. We have seen many instances of ransomware
gangs either failing to decrypt the data, or providing a
decryption tool that only decrypts part of the data and still
leaves a lot of the data locked up and unusable.
But, of course, the second reason is that these ransomware
campaigns and these criminal gangs are fueled by ransom
payments. The more the organizations pay ransom, the more that
we can expect these criminal gangs to be incentivized to
continue the scourge of attacks against U.S. critical
infrastructure. The decision to pay remains with the impacted
company, and certainly, for many companies, this is a hard
decision, particularly, if they provide some critical service.
But these payments, again, provide no assurance of restoration,
and what is driving these campaigns and these really damaging
attacks to continue.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Do you know how many private companies
have paid ransomware because they were hacked in--you know, a
lot of companies, even in my district, they don't even report
it, because of those reasons I gave you initially. You know,
you can't really track and get an accurate number of how many
people have been hacked or paid the ransom, because they don't
want you to know. They have cyber insurance because of these
ransomware attacks. This is--I mean, it is has gotten out of
control when our own Government, you have 9 different agencies
hacked, and they don't really know how it happened. It was an
outside entity that had to tell us.
So, there is a lot of reasons, I understand, why private
businesses won't voluntarily be assessed, even to find out what
their own vulnerabilities are. Maybe they just don't trust the
Government. I don't know. But what percentage of companies do
you have numbers on that report that they have had to pay
ransomware, or they have been compromised? Do you have a
number?
Mr. Goldstein. So, ma'am, we don't have a good number
today. It gets back to the question that the Chairman raised,
which is today, you know, it is largely voluntary whether a
victim of a cybersecurity intrusion, including ransomware
attacks, does report to either CISA or Federal law enforcement.
I do want to comment briefly though, ma'am, on your last
point, which is well-taken, on disincentives for sharing
information with the Government. Because Congress has already
acted to largely address many of those concerns, both in the
Cybersecurity Act of 2015, and in the Critical Infrastructure
Information Act, both of which provide strong protections for
information shared by the private sector with CISA, including
protections from regimes like FOIA, regulatory use, civil
litigation, et cetera. So, certainly, one of our goals at CISA
is to ensure broad understanding of these protections and
ensure companies take advantage of them by reporting both their
cybersecurity risks and incidents to CISA.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes. This is big business right now, and
we have got to get a handle on it, and that is why we are
having these hearings.
I do have another question. Why--and this is just your
opinion--why do you think the FBI did not take this committee
up on our invitation, I guess you could say?
Mr. Goldstein. Ma'am, I have not discussed that question
with my colleagues at the FBI, and I wouldn't be able to
comment.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well, that is your opinion. I appreciate
that. I don't know. How much time do I have left?
Mrs. Watson Coleman. You have 20 seconds.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Twenty seconds. Well, I will just yield
back. Thank, you ma'am.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Well, thank you very much. I will now
recognize Representative Titus.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank you for holding
this hearing. We certainly realized that we have put this off
for too long. We need to get on top of it, and the testimony
has been excellent. We focused on the Colonial Pipeline, but I
would like to be sure that other kinds of energy infrastructure
are protected like generating stations.
I represent Las Vegas, and we have a lot of lights there,
and we need a lot of sources of energy that are consistent,
that are persistent that we can count on to serve our
residents, and also 40 million visitors.
Now, Nevada Energy is our primary provider of energy, and
they are doing a lot of investing in renewable energy
resources. They are developing throughout the State, mostly
solar, but some wind, which I think is a great thing. But I
want to be sure that the Government is adequately protecting
those sources, too, from these kinds of threats.
I wonder if y'all would comment on what CISA and TSA are
doing in anticipation of maybe some needs in this area?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am. So, certainly, CISA is deeply
focused on cybersecurity risks facing the energy sector and
iteration entities in particular. Of particular note, the White
House recently announced a 100-day industrial control system
Cybersecurity Sprint. The first sprint focused precisely on
this sector recognizing the centrality of the energy grid, of
course, to our Nation's economy and National security, and the
potential for a cybersecurity event to cause significant
disruption.
You know, certainly, many entities across the electric
subsector are well-resourced and mature in this space. This is
a sector that recognizes the risk and has invested accordingly.
But, certainly, CISA and our colleagues at DOE are deeply
focused on providing tools, resources, and guidance to this
sector, recognizing the risks and the need to make further
investments to stay ahead of our adversaries.
Ms. Titus. So do you work directly with the utilities? You
would be working directly with Nevada Energy to help them to be
sure they are up to speed?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am. I can take back to see if we
have worked with Nevada Energy recently. But, certainly, we
work very consistently with individual operators to assess
their security and make sure they have what they need to be
secure.
Ms. Titus. Oh, I am glad to hear that. Any other comment?
Well, the second question that I have is that I know one of the
problems that we often have is trying to recruit and train and
have in the field cyber professionals. I understand that there
is a program--it is a scholarship program--called CyberCore.
Now, my district is home to several minority-serving
institutions. I just wonder how much outreach you are doing, or
how much work you are doing with those institutions to try to
attract and train people who are--well have the skills to enter
into this field that is going to be needed increasingly as we
go forward?
Mr. Goldstein. Ma'am, thanks so much for that question. You
are absolutely correct. Building a deep, diverse cybersecurity
work force is absolutely essential for us not only getting our
arms around this risk, but managing it going forward. CISA is
deeply focused on working with institutions across the country,
but particularly minority-serving institutions, HBCUs, and
community colleges, to make sure that those schools have
curriculum, have training, have resources, and assistance so
that they can train the next generation of cybersecurity
professionals.
Certainly, we are focusing in that regard, not only
training that work force so that they can join Federal service,
including through the programs like Scholarship for Service,
but, also, ensuring that we are driving and catalyzing a robust
educational community around the cybersecurity work force at
all levels of education to ensure that we are educating people
today, so that they can be well-equipped for the jobs of
tomorrow.
Ms. Titus. I am going to reach out to the campuses in my
district about this CyberCore program and see what they are
doing. Then can I have them get in touch with your office or
somebody there to find out how they might enhance that, and
maybe get the word out more and be sure people--students in
there know that they can apply for this kind of program.
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am. Most certainly.
Ms. Titus. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chairman, I yield
back.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. I want to take this opportunity to ask
Ms. Proctor a question that I tried to ask when our system went
down. Ms. Proctor, are you there?
Ms. Proctor. Yes, ma'am, I am.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Oh, thank you very much. You know,
given that operators will only be required to self-assess their
compliance with TSA guidelines, how would TSA verify the
information provided, and what will the consequences be if the
pipeline operator misrepresents their cybersecurity practices
to the TSA?
Ms. Proctor. Thank you so much for that question, because I
think it is important to know that in the first security
directive we have issued, there is a requirement for companies
to conduct a self-assessment as part of those requirements that
security directors want. However, we are continuing to develop
additional measures for pipeline companies. We are developing
now a second security directive, which will have the force of a
regulation. That one will require more specific mitigation
measures, and it will ultimately include more specific
requirements with regard to assessments.
The second security directive is going to be an SSI
directive, because of the nature of the mitigating measures
that are going to be required within there. But these are also
subject to inspection by TSI inspectors. We have a cadre of
service inspectors that we have trained that underwent training
at PHMSA Training Academy for pipeline operations. We have a
subset of them who have also undergone cybersecurity training.
They just recently completed an in-residence course at Idaho
National Lab. So they have both pipeline operations training
and cyber training.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
Ms. Proctor. Those will be the individuals who will be
ensuring that the pipeline companies are adhering to what is
required in those security directives.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. Yes or no, do you all have
the resources and personnel that you need to be able to ensure
the accountability measures that we think are important?
Ms. Proctor. Yes, ma'am, we do have those resources now.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. OK. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Now, I would like to recognize Mr. Van Drew from New
Jersey.
Mr. Van Drew. Thank you, Madam Chair. I have just some
questions, and some of them may seem a little repetitive, but I
really want to tack this down.
For Sonya Proctor from the TSA, I understand there are
growing concerns that the TSA [inaudible].
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Congressman, Congressman, can you
unmute? I guess while we are trying to work this out, I will
recognize Representative Clyde.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this
hearing. This question is for Eric Goldstein. Mr. Goldstein,
the subcommittee held a hearing last month on the ransomware
crisis with experts from the private sector, and former
Director Krebs responded to a question of mine about how CISA
gets word out about its great services. He said that marketing
is not an area of strength for the agency.
Considering the recent attacks where CISA has not been
directly involved, I think it is important that business
leaders, critical infrastructure companies, and State and local
governments are aware of CISA and its great services. So, my
question to you is how many dedicated marketing professionals
does CISA have? If I may, sir.
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, sir. So I don't have an exact
number on the size of our relative external affairs team. I am
happy to get that back for you. What I would say is fully agree
with the general point. It is absolutely critical for CISA to
make sure that every company in this country, as well as every
SLTT government partner understands the services that we are
offering and understand how our services can help them drive
down cybersecurity risks and the investments that they need to
make. So, certainly, we need to do more to convey that message
to every corner of this country, and part of doing that is by
having, as you frame it, sir, marketing campaigns that make
sure that the word gets out effectively. So that is an area of
urgent investment for us. The point, sir, is very well-taken.
Mr. Clyde. OK. Well, because the more I learn about you,
the more I like you. OK. So I want to make sure that the entire
Nation knows just what outstanding services you provide. So, I
strongly encourage you to have a very good media campaign,
because I think our business is needed. OK? We need to know
that CISA is there really to help. Tell me, does CISA have a
position on whether the victim of ransomware attack should pay
ransom?
Mr. Goldstein. Sir, we do. We advocate that victims--we
strongly discourage victims from paying ransom. As noted, I
think, from a prior question, that is for 2 reasons. First,
because there is no guarantee that victims will have their data
restored. Second, of course, because paying ransoms is exactly
what these criminal gangs want. Paying ransoms only further
incentivizes these sort of damaging attacks to continue.
Mr. Clyde. OK. Does CISA have an offensive capability?
Mr. Goldstein. We do not, sir. We are purely a cyber
defensive organization.
Mr. Clyde. OK. Last week, I asked FireEye senior VP Charles
Carmichael if his company would be willing to work with the
Federal Government in helping secure a network. He stated that
he would certainly be interested in the opportunity. Mr.
Carmichael also stated that he believes the attacks on the
Colonial Pipeline and JBS Foods originated overseas. Does CISA
work with the private sector regarding any intelligence sharing
or threat assessments to safeguard private or public networks?
Mr. Goldstein. We do, sir. We have deep relationships with
many, if not the vast majority of the Nation's leading
cybersecurity companies, internet companies, cloud providers to
do just the work you describe. Sharing and exchanging of
information that these companies are learning about
cybersecurity risks affecting their customers, fusing that
together with what CISA is learning from Federal networks, and
what we are learning from our partners elsewhere in government,
and developing that common operating picture of cybersecurity
risks.
We have made real investments there, but there is certainly
more work to do to ensure that we have that deep visibility we
need to understand risks that are impacting our country.
Mr. Clyde. OK. Would you agree with his assessment that
these attacks were perpetrated from overseas, all of them, or
any of them from this country that you know of?
Mr. Goldstein. Sir, as a general matter, many of these
ransomware gangs are domiciled overseas. I am not able to speak
about any particular act in this committee, sir.
Mr. Clyde. OK. Do you have any evidence that would suggest
that they are sponsored by a foreign state?
Mr. Goldstein. Sir, in general terms, these criminal groups
are seeking financial gain, and are generally not seeking any
sorts of strategic ends sought by nation-states.
Mr. Clyde. OK. If CISA doesn't have an offensive
capability, do you know does one exist in our country
somewhere?
Mr. Goldstein. Sir, there are various other Federal
agencies that do exercise under their own authorities the
ability to disrupt adversaries using cyber means, including
within the Defense Department. I would, of course, defer to the
departments for further detail in their committees.
Mr. Clyde. OK. Do you coordinate with any of those to
assist them?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. We work very deeply across the
interagency, with Federal law enforcement, with the Defense
Department, and other partners to ensure that we are sharing
information, and that all of our activities across the
Government are well-coordinated and aligned.
Mr. Clyde. OK. All right. Well, thank you very much, sir, I
appreciate your responses in that. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Representative Clyde, for
raising that issue because I was just talking about that
myself. I think the capacity to be able to be on the defense is
something we really do have to drill down a little bit better
on.
Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Very good, Madam Chair, can you hear me OK?
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Yes.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Madam Chair, thank you holding
this joint hearing. I want to thank our witnesses for their
testimony today and for the important work that they are doing.
Mr. Goldstein, let me start with you if I could. Last week,
in front of this committee, I was so bold as to offer CISA's
service to the CEO of Colonial Pipeline, and he refused them.
So, I urged him certainly to reconsider, as he says, he is
acting for the good of the country. So that being said, I just
want to confirm that the offer is still on the table. So, Mr.
Goldstein, just to confirm, CISA stands ready to offer
assistance on the networks of the Colonial Pipeline if your
services are requested, correct?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir, we stand ready to support any
entity providing critical services in this country, including,
of course, Colonial.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. Thank you. So Mr. Goldstein, now I
know that CISA is a relatively new agency, and not everyone is
familiar with the services that you offer. Can you help the
committee understand what value you bring to entities when they
invite you onto their networks following a breach? Furthermore,
what benefits to other critical infrastructure owners and
operators across various sectors can CISA bring to the table by
having on-network presence? I hope that the CEO of Colonial is
watching. Maybe this will encourage him to invite you in once
and for all.
Mr. Goldstein. Indeed. Thank you for that question. Sir.
The way you framed it is exactly right. First and foremost, it
bears noting that we do encourage organizations that are
victimized by cybersecurity incidents to bring on a third-party
private response provider if they are so inclined. We work very
frequently closely in tandem with private incident response
firms to conduct a joint response.
So CISA's role is not replacing the extraordinary talent in
the private cybersecurity market, but is, instead, additive
there, too. That is the case really in 2 ways. The first is in
supporting a victim of a cybersecurity intrusion, we are able
to bring to bear information from other Federal agencies, and
from what we have learned across incidents affecting the
Federal Government, and our other partners, and enrich the
incident response that may be already undertaken by the victim
itself or their third-party provider. So, we can complement and
add to the incident response, bringing some unique information,
and in the case of incidents, that impact control systems, some
unique expertise and capability. In fact, our team that is
focused on control system cybersecurity is actually one of the
oldest and most expert teams doing that kind of work.
So, in the first instance, we can be deeply complementary
to and additive to the work already going on by an
organization. Of course, if a victim chooses not to bring on a
third party and seek CISA's help, foundationally, we can
certainly provide the primary incident response role as well.
But as you note, sir, our role extends far more broadly,
and we are focused on managing National risks and ensuring that
a cybersecurity intrusion that impacts one entity doesn't
spread across others. Certainly, organizations should think of
this as even if you are not a victim today, you may be one
tomorrow. If you are one today, that doesn't mean that you will
not have an intrusion again in the future.
So, organizations should certainly see this as an issue of
National interest where the more information that CISA can
receive in the early days of an incident by being part of the
incident response and part of that initial assessment, that
lets us move more quickly to glean information, glean those
technical indicators that we can then share either in a focused
way with organizations that may be directly impacted based upon
their sector, their technology footprint, their geography, or
broadly and nationally, and even internationally, to raise the
cost for adversaries and ensure that they are not using these
same tactics, these same indicators over and over again.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you for that. Before my time expires,
Mr. Goldstein, we have seen press reports that third-party
incident responders suggested not bringing the Government in.
Do you find that outside cyber consultants tend to work
cooperatively with CISA in emergency situations like this one
with Colonial, for example, or do they bring their clients'
reservations about Government involvement?
Mr. Goldstein. So we do find in general, sir, that
certainly, most of the major cybersecurity providers in this
country work collaboratively with CISA. We have deep
relationships with many of them and have on-going operational
collaboration around significant campaigns and significant
threats, and, certainly, would discourage any company or third
party from deciding not to share information with the
Government.
As noted throughout this hearing, this really at this point
is both an issue of National security and public health and
safety. The more that U.S. Government can understand this risk
and take urgent action and mitigate it, the more we can drive
down this trend over time and protect our people.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you for the question. The
gentleman is out of time. Thank you.
I understand Mr. Van Drew is now available to be recognized
for 5 minutes. Mr. Van Drew.
Mr. Van Drew. Thank you. I will give this a shot again. We
had some technical issues. So, although, Congress gave the TSA
authority [inaudible] over pipeline [inaudible] in 2001 have
recently been efforts to transfer its authority to the
Department of Energy [inaudible]----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Mr. Van Drew is having technical
problems again. We cannot hear you. So I will recognize
Representative LaTurner.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Madam Chair. My question is for
Mr. Goldstein. Mr. Goldstein, how are you doing today?
Mr. Goldstein. Doing well, sir. Thank you.
Mr. LaTurner. Good. Thanks for being with us. Could you
help us understand how many, just the scope, in the Federal
Government, of how many different Government agencies are
dealing with cybersecurity ransomware, either on an offensive
or defensive nature?
Mr. Goldstein. Certainly, sir. So the existing model for
Federal Government cybersecurity is--in the first instance,
there are 2 agencies that are focused on cybersecurity incident
response, and that is CISA, as they lead for asset response,
which are efforts to understand and mitigate the immediate
impacts of an incident, and then help to protect others. Then
our colleagues at the FBI, who are the leads for threat
response and focused on understanding the adversary, and then,
of course, taking actions to disrupt or impose costs.
Apart from CISA and the FBI, there are a number of Sector
Risk Management agencies that bring to bear specialized
authorities in their sectors that may support CISA and the FBI
for a cybersecurity incident affecting their sector. Then, of
course, apart from these civilian space, both the Department of
Defense and our Nation's intelligence community have unique
authorities to either gather information about adversaries who
are seeking to damage our country through cyber means, or, of
course, take other measures to impose costs on our adversaries
wherever they may be.
Mr. LaTurner. The Colonial Pipeline CEO recommended that
there be designated a single point of contact to coordinate the
response to cyber attacks and incidents at large. What is your
reaction to that?
Mr. Goldstein. So sir, our goal as a U.S. Government is to
make this as easy as possible for victims on cybersecurity
incidents. Certainly, today if an organization calls CISA, if
they call the FBI, if they even call their Sector Risk
Management agency, they should get the same response.
So, we have worked deeply within the Federal Government to
ensure that we are providing victims of cybersecurity incidents
with all of the resources that the Federal Government can bring
to bear. I think that this actually worked fairly well in the
context of the Colonial intrusion where, you know, there was a
wide breadth of Federal agencies based upon the unique
attributes of this incident. But those agencies collaborated
well together behind the scenes. Colonial was able to interact
with a handful of agencies, and not, frankly, the full breadth
of agencies with some authority to manage an incident of this
complexity.
But certainly to your point, we can always do more to make
this clearer in the private sector, and make sure that the
activity of reporting an incident in the Federal Government,
and engage in our health is as frictionless as possible and as
simple as possible.
Mr. LaTurner. I talked to people in the private sector in
my State that this has happened to, and it has happened to a
lot, and the number seems to be growing. So, it is a great
concern to me that the Federal response to this can be kind-of
clunky. It has been described, or suggested by some, that we
have one person that coordinates this and have the ability to
control the budgets of all of these other entities. Do you have
a response to that?
Mr. Goldstein. So, sir, I think the answer is----
Mr. LaTurner. There is some precedence for it in the past
as well. I am sorry. Go ahead, Mr. Goldstein.
Mr. Goldstein. Sure. Certainly, sir. So, certainly, the
various agencies involved here, and certainly CISA and FBI have
been the lead for cyber asset response, have unique authorities
and unique capabilities to bring to bear. But you said it had
the opportunity to hear testimony from our nominee for National
cyber director just last week. That role, I think, will also
help further codify the structure and the engagement model, and
further streamline the manner in which the Federal Government
engages with all manner of entities.
So we are looking forward both to the speedy confirmation
of the National cyber director, as well as director for CISA.
Both of those individuals, I think, will help the Government
further mature our processes to simplifying engagement with the
private sector.
Mr. LaTurner. Do you think that that solves the problem,
though? Because, I think, from my perspective, it can still put
us in the exact position that we are in right now. Maybe
improve it, right? But at the end of the day, it is concerning
to me that we don't have one point of contact who controls the
budgets who can force these different bureaucracies to come
together and make sure that our response in the United States
is clear and concise and efficient. Do you think that those
confirmations fix that problem?
Mr. Goldstein. I think that we are making progress over
time in significant ways. I will say, sir, I was in this agency
5 years ago. Having recently come back in, we have made
significant progress in the intervening time. I think the
confirmation of both the new CISA director and the National
cyber director will make another significant step forward in
our ability to offer these sort-of simplified, cohesive
engagement model that you described. But, assuredly, we will
have more work to do because this is a deeply evolving space,
and as the U.S. Government, we will have to evolve the pace.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you for your----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Mr. LaTurner, your time has expired.
Thank you. The Chair recognizes Representative Slotkin.
Ms. Slotkin. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks for our
witnesses for being here. Two very different questions. So, you
know, after the Colonial Pipeline was attacked, I went to all
of the CEOs of the pipelines that criss-cross through Michigan,
both over land and over sea, or under our inland seas, and
asked them, like, what they were doing in the wake of the
Colonial attack to improve their own cybersecurity, learning
from the painful example that Colonial was offering us.
I know that we put in these new procedures at the end of
May. So, I just want to understand, in a very concrete way,
what actually happened? Let's say, Enbridge, which is a big
pipeline company that goes under the Straits of Mackinac, a
very sensitive place in Michigan's Great Lakes. Let's say they
are attacked. What is the actual procedure? Tell me the 9-1-1
process from the moment they are attacked in terms of engaging
with Federal agencies? Whoever is the responsible party should
take that one.
Mr. Goldstein. Sorry, ma'am. I will take it first, then I
will yield to my colleague. Under--and I will defer to my
colleague if this pipeline is in scope for the TSA directive.
But the TSA directive does require a certain set of pipeline
entities to report cybersecurity intrusions centrally to CISA.
Upon receiving such a report, CISA triages the report based
upon a standard methodology to assess the criticality of the
incident, based upon risk to the country, the nature of the
entity, the nature of the intrusion, and then certainly for an
incident affecting an entity of the criticality that you note
we would likely offer some measure of incident response or
threat hunting assistance.
Now, I will note in this case it would still remain
voluntary for this pipeline entity to accept our assistance.
This entity could say, they have chosen to engage a third
party, and that is how they want to engage their response. Now,
even in that model, we would still encourage them to share
information with us urgently so we can help them with the
response and protect others. I am sorry, ma'am. Go ahead.
Ms. Slotkin. As a requirement, just so I understand, is it
true that within 12 hours now, they must contact CISA? Is that
the sort of requirement with the new rules that were put in
place at the end of May?
Mr. Goldstein. Ma'am----
Ms. Proctor. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Slotkin. OK. Perfect. So just so I understand, that is
the 9-1-1 call they must make within 12 hours if they detect
some sort of cyber intrusion. OK. I know it depends on the type
of pipeline, but I understand.
Then a completely different question on sort-of the eve of
a big meeting between President Biden and Vladimir Putin, where
Putin had suggested that there be some sort of trade for groups
that are conducting ransomware attacks, you know, from Russia,
and groups that are allegedly conducting ransomware attacks
from the United States.
Can you confirm for me--I know you are defensive and not
offensive in nature, I know that you are not law enforcement--
but, Mr. Goldstein, can you confirm in one sort-of yes or no,
the United States of America has the ability to go after any
criminal actors who are conducting ransomware attacks, here or
abroad?
Mr. Goldstein. Ma'am, that question will get into the
authorities vested in Federal law enforcement, which I am not
able to answer.
Ms. Slotkin. OK. Have you seen the Russians do anything to
try and clamp down on ransomware actors emanating from their
soil?
Mr. Goldstein. Ma'am, I think, what I can say, generally,
there is, you know, we strongly encourage all countries to take
urgent action against ransomware actors operating within any
country. The trend that we have seen of ransomware attacks over
the past year suggest that such acts across the board is not
being taken.
Ms. Slotkin. Right. So it is more--I understand it is not
your jurisdiction. I guess I just want to make the point that a
trade between Vladimir Putin and Joe Biden makes zero sense.
Because we actually go after our criminals. We actually would
take action if we had a ransomware group that were threatening
other countries, that were attacking Russia, or attacking a
European ally, or attacking China, that we would go after them,
unlike the Russians, who have taken, at best, limited action
against those, who we know, who we have said publicly, are
attacking United States infrastructure.
So it is more of a statement. I just feel like this--until
we get to the root of the problem that no action is being taken
often by the Russians and the Chinese against actors emanating
from their soil, we are going to keep having this conversation
over and over again. I know I am out of time. I will leave it
at that. Thanks very much.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. We will now recognize
Representative Luria for 5 minutes. Thank you.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you, Madam Chair, and the Chairs and
Ranking Members of both committees for having this important
hearing. I was reviewing one report, and I saw that there were
over 304 million ransomware attacks world-wide in 2020. That
was a 62 percent increase from 2019.
So the recent Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack was,
obviously, not the first we have seen against critical
infrastructure, but it spurred the fuel shortages across the
Eastern Seaboard for several days. At the local level, I was
seeing impacts like this as well in my district. For example,
the Hampton Road Sanitation district suffered a ransomware
attack last November that disrupted billing across the service
region for several weeks.
I think that we can all agree that ransomware attacks are a
National security crisis. As Chairman Thompson noted last week,
the Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack raised serious
questions about the cybersecurity practices of our critical
infrastructure owners and operators, and whether the voluntary
cybersecurity standards are sufficient to defend ourselves
against these types of cyber threats.
So I wanted to the ask the question of our witnesses today.
With regards to our critical infrastructure owners and
operators, such as those that operate pipelines, what evidence
do you and other agencies have that the organizations you
oversee actually understand the extent of their cybersecurity
risk?
Ms. Proctor. We offer briefings to owners and operators of
critical infrastructure. Based on the threat that has been made
clear over the last several years, we have arranged Classified
briefings for owners and operators of infrastructure to ensure
that they understand the nature of the threat. We also have
provided assessments, vulnerability assessments, so that they
can identify and then close those cybersecurity gaps to make
themselves less likely to be a successful target for those who
would be likely to launch those kinds of intrusions.
We also work with owners and operators to conduct
exercises, so that they can actually exercise their plans. It
is one thing to have plans on paper. It is another thing to be
able to exercise those both within your company, and within the
region or with others in your industry.
So, we have a layered approach, both in terms of providing
education, assessments, exercises to exercise those plans, and
to be able to continue to inform of emerging threats, and to
keep the cycle of both informing, exercising, and updating
plans to keep that process under way.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you. I mean that does sounds like a
good resource, and a good way for them to understand the
potential threats, the emerging threats that helped developing
plans. But can you clarify--am I understanding that this is
still all voluntary on behalf of the company?
Ms. Proctor. Well, currently, we certainly started out with
the Pipeline Security Guidelines which were not mandatory. But
as of May 28, we issued our first security directive, which has
the power of regulation. We are in the process now of
developing our second security directive, again, which will be
mandatory, which will have more specific mandatory mitigating
measures that will be required by owners and operators. That
directive is going to be very specific. So there is going to be
marked as an SSI document, security--excuse me, Security
Sensitive Information. So that one will have a lot more detail
and will be rather prescriptive in terms of the mitigation
measures required.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you. Just in the last couple of
seconds remaining, do you have a good assessment for all of the
operators of the major pipelines? Do you know where they are on
a scale that shows both their awareness and preparedness, their
plans, their training that they have completed in order to
execute plans, and is that something you are tracking so that
kind-of within the network of pipelines around the country, you
know where the biggest vulnerabilities exist?
Ms. Proctor. Within the network of critical pipelines, we
have conducted Corporate Security Reviews and Critical Facility
Security Reviews with most of them. So we do have a good
baseline for them in terms of where they are with regard to
their corporate plans, their cybersecurity plans, and also,
with their critical facilities in the field. So both are
assessments that we continually perform with owners and
operators in the pipeline community.
Mrs. Luria. OK. Well, thank you very much. Ma'am, my time
has expired. I yield back.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you very much. The Chair
recognizes Representative Rice.
Miss Rice. Thank you so much. Mr. Goldstein, I know that
Chairman Thompson had asked you some questions about, you know,
additional resources and such. I mean, it is clear that, you
know, your agency has issued extensive ransomware guidance and
led efforts such as the Reduce the Risk of Ransomware Campaign
to help owners and operators of critical infrastructure prepare
for ransomware threats. But we also know that, you know, the
Colonial hack demonstrates that even when companies are willing
to self-report and engage with law enforcement after a
ransomware attack, they may not report to, or engage directly
with CISA. I think that is one of the issues we need to address
here.
So, is this something that, you know, CISA is not being
clear enough to owners and operators about the value added that
you could bring to their protection of their, you know,
critical infrastructure? Or is it just that they are saying
thanks, but no thanks.
Mr. Goldstein. There is certainly more that we can do to
make sure that companies across sectors understand the unique
value proposition, which we discussed in response to
Congressman Langevin's question, about engaging CISA and the
way that that value is unique and additive to engaging a third-
party response firm, and additive to engaging with Federal law
enforcement. We worked very closely with our partners in law
enforcement and often conduct joint responses, because we are
achieving different mission objectives where we support a
victim organization. So, certainly continuing to clarify the
value proposition that CISA brings to the table, and
differentiating that and showing that it is complementary to
engaging other partners, I do think is a critical area for the
work for the agency.
Miss Rice. What percentage of ransomware attacks would you
say get reported to CISA?
Mr. Goldstein. So, ma'am, as noted, due to the real
challenge we have here with visibility, we don't have a good
number there. What I would say is after recent intrusions of
Colonial, JBS Foods, et cetera, we are seeing a real increase,
both in organizations that are reporting incidents, and also in
organizations that are availing themselves of CISA's guidance
and best practices. As just one example, in the week after the
Colonial intrusion, I think we saw increased views of our
ransomware guide, I think, something like 400 percent for that
week after.
So, we are seeing organizations across the country
recognize this risk and recognizing that CISA is a source of
support and expertise. We just need to make sure that that
continues, and that we reach again into every corner of the
country going forward.
Miss Rice. Well, I agree with that, Mr. Goldstein, but I
also think it is also really important for whatever Federal
agency it is that gets contacted by an operator of a critical
piece of infrastructure in this country, that whether they take
it to the FBI--if the FBI brings in CISA, and whatever other
agency, Federal agency we need to partner with to address this
as comprehensively as possible. I hope that that is what the
practices is--or if it isn't, will be, going forward.
Ms. Proctor, just in the past few weeks, a ransomware
attack against a Massachusetts ferry operator shut down travel
between the State and its islands. It was revealed that hackers
had breached the networks of New York's MTA on whose trains my
constituents work and ride every day.
Now, neither of those hacks posed a risk for passenger
safety, but, you know, cyber attacks targeting mass transit,
railways, aviation, they have the potential to put travelers at
risk, and would be massively disruptive to society writ large.
So can you, specifically, discuss the recent ransomware attack
against the MTA?
Ms. Proctor. Yes, ma'am. As a matter of fact, I can. After
that incident, I actually did speak with New York's MTA's CISO.
I did learn from speaking with him that the attack was not
considered to be successful. They did not actually access
information in the system. They did not make a demand for
ransom. They did not acquire information from the MTA. The
example that the CISO used would be that the ransomware
intrusion opened the screen door, but did not get in the front
door.
Miss Rice. OK. So thank you.
Ms. Proctor. That was the example that they used. They did
not acquire anything in that attack.
Miss Rice. Thank you for that clarification. I think it is
really important for TSA to engage with MTA and other public
transit agencies on security measures, and cybersecurity, in
particular, not just private-sector companies who are running
pieces of critical infrastructure. Thank you both so much, and
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. I recognize Mr. Gottheimer
from New Jersey.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you, Chairwoman Watson Coleman also
from New Jersey, and Chairwoman Clarke for recognizing me and
arranging today's important hearing on cyber threats to
pipelines.
The recent ransomware attack on the United States' largest
fuel pipeline, Colonial Pipeline, I think many Americans across
these East Coast experience a rush on gas and long lines at the
pump because of the collective failure to secure our critical
infrastructure from hackers, as we have heard time and time
again today and before.
I think it is fair to say that Colonial had serious
security flaws, including an outdated VPN system which
permitted ransomware hackers to breach Colonial systems that
required dual-factor authentication. But I am also concerned
that Colonial's spotty record of engagement with TSA, which
since 9/11, has been tasked with securing our pipelines by
conducting voluntary assessments of private operators.
If I can ask Assistant Administrator Proctor, we may know
that on multiple occasions prior to the attack on May 7, TSA
requested cybersecurity assessment of Colonial's system, but
Colonial repeatedly punted, and has yet to participate in these
assessments. Can you please compare TSA's experience with
Colonial to the cooperation you received from other pipeline
operators?
Ms. Proctor. Yes, sir. I would speak to that in that the
experience we have had with Colonial is--it is for the request
that they have made to reschedule, not unusual during the
pandemic. During the pandemic, there were a number of companies
that had limited personnel on-site. They considered their
personnel on-site to be essential personnel. They did restrict
them from a lot of interaction with outsiders. So Colonial had
postponed a discussion to get a scheduled date for their VADR
assessment.
The postponement was not unusual for other companies. Other
companies did go through. We did pivot, and we did manage to
find a way to conduct the VADR virtually. So we were able to
schedule those in other cases.
The Colonial discussion was postponed because they were
installing some new software. At one point, they were doing
some other updates, and we had a focus in March. They had asked
for about 6 weeks to complete some cyber updates. The 6 weeks
was actually a week after the incident with Colonial. We have
since focused on getting that date in place. They are now
scheduled for the last week of July for their Validated
Architecture Design Review.
Mr. Gottheimer. Got it. Has a pipeline ever flat-out
refused to cooperate with an inspection or assessment, or tried
to limit the scope of what you are assessing?
Ms. Proctor. No, it wasn't a refusal, it was rescheduling
the discussion so that they could deal with personnel issues.
At one point, we had a conversation set with them, and they had
several employees that were COVID-impacted. So they delayed
that.
Mr. Gottheimer. I am sorry to interrupt. I was just going
to ask, is that similar in terms of others' ever having done
the same thing where they have delayed? Have others refused?
Other pipelines? Is this consistent, with the last little extra
time?
Ms. Proctor. We have had other delays, but we have gotten
to the point where we have done those assessments. We had
worked out a way to do them virtually, so it made this more
manageable for the company, even though they were trying to
protect their essential employees from engaging with outsiders.
Mr. Gottheimer. Got it. Thank you so much.
Mr. Goldstein, you recently witnessed a series of attacks,
not just against pipelines, but also against mass
transportation infrastructure. Clearly, we need robust
cybersecurity standards for the transportation sector writ
large. What additional measures can we take to protect this
sector not just from ransomware hackers, but, also, determined
nation-state adversaries like China, Iran, or North Korea?
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, sir. The good news here is that
there is nothing particularly unique about ransomware
intrusions. The sorts of cybersecurity advisories and best
practices that are promulgated by CISA and the sorts of
cybersecurity directives that we impose upon Federal civilian
agencies are effective against ransomware actors, nation-
states, and really any adversaries.
In addition, as we think through the more sophisticated
types of adversaries that may want to cause more lasting damage
or gain more persistence, that is where a program like
CyberSentry really comes into play. Our ability to gain
persistent visibility into cybersecurity risks affecting our
most critical infrastructure. By broadening and maturing that
pilot program, we will be able to get more visibility and drive
targeted action to drive out those risks of intrusions as soon
as they are identified.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you. I yield back. Thank you so much,
gentleman.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you very much. With that, I want
to thank the witnesses. Your testimony has been invaluable,
enlightening, and thank you so much.
The Members of the subcommittee may have additional
questions for you all, the witnesses, and we ask that you
respond expeditiously in writing to those questions. The Chair
reminds Members of the subcommittee that the committee's record
will remain open for 10 days. Without objection, the
subcommittee stands adjourned. Thank you so much.
[Whereupon, at 4:33 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Question From Honorable Jefferson Van Drew for Sonya T. Proctor
Question. I understand there are growing concerns that the TSA's
performance in pipeline security has been inadequate. Given the recent
attack on Colonial, I am inclined to share those concerns.
Although Congress gave the TSA authority over pipeline security in
2001, there have recently been efforts to transfer its authority to the
Department of Energy. Do you believe that the TSA should retain its
authority, and what assurance can you provide us that the TSA will
expand and improve on its Pipeline Security Guidelines?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question From Honorable Jefferson Van Drew for Eric Goldstein
Question. During last week's hearing, Colonial Pipeline CEO Joseph
Blount stated that he did not feel like including CISA at this state of
their response would add much value. Moreover, Colonial chose to hire
private firms to assist with their recovery efforts from the ransomware
attack last month instead of working with CISA.
Does Colonial's decision to hire private companies instead of
working with CISA concern you?
Do you feel that CISA maintains a competitive edge in the cyber
realm? What can CISA improve upon to incentivize organizations who are
victims of cyber attacks to collaborate with the agency?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.

[all]
