- SECURING DEMOCRACY: PROTECTING AGAINST THREATS TO ELECTION INFRASTRUCTURE AND VOTER CONFIDENCE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SECURING DEMOCRACY: PROTECTING AGAINST
THREATS TO ELECTION INFRASTRUCTURE AND
VOTER CONFIDENCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION, AND INNOVATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 20, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-41

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
47-316 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            John Katko, New York
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island      Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Clay Higgins, Louisiana
J. Luis Correa, California           Michael Guest, Mississippi
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri            Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Al Green, Texas                      Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Yvette D. Clarke, New York           Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
Eric Swalwell, California            Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Dina Titus, Nevada                   Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey    Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Val Butler Demings, Florida          Peter Meijer, Michigan
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California    Kat Cammack, Florida
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          August Pfluger, Texas
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey
Ritchie Torres, New York
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Daniel Kroese, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Clerk

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, AND
INNOVATION

Yvette D. Clarke, New York, Chairwoman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York,
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island          Ranking Member
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Ritchie Torres, New York             Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex  Jake LaTurner, Kansas
officio)                         John Katko, New York (ex officio)
Moira Bergin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Austin Agrella, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
Mariah Harding, Subcommittee Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Yvette D. Clarke, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York, and Chairwoman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Andrew R. Garbarino, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     6

Witnesses

Ms. Gowri Ramachandran, Senior Counsel, Brennan Center For
Justice:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
Mr. Alex Stamos, Director, Stanford Internet Observatory, and
Commissioner, Aspen Institute Commission on Information
Disorder.......................................................    24
Mr. Ezra D. Rosenberg, Co-Director, Voting Rights Project,
Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law:
Oral Statement.................................................    26
Prepared Statement.............................................    27
Mr. Matthew Masterson, Private Citizen, Former Senior
Cybersecurity Advisor, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    36
Prepared Statement.............................................    38

SECURING DEMOCRACY: PROTECTING AGAINST THREATS TO ELECTION
INFRASTRUCTURE AND VOTER CONFIDENCE

----------

Thursday, January 20, 2022

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Infrastructure Protection,
and Innovation,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:02 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. Yvette D. Clarke [Chairwoman of the subcommittee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Clarke, Jackson Lee, Langevin,
Slotkin, Garbarino, Harshbarger, Clyde, and LaTurner.
Chairwoman Clarke. The Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation will come to order.
The subcommittee is meeting today to receive testimony on
``Securing Democracy: Protecting Against Threats to Election
Infrastructure and Voter Confidence.'' Without objection, the
Chair is authorized to declare the committee in recess at any
point.
Good afternoon, everyone. I would like to thank our panel
of witnesses for participating in today's hearing on how we can
secure our democracy against threats to election systems, as
well as efforts to undermine voter confidence and faith in
democratic institutions.
So much has changed since this committee held its first
dedicated election security hearing in 2019, which was already
about 2 years too late. That is because in 2017, as the rest of
us were waking up to grave security threats posed to our
Nation's underfunded, outdated voting systems, Republicans
controlled the House. Despite multiple requests by the
committee Democrats to hold hearings on election security, the
Republican Chairman largely declined to do so, except for a
single hearing on threats to elections and other critical
infrastructure.
Still, Democrats got to work. The Democratic Task Force on
Election Security worked to find solutions and make investments
to help State and local officials upgrade and improve systems.
When Democrats regained control of the House in 2019, this work
did not cease, it accelerated.
We secured funding for election upgrades at the State level
and built up capacity at the Federal level, empowering CISA to
work with election officials, vendors, and other stakeholders
to harden voting systems around the country. At the end of the
day, we made enormous progress. Roughly 96 percent of voters
used voter-verifiable paper ballots and the results were
validated by legitimate, credible post-election audits in every
swing State.
Election security experts called the 2020 election the most
secure in American history in a year with historically high
turnout during a global pandemic. It is hard to square that
with what happened next. The out-going President ratcheted up
the disinformation campaign he had been carrying out in the
open for weeks. Rather than accept his loss gracefully, the
former President asked his loyalists to subscribe to baseless
claims of voter fraud at a scale never seen in history to
explain his defeat.
Despite the obvious absurdity and total lack of evidence,
former President Trump was somehow able to parlay this message
into a campaign so effective that he convinced 145 Republican
Members of this very chamber to vote against certification of
the election results. That same day, thousands of Trump
supporters mobbed the U.S. Capitol with nooses, bear spray, and
zip ties, inflicting serious or even fatal injuries on Capitol
Police officers sent here to protect and serve.
We as a Nation will be dealing with the fallout from the
2020 election for a long time to come. Today, election
denialists are running for office across the country and State
legislatures are pursuing fake, partisan audits and restrictive
voting laws that will do nothing more than create another
barrier for voters of color to cross to cast their vote. Recent
polls suggest that 1 in 3 voters question the legitimacy of the
2020 election and 1 in 3 election officials feels unsafe in
their job.
I began this statement by talking about the efforts of
Democrats to secure elections, not as a pat on the back or to
inflame partisan divisions, but rather because I believe we are
at an inflection point in our Nation's history where terms like
``election security'' and ``election integrity'' are being
weaponized in ways that I have never seen before.
As long as we are opening up the proper scope of those
terms, let me tell you how I define election security. No. 1,
making sure that every eligible voter who wants to cast a vote
is able to cast it; and, No. 2, making sure that vote is
counted as it was cast. Anything that undermines either of
these tenets, whether that is restrictive voting laws,
disinformation that threatens the health of our republic, or
outdated voting machines that can be exploited by hackers, is a
threat to election security. That is why this hearing will
cover the waterfront of issues that threaten secure elections
today, even those outside the realm of cybersecurity.
I am also profoundly concerned about the fractured state of
our information ecosystem and the ability for media consumers
to simply choose their own reality based on the Facebook groups
they join and the cable news outlets they choose to watch. This
is a major existential threat to our democracy, and I look
forward to hearing from this panel to see how we might start to
rebuild faith in democratic institutions.
Finally, I believe the Federal Government, and CISA in
particular, has a role to play in confronting the mis- and
disinformation narratives that jeopardize our faith in free and
fair elections and other issues that threaten our National
security, public health, and safety. That is why I am
introducing legislation to authorize CISA to identify, track,
and address mis- and disinformation through efforts like the
Rumor Control website.
The best way to attack a lie is with the truth. I hope my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle will join me in
supporting CISA's efforts to prebunk and debunk the kind of
disinformation that erodes our democracy.
I thank our panel of witnesses for participating today and
I look forward to a robust discussion.
[The statement of Chairwoman Clarke follows:]
Statement of Chairwoman Yvette D. Clarke
January 20, 2022
Good afternoon. I would like to thank the witnesses for
participating in today's hearing on how we can secure our democracy
against threats to election systems, as well as efforts to undermine
voter confidence and faith in democratic institutions.
So much has changed since this committee held its first, dedicated
election security hearing in 2019--which was already about 2 years too
late.
That's because in 2017--as the rest of us were waking up to grave
security threats posed to our Nation's under-funded, outdated voting
systems--Republicans controlled the House.
And, despite multiple requests by committee Democrats to hold
hearings on election security, the Republican Chairman largely declined
to do so--except for a single hearing on threats to elections and other
critical infrastructure.
Still, Democrats got to work. The Democratic Task Force on Election
Security worked to find solutions and make investments to help State
and local officials upgrade and improve systems.
And when Democrats regained control of the House in 2019, this work
did not cease--it accelerated.
We secured funding for election upgrades at the State level, and
built up capacity at the Federal level--empowering CISA to work with
election officials, vendors, and other stakeholders to harden voting
systems around the country.
At the end of the day, we made enormous progress.
Roughly 96 percent of voters used voter-verifiable paper ballots--
and the results were validated by legitimate, credible post-election
audits in every swing State.
Election security experts called the 2020 election the ``most
secure in American history''--in a year with historically high turnout,
during a global pandemic.
It's hard to square that with what happened next.
The out-going President ratcheted up the disinformation campaign
he'd been carrying out, in the open, for weeks.
Rather than accept his loss gracefully, the former President asked
his loyalists to subscribe to baseless claims of voter fraud, at a
scale never seen in history, to explain his defeat.
Despite the obvious absurdity and total lack of evidence--former
President Trump was somehow able to parlay this message into a campaign
so effective that he convinced 145 Republican Members of this very
Chamber to vote against certification of the election results.
That same day, thousands of Trump supporters mobbed the U.S.
Capitol with nooses, bear spray, and zip ties--inflicting serious or
even fatal injuries on Capitol Police officers sent here to protect and
serve.
We, as a Nation, will be dealing with the fallout from the 2020
election for a long time to come.
Today, ``election denialists'' are running for office across the
country, and State legislatures are pursuing fake, partisan audits and
restrictive voting laws that will do nothing more than create another
barrier for voters of color to cross to cast their vote.
Recent polls suggest that 1 in 3 voters question the legitimacy of
the 2020 election. And, 1 in 3 election officials feels unsafe in their
job.
I began this statement by talking about the efforts of Democrats to
secure elections--not as a pat on the back or to inflame partisan
divisions.
But rather, because I believe we are at an inflection point in our
Nation's history--where terms like ``election security'' and ``election
integrity'' are being weaponized in ways that I have never seen before.
As long as we're opening up the proper scope of those terms, let me
tell you how I define election security: (1) Making sure that every
eligible voter who wants to cast a vote is able to cast it, and (2)
making sure that vote is counted as it was cast.
Anything that undermines either of those tenets--whether that's
restrictive voting laws, disinformation that threatens the health of
our republic, or outdated voting machines that can be exploited by
hackers--is a threat to election security.
That is why this hearing will cover the waterfront of issues that
threaten secure elections today--even those outside the realm of
cybersecurity.
I am also profoundly concerned about the fractured state of our
information ecosystem--and the ability of media consumers to simply
choose their own reality based on the Facebook groups they join and the
cable news outlets they choose to watch.
This is a major, existential threat to our democracy--and I look
forward to hearing from this panel to see how we might start to rebuild
faith in democratic institutions.
Finally, I believe the Federal Government--and CISA in particular--
has a role to play in confronting the mis- and disinformation
narratives that jeopardize our faith in free and fair elections, and
other issues that threaten our National security, public health, and
safety.
That is why I am introducing legislation to authorize CISA to
identify, track, and address mis- and disinformation through efforts
like the Rumor Control website.
The best way to attack a lie is with the truth, and I hope my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle will join me in supporting CISA's
efforts to ``prebunk'' and debunk the kind of disinformation that
erodes our democracy.
I thank the witnesses for participating today, and look forward to
a robust discussion.

Chairwoman Clarke. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking
Member of the subcommittee, the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Garbarino, for an opening statement.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke. Thank you very
much for holding this hearing today. I appreciate our witnesses
being here to discuss how we can support our State and local
officials, secure election infrastructure from cyber threats,
and examine ways to improve the tools and services provided by
the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency.
In 2021, our Nation experienced an unprecedented number of
cyber attacks against our critical infrastructure. We began
2021 by analyzing the impacts of the SolarWinds cyber espionage
campaign and we ended the year by responding to Log4j, the most
pervasive vulnerability the cybersecurity community has ever
seen. This is not to mention the dozens of significant
ransomware attacks throughout the year.
On top of spikes in cyber crime, we are seeing a lack of
faith among voters in our election security. As we enter 2022,
we must keep a keen eye on the mid-term elections and ensure
that voters can be confident that their vote will count. Given
the volume and sophistication of cyber threats we face, we must
empower CISA with the tools and resources it needs to support
our State and local election officials so that they can carry
out their mission to administer free and fair elections.
CISA's election security mission has greatly evolved since
election infrastructure was designated as a subsector of our
Nation's critical infrastructure in 2017. CISA has gone to
great lengths to build trusted relations with the State and
local election officials across the country and is providing
free and voluntary cybersecurity services, tools, and other
guidance in all 50 States.
A key part of securing election infrastructure that is
owned and operated by State and locals is ensuring that CISA
has the ability to provide situational awareness about
vulnerabilities across digital footprints. Initiatives like
CISA's Crossfeed program are a commendable effort in this
respect. Crossfeed leverages the best available technology to
attribute public-facing assets to the organizations that own
them, and provides CISA the ability to quickly detect new
vulnerabilities. You can't secure what you can't see, and this
real-time common operating picture, as well as several other
CISA programs, continue to provide great value to State and
local officials across the country.
I am pleased that we are joined today by Matt Masterson,
who led CISA's election security work in the prior
administration and built the backbone of the trusted
relationships that CISA leverages today. Matt is experienced in
elections at every level, from administering them at the State
level in Ohio to serving as commissioner of the Election
Assistance Commission and as senior cybersecurity advisor for
elections at CISA. I look forward to hearing from Matt about
the practical, meaningful steps we can take to improve CISA's
ability to support our State and local officials. I am
determined to work with the State and local officials and other
stakeholders in New York's Second Congressional District and
across the country to improve their cybersecurity posture in
the wake of increasing threats.
This past August, I was pleased to host a roundtable
discussion in my district with local government, critical
infrastructure stakeholders, and CISA's Region 2 team where
CISA presented numerous tools and resources that they can
provide to bolster critical infrastructure security free of
charge. I am also proud to have been an original cosponsor of
the Chairwoman's State and Local Cybersecurity Improvement Act,
which was signed into law last year.
I hope we can all agree more resources for our State and
local governments are necessary. We must also ensure these
funds are spent responsibly and have a meaningful impact on
risk reduction. CISA plays a vital role. This important bill is
a tremendous step forward in our fight to enhancing election
infrastructure security at a local level.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about
how Congress can bolster CISA's role in election security and
how CISA can turn support--in turn support our State and local
election officials.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Garbarino follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Andrew Garbarino
Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke, for holding this hearing today. I
appreciate our witnesses being here to discuss how we can support our
State and local election officials, secure election infrastructure from
cyber threats, and examine ways to improve the tools and services
provided by the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
(CISA).
In 2021, our Nation experienced an unprecedented number of cyber
attacks against our critical infrastructure. We began 2021 by analyzing
the impacts of the SolarWinds cyber espionage campaign, and we ended
the year by responding to Log4j--the most pervasive vulnerability the
cybersecurity community has ever seen. This is not to mention the
dozens of significant ransomware attacks throughout the year.
On top of spikes in cyber crime, we are seeing a lack of faith
among voters in our election security. As we enter 2022, we must keep a
keen eye on the mid-term elections and ensure that voters can be
confident that their vote will count. Given the volume and
sophistication of the cyber threats we face, we must empower CISA with
the tools and resources it needs to support our State and local
election officials so that they can carry out their mission to
administer free and fair elections.
CISA's election security mission has greatly evolved since election
infrastructure was designated as a subsector of our Nation's critical
infrastructure in 2017. CISA has gone to great lengths to build trusted
relationships with State and local election officials across the
country, and has provided free and voluntary cybersecurity services,
tools, and other guidance in all 50 States.
A key part of securing election infrastructure that is owned and
operated by State and locals is ensuring that CISA has the ability to
provide situational awareness about vulnerabilities across digital
footprints. Initiatives like CISA's Crossfeed Program are a commendable
effort in this respect. Crossfeed leverages the best available
technology to attribute public-facing assets to the organizations that
own them, and provides CISA the ability to quickly detect new
vulnerabilities. You can't secure what you can't see, and this real-
time common operating picture, as well as several other CISA programs,
continue to provide great value to State and local officials across the
country.
I am pleased that we are joined today by Matt Masterson, who led
CISA's election security work in the prior administration and built the
backbone of the trusted relationships that CISA leverages today. Matt
has experience in elections at every level, from administering them at
a State level in Ohio, to serving as commissioner of the Elections
Assistance Commission, and as senior cybersecurity advisor for
elections at CISA. I look forward to hearing from Matt about the
practical, meaningful steps we can take to improve CISA's ability to
support our State and local officials.
I am determined to work with State and local officials, and other
stakeholders in New York's 2nd district and across the country to
improve their cybersecurity posture in the wake of increasing threats.
This past August, I was pleased to host a roundtable discussion in my
district with local government, critical infrastructure stakeholders,
and CISA's Region 2 team, where CISA presented numerous tools and
resources they can provide to bolster critical infrastructure security,
free of charge.
I am also proud to have been an original cosponsor of the
Chairwoman's State and Local Cybersecurity Improvement Act, which was
signed into law last year. While we can all agree more resources for
our State and local governments are necessary, we must also ensure
these funds are spent responsibly and have a meaningful impact on risk
reduction. CISA plays a vital role here. This important bill is a
tremendous step forward in our fight to enhance election infrastructure
security at the local level.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about how
Congress can bolster CISA's role in election security and how CISA can
in turn support our State and local election officials. Thank you,
Madam Chair.

Chairwoman Clarke. I thank our Ranking Member for his
opening statement. Just to remind Members that the subcommittee
will operate according to the guidelines laid out by the
Chairman and Ranking Member in their February 3 colloquy
regarding remote procedures. Member statements may be included
for the record.
[The statement of Chairman Thompson follows:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
January 20, 2022
Good afternoon. I want to thank Chairwoman Clarke and Ranking
Member Garbarino for holding this important hearing on election
security as we enter a mid-term election year.
Ensuring the security of our elections has been a priority for me,
particularly since 2016, where we witnessed unprecedented foreign
interference in our electoral process.
In the 115th Congress, then-House Administration Committee Ranking
Member Robert Brady and I formed the Congressional Task Force on
Election Security.
The Task Force produced a report with 10 recommendations for
enhancing our Nation's election security and led to the introduction of
the Election Security Act to implement these important proposals.
Unfortunately, while the House has passed these critical election
security provisions as part of broader election reform legislation,
unified Republican opposition has blocked passage in the Senate.
Although we have been unable to pass these critical provisions,
Democrats have been able to secure over $1 BILLION in support to the
States, including through the CARES Act, to enhance the security of
voting systems.
Combined with the work of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency and other Federal partners, we were able to have the
most secure election in American history in 2020, even amidst a global
pandemic.
That achievement speaks volumes about the hard work of election
officials throughout the country and the potential to protect our
elections when we collaborate to prioritize security.
We must build on this progress by investing additional resources in
election security, replacing paperless voting machines with paper
ballots, conducting evidence-based post-election audits, and ensuring
the highest security standards for voter registration databases,
electronic poll books, and other election technology.
Unfortunately, the aftermath of the 2020 election demonstrated that
even when an election is highly secure, misinformation can produce
devastating consequences for our democratic system of government.
If people are convinced that an election result is illegitimate--no
matter how baseless that claim may be--we have seen first-hand the
violence it can produce.
With social media enabling misinformation to spread at
unprecedented speeds, developing strategies to respond and contain such
falsehoods will require innovative solutions to address this very
complex problem.
I applaud Chairwoman Clarke for her efforts to authorize CISA's
disinformation efforts, particularly its Rumor Control website to
debunk misinformation promptly.
An essential aspect of addressing misinformation is to promote
accurate information from trusted sources, and I am confident that this
legislation can help achieve that goal.
I look forward to working with her to move this important bill
forward.
The past few years has been a troubling time for our democracy.
We have seen people spread lies about the integrity of our
elections and use them to justify new restrictive voter laws that do
nothing to enhance voter confidence.
Instead, they only make it harder for Americans, and particularly
people of color, to exercise their fundamental right to vote.
That only further erodes trust in our institutions and makes our
democracy more vulnerable.
Fortunately, there is another way, as reflected in the Freedom to
Vote: John R. Lewis Act that the House passed last week.
This approach ensures voting is accessible to all who are eligible
and invests in meaningful election security, helping to build
confidence in the integrity of our elections.
We have not been able to enact this important legislation, but we
will continue to fight, as the consequences of failure on this issue
are simply too high.
The panel of witnesses we have today are all individuals who have
been working tirelessly in recent years to address these challenges.
I look forward to hearing their ideas about how we can expand on
our successes so far, continue to strengthen the security of our
election infrastructure, and build back public confidence in our
democratic institutions.
I yield back.

Chairwoman Clarke. Right now I am going to move us to our
panel. When and if our Ranking Member or Chairman arrive, we
will hear from them.
I now welcome our panel of witnesses.
First, I would like to welcome Ms. Gowri Ramachandran,
excuse me. Ms. Ramachandran serves as senior counsel in the
Brennan Center's democracy program, where her work focuses on
election security, election administration, and combatting
election disinformation. Prior to her role at the Brennan
Center, Ms. Ramachandran, excuse me, was professor of law at
Southwestern Law School in Los Angeles, California.
Second, we will hear from Mr. Alex Stamos, the director of
the Stanford Internet Observatory. At Stanford he oversaw the
Election Integrity Partnership, a coalition of researchers,
civil society groups, and other stakeholders working to track
and respond to election disinformation in real time. Mr. Stamos
also serves as a commissioner on the Aspen Institute's
Commission on Information Disorder and is the former chief
security officer for Facebook.
Next we have Mr. Ezra Rosenberg, who has served as the
codirector of the Voting Rights Project at the Lawyers'
Committee for Civil Rights Under Law since July 2015. Mr.
Rosenberg joined the Lawyers' Committee in November 2014 as
special senior counsel in the Legal Mobilization Project,
continuing a 40-year career in the public and private sectors.
Finally, I would like to welcome Mr. Matt Masterson, who
serves as a nonresident policy fellow with the Stanford
Internet Observatory. Prior to his current role, Mr. Masterson
was a senior cybersecurity advisor at the Department of
Homeland Security, where he focused on election security
issues. He has also served as the commissioner at the Election
Assistance Commission and on the staff of the Ohio Secretary of
State's Office.
Without objection, the witnesses' full statements will be
inserted in the record. I now ask each witness to summarize his
or her statement for 5 minutes, beginning with Ms.
Ramachandran. Thank you for joining us.

STATEMENT OF GOWRI RAMACHANDRAN, SENIOR COUNSEL, BRENNAN CENTER
FOR JUSTICE

Ms. Ramachandran. Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member
Garbarino, and Members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss election security.
The November 2020 election is widely considered the most
secure in American history. But an anti-democracy movement,
fueled by the Big Lie, poses serious threats to elections.
Taking these threats seriously requires expanding upon recent
improvements to election security.
In my testimony I will cover 3 topics. First, I will
describe what went right in 2020. State and local election
security, CISA, the EAC, and voters themselves all played a
role with support from Congress helping to make it possible.
Second, I will describe the threats that the election
sabotage movement is posing to election infrastructure. Lies
about the 2020 election not only undermine voter confidence,
they also lead to tangible security risks to election systems
and increase the risk of insider attacks.
Third, I will address how election infrastructure can be
bolstered against this threat with financial resources and
incentivizing true election integrity measures, like risk-
limiting audits and rigorous election vendor security
standards.
In 2016, 1 in 5 voters cast their vote using a paperless
voting system. But in 2020, an estimated 96 percent of voters
used paper ballots. In fact, no swing State used paperless
voting machines and routine statutory tabulation audits were
performed in every swing State. None found discrepancies that
would have been sufficient to alter the outcome of the
Presidential election.
In addition to this crucial move away from paperless
systems, CISA expanded its collaboration with State and local
election officials. It provided vulnerability testing and
trainings, shared information, and emphasized public education.
For instance, in the fall of 2020, some Florida voters received
threatening emails in the guise of a domestic far-right group
that has promoted violence. The intelligence community detected
the true source of the attack, alerted election officials, and
held a joint press conference to let the public know the truth:
The emails were actually coming from malicious actors
associated with Iran.
Election officials adopted resiliency measures, such as
stocking emergency paper ballots in case of machine failure, to
ensure that voters could exercise their rights even when there
was sporadic polling place problems. In some States, the many
options for voting served as their own resiliency measure
against the pandemic. These options allowed voters to spread
themselves out among different voting methods and days. It also
meant that money from Congress was crucial.
After this success, what lies ahead? The continued lie that
the 2020 election was stolen is not only undermining the
public's confidence, but is also threatening election
infrastructure directly through sham partisan reviews and
insider threat risks.
Sham partisan reviews have provided unmonitored election
equipment access to biased, uncertified partisans. In fact,
decertification or decommission of equipment has been necessary
after multiple sham reviews across the country. Ballot security
breaches have also been damaging.
Anti-democratic forces are also undermining a once broadly-
shared commitment to competent and nonpartisan election
administration. Many election officials committed to fair
elections are resigning or being pushed out in the fact of
myriad attacks and pressures.
Moreover, given that almost one-third of Americans still
believe the Big Lie, it is unsurprising that some minority of
election officials, and likely even some employees and vendors
who support their work, themselves buy into election conspiracy
theories. Unprecedented amounts of money are being spent in
campaigns for election administration jobs with election
denialism, for and against, being treated as a key issue.
What happens if officials and election personnel fall
victim to these falsehoods? We are witnessing the first
glimpses now. In Colorado, a county clerk with connections to
election conspiracy theorists gave unauthorized access to the
county's voting systems. Photos of passwords for the voting
machine software ended up on-line.
These security risks are alarming, but they can be
mitigated. It should go without saying that all levels of law
enforcement should enforce existing laws against threats,
especially when election personnel are intimidated. Congress
can work to combat doxing and provide for physical security and
training. When it comes to insider threats, well-accepted best
practices already exist. They include restricting and logging
access to critical systems, monitoring through video
surveillance, background checks, and choosing vendors that also
employ good practices.
This all costs money and Congress should help. Routine
tabulation audits in which a sample of ballots are hand-counted
and compared to machine counts help to guard against a variety
of threats, including insider threats. Requiring risk-limiting
audits in Federal elections has received bipartisan support in
the past.
Our election infrastructure is strong, but it is facing a
growing anti-democracy threat from within. Congress can lead
the way on protecting democracy from that threat by investing
in true election integrity measures.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ramachandran follows:]
Prepared Statement of Gowri Ramachandran
January 20, 2022
Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and Members of the
committee: Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the security of our
Nation's election infrastructure. Despite a global pandemic, the
November 2020 election saw historic turnout and was widely considered
the most secure in American history.\1\ But an anti-democracy movement,
fueled by the Big Lie, poses serious threats to the security of
elections. Taking these threats seriously means building upon recent
improvements to election infrastructure security, such as the increased
use of auditable paper ballots and increased information sharing
between State and local election officials and the U.S. Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, ``Joint
Statement from Elections Infrastructure Government Coordinating Council
& the Election Infrastructure Sector Coordinating Executive
Committees,'' November 12, 2020, https://www.cisa.gov/news/2020/11/12/
joint-statement-elections-infrastructure-government-coordinating-
council-election.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Brennan Center for Justice--a nonpartisan law and policy
institute that focuses on democracy and justice--appreciates the
opportunity to report on the security of our election infrastructure,
threats to that infrastructure, and ways to secure against these
dangers. At the Brennan Center, I focus on election security, and I
frequently engage with State and local election officials to advocate
for and assist with the implementation of election security and
resiliency measures.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Reports that I have coauthored include Lawrence Norden, Gowri
Ramachandran, and Christopher Deluzio, A Framework for Election Vendor
Oversight, Brennan Center for Justice, November 12, 2019, https://
www.brennancenter.org/our-work/policy-solutions/framework-election-
vendor-oversight; Gowri Ramachandran and Tim Lau, ``How to Keep the
2020 Election Secure,'' Brennan Center for Justice, June 9, 2020,
https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/analysis-opinion/how-keep-2020-
election-secure; Edgardo Cortes et al., Preparing for Cyberattacks and
Technical Problems During the Pandemic: A Guide for Election Officials,
Brennan Center for Justice, June 5, 2020, https://
www.brennancenter.org/our-work/research-reports/preparing-cyber-
attacks-and-technical-problems-during-pandemic-guide; Jonathan Bydlak
et al., Partisan Election Review Efforts in Five States, Brennan Center
for Justice, July 8, 2021, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/
research-reports/partisan-election-review-efforts-five-states; and
Brennan Center for Justice and Bipartisan Policy Center, Election
Officials Under Attack, June 16, 2021, https://www.brennancenter.org/
our-work/policy-solutions/election-officials-under-attack.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In my testimony, I will cover 3 topics. First, I will describe what
went right in 2020. This included the wide-spread use of auditable
paper ballots, cooperation between State and local election officials
and CISA, resiliency measures and money from Congress to ensure voters
could exercise their rights safely in a pandemic, and the resiliency of
voters themselves, who made thoughtful plans to vote safely and
securely. This was all followed by routine, statutory tabulation audits
in every swing State, finding no discrepancies sufficient to change the
outcome of the Presidential election.
Second, I will describe the threats that the election sabotage
movement is posing to election infrastructure. These threats include
sham partisan reviews that undermine confidence and security,\3\
violent threats and intimidation of election officials and workers,\4\
and the potential infiltration of election offices, polling places, and
election vendors by anti-democratic forces.\5\ Of particular concern:
Candidates for election administration positions are raising
unprecedented sums as they campaign on election denial.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Gowri Ramachandran, ``A Year Later, Sham Election Review
Continue to Undermine Democracy,'' Brennan Center for Justice, January
7, 2022, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/analysis-opinion/year-
later-shamelection-reviews-continue-undermine-democracy.
\4\ Brennan Center for Justice and Bipartisan Policy Center,
Election Officials Under Attack; and Linda So and Jason Szep, ``Reuters
Unmasks Trump Supporters Who Terrified U.S. Election Officials,''
Reuters, November 9, 2021, https://www.reuters.com/investigates/
special-report/usa-election-threats/.
\5\ Lawrence Norden and Derek Tisler, ``Addressing Insider Threats
in Elections,'' Brennan Center for Justice, December 8, 2021, https://
www.brennancenter.org/our-work/analysis-opinion/addressing-insider-
threats-elections.
\6\ Ian Vandewalker and Lawrence Norden, ``Financing of Races for
Offices that Oversee Elections: January 2022,'' Brennan Center for
Justice, January 12, 2022, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/
research-reports/financing-races-offices-oversee-elections-january-
2022.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Third, I will address how election infrastructure can be bolstered
against this threat. On-line platforms and traditional media should
work with civil society to ensure they are promoting accurate election
information.\7\ Existing laws against intimidation, coercion, and
threats should be enforced,\8\ and States should, with support from
Congress, consistently adopt traditional guardrails against insider
threats. These include restricting and logging access to critical
systems, using transparent procedures such as nonpartisan and
bipartisan election observation, monitoring for inappropriate activity,
requiring vendors to follow cybersecurity, personnel, and supply chain
standards, and removing any officials or workers who actively undermine
election integrity.\9\ Congress should mandate and provide incentives
for true election integrity measures, such as risk-limiting audits,
rigorous election vendor standards, and independent security testing,
as the Freedom to Vote: John R. Lewis Act does.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Gowri Ramachandran, ``Twitter is a Cauldron of Misinformation
about the Arizona 2020 Vote Audit,'' Slate, May 14, 2021, https://
slate.com/technology/2021/05/maricopa-county-arizona-2020-vote-recount-
misinformation.html; and Brennan Center for Justice and Bipartisan
Policy Center, Election Officials Under Attack, 11.
\8\ Linda So and Jason Szep, ``Threats of Violence to U.S. Election
Officials Highlight Legal Gray Area,'' September 8, 2021, https://
www.reuters.com/legal/government/threats-violence-us-election-
officials-highlight-legal-gray-area-2021-09-08/.
\9\ Elections Project Staff, ``Election Observers are Official
Actors that Promote Legitimacy and Transparency. They are Typically
Appointed, Trained, and are Barred from Voter Intimidation by State and
Federal Laws,'' Bipartisan Policy Center, October 23, 2020, https://
bipartisanpolicy.org/blog/election-observers-are-generally-appointed-
and-are-held-to-strict-standards-of-behavior/.
\10\ Freedom to Vote: John R. Lewis Act, H.R. 5746 117th Cong. 
3908, 4001 (2021); Elizabeth Howard, Ronald L. Rivest, and Philip B.
Stark, A Review of Robust Post-Election Audits, Brennan Center for
Justice, November 7, 2019, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/
research-reports/review-robust-post-election-audits; Norden,
Ramachandran, and Deluzio, A Framework for Election Vendor Oversight;
and Cortes et al., Preparing for Cyberattacks and Technical Problems
During the Pandemic: A Guide for Election Officials, 6.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
i. what went right in 2020
The November 2020 election was the most secure election in American
history, with the highest turnout since 1900.\11\ This was accomplished
through the heroic efforts of State and local election officials, their
staff, and pollworkers, with support from CISA, the Election
Administration Commission (EAC), Congress, civil society, and voters
themselves.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Women, Asian Americans, and Native Americans were not able to
vote in 1900. U.S. Const. amend. XIX (ratified Aug. 18, 1920); Terry Ao
Minnis and Mee Moua, ``50 Years of the Voting Rights Act: An Asian
American Perspective,'' Asian Americans Advancing Justice, August 4,
2015, https://advancingjustice-aajc.org/report/50years-voting-rights-
act-asian-american-perspective, (``[U]ntil 1952, Federal policy barred
immigrants of Asian descent from becoming U.S. citizens and having
access to the vote,''); United States Library of Congress, ``Voting
Rights for Native Americans,'' accessed July 25, 2021, https://
www.loc.gov/classroom-materials/elections/right-to-vote/voting-rights-
for-native-americans/, (``The Snyder Act of 1924 admitted Native
Americans born in the U.S. to full U.S. citizenship. Though the
Fifteenth Amendment, passed in 1870, granted all U.S. citizens the
right to vote regardless of race, it wasn't until the Snyder Act that
Native Americans could enjoy the rights granted by this amendment,'');
Kevin Schaul, Kate Rabinowitz, and Ted Mellnik, ``2020 Turnout is the
Highest in Over a Century,'' Washington Post, last updated December 28,
2020, https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/2020/elections/voter-
turnout/; and U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency,
``Joint Statement from Elections Infrastructure Government Coordinating
Council & the Election Infrastructure Sector Coordinating Executive
Committees.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A. An Estimated 96 Percent of Voters Used Voter-Verifiable Paper
Ballots
In order to demonstrate the trustworthiness of elections, election
officials need auditable, voter-verifiable paper ballot systems.\12\
These allow for routine, statutory post-election tabulation audits, in
which a sample of paper ballots are compared to the machine-tabulated
results. These types of audits are designed to catch tabulation errors,
whether they might be the result of malicious activity or technical
errors. When these types of audits are routinely performed by competent
administrators in a transparent manner, they can and should boost
confidence in the accuracy of electoral outcomes. The Brennan Center
and others have long advocated for this type of audit.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ U.S. Election Assistance Commission, Voluntary Voter System
Guidelines 2.0, February 10, 2021, 184, 186, https://www.eac.gov/sites/
default/files/TestingCertification/Voluntary-
_Voting_System_Guidelines_Version_2_0.pdf; and Kate Polit, ``Former
CISA Head Krebs Counters GOP Claims, Reassures that 2020 Election was
Secure,'' MeriTalk, December 16, 2020, https://www.meritalk.com/
articles/former-cisa-head-krebs-counters-gop-claims-reassures-that-
2020-election-was-secure/.
\13\ Bydlak et al., Partisan Election Review Efforts in Five
States; U.S. Election Assistance Commission, Best Practice: Chain of
Custody, July 13, 2021, 15, https://www.eac.gov/sites/default/files/
bestpractices/Chain_of_Custody_Best_Practices.pdf; and Howard, Rivest,
and Stark, A Review of Robust Post-Election Audits.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2016, 1 in 5 voters cast their vote using a paperless voting
system that could not be subject to a tabulation audit.\14\ But thanks
to election officials across the country transitioning to more secure
systems that scan paper ballots, as well as the choice of more voters
to vote by mail during the pandemic, an estimated 96 percent of voters
used voter-verifiable paper ballots in the 2020 election. No swing
State used paperless voting machines.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Andrea Cordova McCadney, Elizabeth Howard, and Lawrence
Norden, ``Voting Machine Security: Where We Stand Six Months Before the
New Hampshire Primary,'' Brennan Center for Justice, August 13, 2019,
https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/analysis-opinion/voting-machine-
security-where-we-stand-six-months-new-hampshire-primary.
\15\ Lawrence Norden and Derek Tisler, ``Our System is Resilient--
but Still has Room for Improvement,'' Brennan Center for Justice,
September 22, 2020, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/research-
reports/our-election-system-resilient-still-has-room-improvement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. CISA and State and Local Election Officials Cooperated To Prevent,
Detect, and Recover from Cyber Attacks
CISA established a partnership with and supported State and local
election officials in the years and months leading up to the 2020
election by providing vulnerability testing,\16\ promoting best
practices for resiliency,\17\ and providing trainings, such as tabletop
exercises \18\ in which officials practiced responding to security
breaches.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, Guide
to Vulnerability Reporting for America's Election Administrators, last
accessed January 13, 2022, 2, https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/
publications/guide-vulnerability-reporting-americas-election-admins_-
508.pdf; and U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency,
``National Cybersecurity Assessments and Technical Services,'' last
accessed January 13, 2022, https://www.cisa.gov/uscert/resources/ncats.
\17\ U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency,
``Election Security--Physical Security of Voting Locations and Election
Facilities,'' last accessed January 13, 2022, https://www.cisa.gov/
sites/default/files/publications/physical-security-of-voting-location-
election-facilities_v2_508.pdf; and U.S. Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, ``We're in This Together. Mis-, Dis-,
and Malinformation Stops with You,'' last accessed January 13, 2022,
https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/publications/election-
disinformation-toolkit_508_0.- pdf.
\18\ U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency,
Elections Cyber Tabletop Exercise Package: Situation Manual, January
2020, https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/publications/Elections-
Cyber-Tabletop-Exercise-Package-20200128-508.pdf; and Benjamin Freed,
``Annual Election Security Tabletop Drill Put Officials through
`Armageddon-Like' Test,'' StateScoop, July 31, 2020, https://
Statescoop.com/dhs-election-tabletop-exercise-2020/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CISA also ramped up its information sharing with State and local
election officials, and the public, and this information sharing paid
off. For instance, in the fall of 2020, some Florida voters received
threatening and intimidating emails in the guise of a far-right group
that has promoted violence.\19\ The intelligence community detected the
true source of the attack, and CISA, the FBI, and the Office of the DNI
held a joint press conference to let the public know the truth: That
the emails were coming from malicious actors associated with Iran.\20\
By quickly informing the public, they were able to reduce any
intimidating effect. As Director Ratcliffe stated on October 21, 2020,
``These actions are desperate attempts by desperate adversaries . . .
We ask every American to do their part to defend against those who wish
us harm. The way you do that is quite simple: Do not allow these
efforts to have their intended effect. If you receive an intimidating
or manipulative email in your inbox, don't be alarmed, and don't spread
it.''\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Ellen Nakashima, Amy Gardner, Isaac Stanley-Becker, and Craig
Timberg, ``U.S. Government Concludes Iran was Behind Threatening Emails
Sent to Democrats,'' Washington Post, October 22, 2020, https://
www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/10/20/proud-boys-emails-
florida/.
\20\ Office of the Director of National Intelligence, ``DNI John
Ratcliffe's Remarks at Press Conference on Election Security,'' press
release, October 22, 2020, https://www.dni.gov/index.php/newsroom/
press-releases/item/2162-dnijohn-ratcliffe-s-remarks-at-press-
conference-on-election-security.
\21\ Office of the Director of National Intelligence, ``DNI John
Ratcliffe's Remarks at Press Conference on Election Security.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A few days later, CISA and the FBI issued a public alert, notifying
Americans that malicious actors, including some associated with the
Iranian government, were scanning multiple States' election webpages
for vulnerabilities, and that one State's voter registration data had
successfully been accessed.\22\ Shortly thereafter, Florida closed down
its State-wide page with a voter information look-up tool and informed
voter advocates who objected that the closure was due to a security
vulnerability. Advocates were able to secure modifications to the page
that did not re-open the security vulnerability, but ensured voters
with questions could still obtain the information they needed, such as
their polling place location.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, ``Alert
(AA20-304A): Iranian Advanced Persistent Threat Actor Identified
Obtaining Voter Registration Data,'' last updated November 3, 2020,
https://www.cisa.gov/uscert/ncas/alerts/aa20-304a.
\23\ Letter from the NAACP Legal Defense Fund et al. to Laurel Lee,
Florida Secretary of State, November 1, 2020, https://www.naacpldf.org/
wp-content/uploads/2020.11.01-Letter-re-Voter-Information-Lookup-
Tool.pdf; and NAACP Legal Defense Fund Thurgood Marshall Institute,
Democracy Defended, September 2, 2021, 74, https://www.naacpldf.org/wp-
content/uploads/LDF_2020_DemocracyDefended-1-3.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
C. Resiliency Measures and Money from Congress Helped Americans Vote
Safely Despite Pandemic
CISA, election security experts, and voting rights advocates all
encouraged the adoption of resiliency measures to help election
officials detect, prevent, and importantly, recover from an attack or
technical failure.\24\ Many election officials employed these measures,
including the maintenance of emergency paper ballots, to be used in
case ballot marking devices malfunctioned,\25\ as well as keeping paper
pollbook back-ups in polling places that use electronic pollbooks,\26\
in case of a malicious attack or malfunction of the electronic books.
Provisional ballots were also kept on hand in case an attack or
malfunction prevented pollworkers from confirming a voter's eligibility
to vote in real time.\27\ Each of these resiliency measures came in
handy in at least some locations, helping ensure that voting could
continue and voters did not need to be turned away, even when
occasional hiccups with equipment occurred.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency,
``#Protect2020,'' last accessed January 14, 2022, https://www.cisa.gov/
protect2020; Cortes et al., Preparing for Cyberattacks and Technical
Problems During the Pandemic: A Guide for Election Officials; and
Common Cause, ``Common Cause Georgia Urges Secretary Raffensperger to
Ensure Georgians Are Not Denied the Right to Vote on November 3,''
press release, October 1, 2020, https://www.commoncause.org/press-
release/common-cause-georgia-urges-secretary-raffensperger-to-ensure-
georgians-are-not-denied-the-right-to-vote-on-november-3/.
\25\ J.D. Capelouto and Ben Brasch, ``Voting Machines Finally
Working at Fulton Polling Place; Paper Ballots Used,'' Atlanta-Journal
Constitution, November 3, 2020, https://www.ajc.com/news/atlanta-news/
voting-machines-down-at-one-fulton-polling-place-paper-ballots-in-use/
OC3TGOUEGRDMVFPMZ6X7ONLMNA/; and Michaelle Bond, Julia Terruso, and
Justine McDaniel, ``Philly Polling Locations Got the Wrong Voting
Machines, Causing Confusion and Long Lines: `It was a Mess,' ''
Philadelphia Inquirer, June 2, 2020, https://www.inquirer.com/politics/
election/live/pa-2020-primary-election-philadelphia-live-updates-
results20200602.html.
\26\ Rick Rouan, ``Election Day: Some Voters See Delays at Polls as
Franklin County Switches to Paper Pollbooks,'' Columbus Dispatch,
November 3, 2020, https://www.dispatch.com/story/news/politics/
elections/2020/11/03/franklin-county-shifts-paper-pollbooks-after-data-
upload-problem/6135788002/; see also Michigan Election Security
Advisory Commission, Report and Recommendations, Michigan Secretary of
State, October 2020, 14, https://www.michigan.gov/documents/sos/
ESAC_Report_Recommendations_706522_7.pdf.
\27\ Ben Finley, Alan Suderman, and Denise LaVoie, ``Cut Cable
Shuts Down Virginia Voter Portal; Lawsuit Filed,'' Associated Press,
October 13, 2020, https://apnews.com/article/election-2020-us-news-ap-
top-news-media-socialmedia-f6525ef6254a940c91b98d2668c43892/.
\28\ Andrea Cordova McCadney, Derek Tisler, and Lawrence Norden,
``2020's Lessons for Election Security,'' December 16, 2020, https://
www.brennancenter.org/our-work/research-reports/2020's-lessons-
election-security.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to these resiliency measures against electronic
equipment failures, the provision by many States of multiple options
for voting--in-person Election Day, in-person early, and mail voting--
served as its own resiliency measure against the pandemic. These
options allowed voters to spread themselves out among different voting
methods and days, thereby reducing crowds at polling places for the
increased safety of all. They also allowed voters to, if faced with a
long line due to some technical issue during early voting, return on
another day when the problem had been ameliorated.\29\ They also meant
election officials needed resources--from personal protective equipment
for pollworkers and voters voting in person, to extra supplies given
uncertainty about which voting methods voters would use and larger
facilities for workers to socially distance in while processing and
tabulating mail ballots.\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Cordova, McCadney, Tisler, and Norden, ``2020's Lessons for
Election Security.''
\30\ Yelena Dzhanova, ``The New Challenge for State Election
Officials? How Much Hand Sanitizer is Enough,'' CNBC, August 10, 2020,
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/08/10/coronavirus-distributing-masks-and-
sanitizer-a-challenge-for-2020-election.html; Tim Harper, Rachel Orey,
and Collier Fernekes, Counting the Vote During the 2020 Election,
Bipartisan Policy Center, August 25, 2020, https://
bipartisanpolicy.org/report/counting-the-vote-during-the-2020-election/
; and Kendall Karson, `` `I Don't Think You Really Can' Make the
Election Safe: Wisconsin Gears Up for Next Primary Amid Coronavirus,''
ABC News, March 31, 2020, https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/make-
election-safe-wisconsin-gears-primary-amid-coronavirus/
story?id=69879453.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The resiliency measures that election officials employed and the
money that Congress provided to help pay for them was crucial in
running a safe and secure election.\31\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Cordova McCadney, Tisler, and Norden, ``2020's Lessons for
Election Security.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
D. Legitimate Post-Election Audits and Recounts Confirmed that Outcomes
Were Correct
Finally, after Election Day came and went, routine, statutory
tabulation audits were performed in every swing State, with additional
recounts in some. None found discrepancies that would have been
sufficient to alter the outcome of the Presidential election, thereby
providing added confidence in the integrity of the election.\32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ Bydlak et al., Partisan Election Review Efforts in Five
States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Of course, there is room for improvement. Ideally, all States would
conduct routine, statutory tabulation audits with the opportunity for
nonpartisan and bipartisan observation. In these audits, a sample of
ballots would be compared to machine counts, and ideally, they would
include risk-limiting audits. In a risk-limiting audit, the number of
ballots sampled varies based on how close the contest being audited is,
in order to provide a pre-determined statistical level of confidence
that any discrepancies were not sufficient to alter the outcome.\33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ Elizabeth Howard, Turquoise Baker, and Paul Rosenzweig, Risk-
Limiting Audits in Arizona, Brennan Center for Justice, February 1,
2021, 3-4, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/research-reports/
risk-limiting-audits-arizona.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Currently, most States have some kind of routine post-election
tabulation audit, and only a few States conduct risk-limiting
audits.\34\ Requiring risk-limiting audits is an example of the kind of
measure that could truly improve upon election integrity, as opposed to
sham partisan reviews,\35\ laws that make it easier for monitors to
interfere with and disturb election administration,\36\ or laws that
make it impossible for election officials to assist and educate voters
about their rights.\37\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ Derek Tisler, Elizabeth Howard, and Edgardo Cortes, ``The
Roadmap to the Official Count in an Unprecedented Election,'' Brennan
Center for Justice, October 26, 2020, https://www.brennancenter.org/
our-work/researchreports/roadmap-official-count-unprecedented-election;
National Conference of State Legislatures, ``Post-Election Audits,''
last updated October 25, 2019, https://www.ncsl.org/research/elections-
and-campaigns/post-election-audits635926066.- aspx#State%20reqs; and
National Conference of State Legislatures, ``Risk-Limiting Audits,''
last updated September 16, 2021, https://www.ncsl.org/research/
elections-and-campaigns/risk-limiting-audits.aspx.
\35\ Elizabeth Howard and Gowri Ramachandran, ``Partisan Arizona
Election `Audit' Was Flawed from the Start,'' Brennan Center for
Justice, September 27, 2021, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/
analysis-opinion/partisan-arizona-election-audit-was-flawed-start.
\36\ Eliza Sweren-Becker, ``Who Watches the Poll Watchers?,''
Brennan Center for Justice, April 29, 2021, https://
www.brennancenter.org/our-work/research-reports/who-watches-poll-
watchers.
\37\ Tyler Buchanan, ``Some Voter Education Programs May Be in
Jeopardy Due to New Ohio Law,'' Ohio Capital Journal, July 16, 2021,
https://ohiocapitaljournal.com/2021/07/16/some-voter-education-
programs-may-be-in-jeopardy-due-to-new-ohio-law/; and TX S.B. 1  4.02
(2021) (omnibus bill with several restrictive provisions).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ii. threat of election sabotage
It is imperative that all those who worked to secure our election
infrastructure against the threat of foreign interference and attacks
in 2020 continue those efforts. But the events of the past year have
shown that there is a fast-growing threat of election sabotage from an
anti-democratic movement within our own country, and that this threat
also deserves focus. In fact, the two threats could compound each
other, with home-grown election conspiracies making it easier for
foreign governments and their agents to accelerate destabilization
merely by seeding and amplifying doubts and confusion, rather than
investing in developing sophisticated cyber attacks.
The domestic anti-democracy movement also threatens election
infrastructure directly, through sham partisan reviews that undermine
not only confidence but security, and through a variety of threats to
the integrity of the people who make up our election infrastructure--
election officials, election workers, and election vendor personnel.
A. Sham Partisan Reviews Undermine Security
Loyalists of former president Donald Trump invaded the U.S. Capitol
1 year ago, carrying weapons, waving the Confederate flag, and
insisting that the 2020 election was fraudulent. There was no credible
support for the claims of ``Stop the Steal'' advocates. Nevertheless,
Pro-Trump politicians have spent the past year attempting to fabricate
that support. They have dented public confidence in the voting process
and made it harder for voters, in particular voters of color, to vote.
Less recognized, but no less damaging, is the way they have co-opted
and undermined a critical tool of our democracy: The post-election
audit.\38\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ Brennan Center for Justice, ``Post-Election Audits,'' last
accessed January 14, 2022, https://www.brennancenter.org/issues/defend-
our-elections/election-security/post-election-audits.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Many States have rigorous protocols for post-election audits,
including randomized selection of the electronic tallies to be checked
against paper records, a commitment to objectivity throughout the
process, and conducting the audit in full public view.\39\ When these
standards are upheld, post-election audits help check that the outcomes
of elections are accurate, and they maintain or restore public
confidence in our democracy. The sham reviews following the 2020
election are, essentially, the opposite of this. They were initiated
for partisan reasons, as part of an attempt to overturn the will of the
voters.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ National Conference of State Legislatures, ``Post-Election
Audits''; and Howard, Rivest, and Stark, A Review of Robust Post-
Election Audits.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
They can also undermine security by providing unmonitored access to
systems to biased partisans,\40\ leading to equipment no longer being
safe to deploy in future elections. Ballot security breaches are
another damaging effect, with inexperienced partisans permitting those
handling the ballots to use pens that could change the vote
records.\41\ They have also threatened potential voter intimidation
with plans for biased partisans to knock on voters' doors asking
questions.\42\ These security problems with partisan reviews are
exemplified in the movement's most prominent effort to date: The
partisan review \43\ of Maricopa County's 2020 election, conducted by
the contractor Cyber Ninjas. Cyber Ninjas finally issued a report in
September 2021, replacing the outright lies that have triggered
defamation lawsuits against other Big Lie proponents with copious and
misleading innuendo.\44\ The Maricopa County Recorder, Stephen Richer
(R), recently issued a lengthy point-by-point rebuttal, in which the
county identified 75 claims made by the audit team and debunked them
all. The county's analysis determined 38 were inaccurate, 25 were
misleading, and 11 were false.\45\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\40\ Katie Hobbs to Maricopa County Board of Supervisors, May 20,
2021, https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/20784519/hobbs-letter-to-
maricopa-supervisors-5-20-21.pdf; and Jeremy Duda, ``Wake Technology
Services Audited a Pennsylvania Election as part of the#StopTheSteal
Movement,'' Arizona Mirror, May 21, 2021, https://www.azmirror.com/
2021/05/21/wake-technology-services-audited-a-pennsylvania-election-as-
part-of-the-stop-the-steal-movement/.
\41\ Felicia Sonmez and Rosalind S. Helderman, ``Observers of
Arizona's GOP-Led Election Audit Document Security Breaches, Prohibited
Items on Counting floor,'' Washington Post, June 2, 2021, https://
www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-election-arizona-audit/2021/06/
02/56de9282-c3af-11eb-9a8df95d7724967c_story.html.
\42\ Pamela S. Karlan to Karen Fann, May 5, 2021, https://
www.justice.gov/crt/case-document/file/1424586/download; and Fredreka
Schouten, ``Trump Loyalists are Knocking on Voters' Doors in the Latest
Quest to Find Fraud in the 2020 Election,'' CNN, December 18, 2021,
https://www.cnn.com/2021/12/18/politics/trump-supporters-knock-on-
doors-in-search-for-2020-fraud/index.html.
\43\ Bydlak et al., Partisan Election Review Efforts in Five
States.
\44\ Howard and Ramachandran, ``Partisan Arizona Election `Audit'
Was Flawed from the Start.''
\45\ Jeremy Duda, ``Maricopa County Rebuts `Audit' Findings, GOP's
Bogus Election Claims,'' Arizona Mirror, January 5, 2022, https://
www.azmirror.com/2022/01/05/maricopa-county-rebuts-audit-findings-
bogus-election-claims.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The contractors' most attention-grabbing findings fit the pattern
\46\ that purveyors of voter fraud myths have long followed: Willful
ignorance \47\ of basic probability, common election laws, and routine
election administration procedures in order to raise baseless
suspicions about fellow voters \48\ and the dedicated public servants
\49\ who count their votes and certify the results. The report claims
it is suspicious that some voters share the same full name and birth
year--it isn't.\50\ It uses a commercial move tracking service to raise
suspicions about voters who, according to the commercial service, moved
before the election. But even leaving aside the accuracy of the
commercial service's data, temporary moves do not alter eligibility to
vote in Arizona.\51\ Unsurprisingly, the Cyber Ninjas audit was
promptly used in the continuing disinformation campaign against our
elections, with Trump citing its ``critical''--and false--``finding''
that 23,344 ballots were somehow impacted by the voters purportedly
moving.\52\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\46\ Brennan Center for Justice, Analysis of the September 15, 2005
Voter Fraud Report Submitted to the New Jersey Attorney General,
December 2005, 1, https://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/
analysis/Analysis%20of%20the%2091505%20Voter%20Fraud%20Report.pdf.
\47\ Gowri Ramachandran, ``The Arizona's Senate's Contractors Fail
to Understand Basic Probability and Voter Data,'' Brennan Center for
Justice, October 1, 2021, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/
analysis-opinion/arizona-senates-contractors-fail-understand-basic-
probability-and-voter.
\48\ Brennan Center for Justice to Cobb County Board of Elections
and Registration, December 18, 2020, https://www.brennancenter.org/
sites/default/files/202012/2020.12.18%20-
Brennan%20Center%20Letter%20to%20Cobb%20County%20Board%20of%20Elections.
pdf.
\49\ Reuters Staff, ``Fact Check: Massachusetts Election Officials
Have Not Destroyed Ballots or Committed Election Fraud,'' Reuters,
October 2, 2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/uk-factcheck-election-
ballot-massachuset/factcheck-massachusetts-election-officials-have-not-
destroyed-ballots-or-committed-election-fraud-idUSKBN26N2AF.
\50\ Ramachandran, ``The Arizona's Senate's Contractors Fail to
Understand Basic Probability and Voter Data.''
\51\ Howard and Ramachandran, ``Partisan Arizona Election `Audit'
Was Flawed from the Start.''
\52\ Daniel Funke, ``Fact Check: Arizona Audit Affirmed Biden's
Win, Didn't Prove Voter Fraud, Contrary to Trump Claim,'' USA Today,
September 28, 2021, https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/factcheck/2021/
09/28/fact-check-arizona-audit-affirms-biden-win-doesnt-prove-voter-
fraud/5846640001/; and Maricopa County (@MaricopaCounty), ``CLAIM:
23,344 mail-in ballots voted from a prior address. BOTTOM LINE: Cyber
Ninjas still don't understand this is legal under Federal election law.
To label it a ``critical'' concern is either intentionally misleading
or staggeringly ignorant. AZ senators should know this too,'' Twitter,
September 24, 2021, 2:32 p.m., https://twitter.com/maricopacounty/
status/1441470631787200514.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The push to conduct partisan reviews continues to spread.\53\ State
legislators in Pennsylvania have proposed conducting their own partisan
review that would use the Arizona Senate's actions as a model. Assembly
members in Wisconsin have launched a partisan effort there, targeting
\54\ officials in its largest cities: Milwaukee, Madison, Racine,
Kenosha, and Green Bay. Despite the dismissal of a lawsuit seeking to
gain access to ballots in Fulton County, GA, for a partisan review,\55\
gubernatorial candidate David Perdue has sued Fulton County officials
seeking a review.\56\ Now, even in States that President Trump won,
such as Texas, Florida, and Idaho, local party activists have demanded
these reviews over the objections of local election supervisors of both
major parties.\57\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\53\ Allan Smith, ``Not Just Arizona: Republicans Push More
Partisan Election `Audits,' '' NBC News, June 4, 2021, https://
www.nbcnews.com/politics/donald-trump/not-just-arizona-republicans-
push-more-partisan-election-auditsn1268644.
\54\ Christine Hatfield, ``Election Officials Across Wisconsin
Receive Subpoenas in GOP 2020 Election Probe,'' Wisconsin Public Radio,
October 1, 2021, https://www.wpr.org/election-officials-across-
wisconsin-receive-subpoenas-gop-2020-election-probe.
\55\ Nicholas Reimann, ``Georgia Judge Dismisses Lawsuit Seeking
Election Audit,'' Forbes, October 13, 2021, https://www.forbes.com/
sites/nicholasreimann/2021/10/13/georgia-judge-dismisses-lawsuit-
seeking-electionaudit/?sh=3e4f2df3107f.
\56\ Mark Niesse, ``Perdue Sues to Inspect Absentee Ballots From
2020 Georgia Election,'' Atlanta Journal-Constitution, December 10,
2021, https://www.ajc.com/politics/perdue-sues-to-inspect-absentee-
ballots-from-2020georgia-election/ERS26VWUQ5AZRAFRCLBPMFINUY/.
\57\ Alexa Ura and Allyson Waller, ``First Part of Texas' 2020
Election Audit Reveals Few Issues, Echoes Findings From Review
Processes Already in Place,'' Texas Tribune, December 31, 2021, https:/
/www.texastribune.org/2021/12/31/secretary-state-texas-election-audit/;
Mitch Perry, ``DeSantis Appointee Dismisses Election `Forensic Audit'
For Hillsborough, Orange, 3 Other Counties,'' Spectrum News: Bay News
9, July 28, 2021, https://www.baynews9.com/fl/tampa/news/2021/07/28/
there-will-be-no-audits-of-florida-s-election-says-sec-of-state?web=1-
&wdLOR=cAFEC4A74-114C-47B8-9D94-A1FC306B6BED; Idaho Secretary of State,
``Idaho Declares `Big Lie' Allegations `Without Merit,' Confirms Idaho
Election Integrity,'' October 6, 2021, https://sos.idaho.gov/2021/10/
06/idaho-declares-big-lie-allegations-without-merit-confirms-idaho-
election-integrity; and Lawrence Mower, `` `Tone Down the Rhetoric':
Florida Election Officials Tell Politicians to Chill Out,'' Tampa Bay
Times, October 21, 2021, https://www.tampabay.com/news/florida-
politics/2021/10/21/tone-down-the-rhetoric-florida-elections-officials-
tell-politicians-to-chill-out/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. Violent Threats and Intimidation, Along with Partisan Attacks, Are
Pushing Out Personnel Committed to Free and Fair Elections
The Brennan Center for Justice commissioned a national survey of
election officials this spring, which found that roughly 1 in 3
election officials feel unsafe because of their job, and approximately
1 in 6 listed threats to their lives as a job-related concern.\58\ This
is unacceptable in a functioning democracy. The people who risked their
lives during a pandemic to ensure that all eligible voters could vote,
that they could vote safely, and that their votes would be counted
accurately, cannot be subject to attacks and intimidation. Not only do
they deserve better, but our democracy cannot survive when dedicated,
honest people who provided the most secure election in American
history, with the highest turnout since 1900 are subjected to death
threats, simply for doing their jobs well.\59\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\58\ Thirty-two percent of election officials surveyed said that
they felt unsafe because of their job. Seventeen percent of local
election officials surveyed said that they had been threatened because
of their job. Benenson Strategy Group, ``The Brennan Center for
Justice: Local Election Officials Survey,'' April 7, 2021, https://
www.brennancenter.org/our-work/research-reports/local-election-
officials-survey.
\59\ Women, Asian Americans, and Native Americans were not able to
vote in 1900. U.S. Const. amend. XIX (ratified Aug. 18, 1920); Minnis
and Moua, ``50 Years of the Voting Rights Act: An Asian American
Perspective''; United States Library of Congress, ``Voting Rights for
Native Americans''; Schaul, Rabinowitz, and Mellnik, ``2020 Turnout is
the Highest in Over a Century''; and U.S. Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, ``Joint Statement from Elections
Infrastructure Government Coordinating Council & the Election
Infrastructure Sector Coordinating Executive Committees.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Department of Justice has created a task force to address the
situation, but the overall lack of accountability for these bad actors
continues to be dispiriting for the public servants who make our
democracy function,\60\ and the impetus to step down is strong.\61\ In
one recent example, despite having the support of at least one
Republican Board of Elections member, Jeannetta Watson, the first Black
elections director in Macon-Bibb County, Georgia, stepped down last
week.\62\ Board of Elections member Mike Kaplan said it was ``a sad day
for our country and especially Macon-Bibb,'' as he ``traced Watson's
troubles back to allegations of improper vote counting during the
Presidential election. Kaplan said workers were `followed home every
night' and under round-the-clock surveillance. `The stress and fear is
too much,' Kaplan said, adding that he believes Watson went through `a
very contentious election where she was in fear of her life.' ''\63\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\60\ So and Szep, ``Reuters Unmasks Trump Supporters Who Terrified
U.S. Election Officials''; and U.S. Department of Justice, ``Justice
Department Launches Task Force to Combat Threats Against Election
Workers,'' July 29, 2021, https://www.justice.gov/opa/blog/justice-
department-launches-task-force-combat-threats-against-election-workers-
0.
\61\ Tom Barton, ``Scott County Auditor Cites Lack of Supervisor
Support in Announcing Early Retirement,'' Quad-City Times, March 10,
2021, https://qctimes.com/news/local/scott-county-auditor-cites-lack-
of-supervisor-support-in-announcing-early-retirement/article_1d6e9afb-
9f10-5e97-9037-7cc4a42516e6.html; Andy Kroll, ``They Helped Save
Democracy--and Are Being Tormented for It,'' Rolling Stone, January 6,
2022, https://www.rollingstone.com/politics/politics-features/jan6-
election-workers-trump-biden-2020-democracy1279027/; John Myers,
``California's Elections Official Exodus,'' Los Angeles Times, April
12, 2021, https://www.latimes.com/politics/newsletter/2021-04-12/
california-elections-officials-exodus-essential-politics; Fredreka
Schouten and Kelly Mena, ``High-Profile Elections Officials Leave Posts
After a Tumultuous 2020,'' CNN, February 19, 2021, https://www.cnn.com/
2021/02/19/politics/election-officials-lose-and-leave-jobs/index.html;
Marie Albiges and Tom Lisi, ``Pa. Election Officials are Burnt Out and
Leaving Their Jobs After 2020 `Nightmare,' '' Spotlight PA, December
21, 2020, https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2020/12/pennsylvania-
election-2020-officials-retiring-nightmare/; and Michael Wines, ``After
a Nightmare Year, Election Officials Are Quitting,'' New York Times,
July 2, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/07/02/us/politics/2020-
election-voting-officials.html.
\62\ Liz Fabian, ``Macon-Bibb Elections Supervisor Resigns, Cites
Stress, Workload, New Election Laws,'' Georgia Public Broadcasting,
January 10, 2022, https://www.gpb.org/news/2022/01/10/macon-bibb-
elections-supervisor-resigns-cites-stress-workload-new-election-laws.
\63\ Fabian, ``Macon-Bibb Elections Supervisor Resigns, Cites
Stress, Workload, New Election Laws.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As one might expect, partisan attacks compound the many other
pressures that election officials committed to nonpartisan election
administration face, and many are being pushed out or resigning in the
face of this pressure.\64\ Others are being stripped of their powers by
partisan actors, in retaliation for certifying election results, or
simply for being the face of nonpartisan election administration.\65\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\64\ Wines, ``After a Nightmare Year, Election Officials Are
Quitting.''
\65\ Michael Wines, ``In Arizona, GOP Lawmakers Strip Power from a
Democrat,'' New York Times, June 25, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/
2021/06/25/us/Arizona-Republicans-voting.html; Jeremy Schwartz, ``Trump
Won the County in a Landslide. His Supporters Still Hounded the
Elections Administrator Until She Resigned,'' ProPublica, October 12,
2021, https://www.propublica.org/article/trump-won-the-county-in-a-
landslide-his-supporters-still-hounded-the-elections-administrator-
until-she-resigned; Laurel White, `` `Partisan Politics at Its Worst':
Wisconsin Elections Head Meagan Wolfe Refuses to Step Down,'' Wisconsin
Public Radio, November 1, 2021, https://www.wpr.org/partisan-politics-
its-worst-wisconsin-elections-head-meagan-wolfe-refuses-step-down; and
Stephen Fowler, ``State Election Board Meets for First Time Since
Raffensperger Stripped as Chair,'' Georgia Public Radio, April 29,
2021, https://www.gpb.org/news/2021/04/29/state-election-board-meets-
for-first-time-raffensperger-stripped-chair.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These attacks on election officials are a threat to the security of
our election infrastructure, as officials who are committed to
conducting free elections and respecting the will of the voters are
themselves a crucial element of that infrastructure.
C. Elections Personnel Who Buy Into Conspiracies May Pose an Insider
Threat
Unfortunately, almost one-third of Americans still believe the
false narrative that the 2020 election was stolen, ``a number that has
not budged across five polls in which Monmouth [University Polling
Institute] asked this question during the past year.''\66\ Given this
fact, we shouldn't be shocked that among the more than 8,000 local
election officials \67\--and tens of thousands of additional public and
private-sector employees that support their work--there are some who
will also buy into these conspiracy theories. In fact, there has been
an active effort to recruit and convince \68\ election officials to
facilitate these conspiracy theories and push the goals of election
deniers. There is reason to worry these efforts could gain traction and
followers in the election official community, posing yet another threat
to the integrity of the human component of our election infrastructure.
Those who work for election vendors may also be at risk.\69\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\66\ Monmouth University Polling Institute, ``Doubt in American
System Increases,'' November 15, 2021, https://www.monmouth.edu/
polling-institute/reports/monmouthpoll_us_111521/; and Chris Cillizza,
``1 in 3 Americans Believe the `Big Lie,' '' CNN, June 21, 2021,
https://www.cnn.com/2021/06/21/politics/biden-voter-fraud-big-lie-
monmouth-poll/index.html.
\67\ Paul Gronke, et al., ``Amplifying the Perspectives of
Officials at the Front Lines of Elections,'' Democracy Fund, April 19,
2021, https://democracyfund.org/idea/amplifying-the-perspectives-of-
officials-at-the-front-lines-of-elections/.
\68\ Amy Gardner, Emma Brown, and Devlin Barrett, ``Attempted
Breach of Ohio County Election Network Draws FBI and State Scrutiny,''
Washington Post, November 19, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/
politics/attempted-breach-ohio-election/2021/11/19/12417a4c-488c-11ec-
b8d9232f4afe4d9b_story.html.
\69\ Norden, Ramachandran, and Deluzio, A Framework for Election
Vendor Oversight.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Officials who have promoted election denialism may be especially
susceptible to entreaties that they give unauthorized access. We are
witnessing the first glimpses now. In Colorado, a county clerk with
connections to election conspiracy theorists gave unauthorized access
to the county's Dominion voting systems--a vendor targeted by many
proponents of the Big Lie.\70\ This access allowed the unauthorized
person to take photos of passwords for the voting machine software,
which then ended up on-line. The secretary of state decertified the
county's voting equipment and ordered the county to replace the
machines before the next election.\71\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\70\ Bente Birkeland, ``After Data is Posted on Conspiracy Site,
Colorado County's Voting Machines are Banned,'' National Public Radio,
August 12, 2021, https://www.npr.org/2021/08/12/1027225157/after-data-
is-posted-on-conspiracy-website-colo-countys-voting-machines-are-bann;
Elise Viebeck, ``Trump Campaign Debunked Dominion Conspiracy Theories,
Internal Memo Shows, Days Before Backers Kept Spreading Them,''
Washington Post, September 22, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/
politics/2021/09/22/trump-dominion-giuliani-powell-memo/.
\71\ Justin Wingerter, ``Mesa County Must Replace Election
Equipment Due to Security Breach, Secretary of State Says,'' Denver
Post, August 21, 2021, https://www.denverpost.com/2021/08/12/election-
security-colorado-mesa-county-jena-griswold/; and Faith Miller, ``Mesa
County Commissioners Vote to Replace Dominion Voting Equipment,''
Colorado Newsline, August 24, 2021, https://coloradonewsline.com/
briefs/mesa-county-commissioners-vote-to-replace-dominion-voting-
equipment/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Michigan, a town clerk who shared election conspiracies on
social media and who took office in 2021 refused to allow a vendor to
perform routine maintenance on a voting machine because the clerk
falsely believed the maintenance would erase old data that could prove
the machines were rigged.\72\ When a central component of that machine
went missing, the State police opened a criminal investigation into the
clerk to locate the since-found equipment and determine whether the
equipment had been tampered with.\73\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\72\ Jonathan Oosting, ``Clerk Decries `Tyranny' After Michigan
Strips Her of Running Election,'' Bridge Michigan, October 27, 2021,
https://www.bridgemi.com/michigan-government/clerk-decries-tyranny-
after-michigan-strips-her-running-election; Jonathan Oosting, ``Voting
Machine Missing after Michigan Clerk Stripped of Election Power,''
Bridge Michigan, October 28, 2021, https://www.bridgemi.com/michigan-
government/voting-machine-missing-after-michigan-clerk-stripped-
election-power; and Secretary of State Jocelyn Benson to Adams Township
Clerk Stephanie Scott, October 25, 2021, https://
content.govdelivery.com/attachments/MISOS/2021/10/25/file_attachments/
1976229/Letters%20to%20Adams%20Township%20Clerk.pdf.
\73\ Oosting, ``Voting Machine Missing After Michigan Clerk
Stripped of Election Power''; and John Tunison, ``Missing Hillsdale
County Voting Equipment Found, State Checking Whether Tampering
Occurred,'' Michigan Live, October 29, 2021, https://www.mlive.com/
news/ann-arbor/2021/10/missing-hillsdale-county-voting-equipment-found-
state-checking-whether-tampering-occurred.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Ohio, an individual inside a county commissioner's office
connected a private laptop to the county network in an attempted breach
that State officials believe a government employee may have
facilitated.\74\ While the connection did not allow access to voting
systems, and no sensitive data appears to have been obtained, network
traffic captured by the laptop was nonetheless shared at a conference
hosted by election conspiracist Mike Lindell--the same conference where
information from the Colorado breach was released. Officials in both
counties had previously discussed baseless claims about the 2020
election with associates of Lindell.\75\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\74\ Lauren Aratani, ``FBI Investigates Attempted Breach of Local
Election Network in Ohio,'' Guardian, November 20, 2021, https://
www.theguardian.com/us-news/2021/nov/20/fbi-investigates-attempted-
breach-local-election-network-ohio; and Gardner, Brown, and Barrett,
``Attempted Breach of Ohio County Election Network Draws FBI and State
Scrutiny.''
\75\ Gardner, Brown, and Barrett, ``Attempted Breach of Ohio County
Election Network Draws FBI and State Scrutiny.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
D. Candidates Are Running for Election Administration Positions with
Big Lie Messaging
The magnitude of the insider threat that anti-democracy forces
could pose is clarified by examining races for Governor, secretary of
state, and local election administrator positions. There are thousands
of local election jurisdictions in the United States, and in the vast
majority of them, an elected individual is in charge.\76\ In past
years, the question of who ran and certified our elections has
traditionally been of little interest to most. But now, there is an
alarming trend of candidates running on (and against) ``election
denialism.''\77\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\76\ Gronke, et al., ``Amplifying the Perspectives of Officials at
the Front Lines of Elections''; and David C. Kimball and Martha Kropf,
``The Street-Level Bureaucrats of Elections: Selection Methods for
Local Election Officials,'' Review of Policy Research 23 (2006): 1257-
1268, https://editions.lib.umn.edu/wpcontent/uploads/sites/3/2016/02/
Kimball.Kropf_.Street.Level_.Bu- reaucrats.of_.Elections.pdf.
\77\ Vandewalker and Norden, ``Financing of Races for Offices that
Oversee Elections: January 2022.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A preliminary Brennan Center analysis of campaign finance
disclosures and messaging by candidates in swing States has found that
much of the political discussion this year, 2022, is shaping up to be
about 2020 and 2024: Specifically, the Big Lie that the election was
``stolen'' from former President Trump in 2020, and that if he runs
again and loses in 2024, those election results should be overturned.
So far, across 3 States with data available, fundraising in
secretary of state races is 2\1/2\ times higher than it was by the same
point in either of the last two election cycles. And campaigns are
making election denial--and opposition to it--a key campaign issue in
all 6 of the battleground States with elections for secretary of state
in 2022--Arizona,\78\ Georgia,\79\ Michigan,\80\ Minnesota,\81\
Nevada,\82\ and Wisconsin.\83\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\78\ Mary Jo Pitzl, ``Mark Finchem, Election Conspiracy Promoter,
Gets Trump's Endorsement for Secretary of State,'' Arizona Republic,
September 13, 2021, https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/politics/
elections/2021/09/13/trump-endorses-mark-finchem-arizona-secretary-
state-election/8322839002/.
\79\ Jeremy Herb and Fredreka Schouten, `` `We Won': Trump and His
Allies Barrel Ahead with Election Lies Despite Arizona Review
Confirming His Loss,'' CNN, September 27, 2021, https://www.cnn.com/
2021/09/27/politics/arizona-trump-election-lies/index.html.
\80\ Jeremy Herb and Sara Murra, ``Trump-Backed Michigan Secretary
of State Candidate Spread False Election Claims and January 6
Conspiracy Theories,'' CNN, November 16, 2021, https://www.cnn.com/
2021/11/16/politics/kristina-karamo-michigan-secretary-of-state-
candidate/index.html.
\81\ Miles Parks, ``Here's Where Election-Denying Candidates are
Running to Control Voting,'' National Public Radio, January 4, 2022,
https://www.npr.org/2022/01/04/1069232219/heres-where-election-deniers-
and-doubters-are-running-to-control-voting.
\82\ Tim Reid, Nathan Layne, and Jason Lange, ``Special Report:
Backers of Trump's False Fraud Claims Seek to Control Next Elections,''
Reuters, September 22, 2021, https://www.reuters.com/world/us/backers-
trumps-false-fraud-claims-seek-control-next-us-elections-2021-09-22/.
\83\ Vandewalker and Norden, ``Financing of Races for Offices that
Oversee Elections: January 2022.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the contest for Georgia secretary of state, 4 candidates have
each raised more than the 2018 winner had at this point, and the
candidate raising the most money has refused to acknowledge that Joe
Biden won the 2020 election. The Georgia election also features an
early indication that these contests are being nationalized. The
portion of funding in the race from out-of-state donors so far, 22
percent, is a marked increase over 2018, when it was 13 percent, and
more than 4 times the amount from 2014, which was only 5 percent.\84\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\84\ Vandewalker and Norden, ``Financing of Races for Offices that
Oversee Elections: January 2022.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Michigan, the incumbent has raised $1.2 million--6 times what
the last incumbent had raised at this point in 2014. This candidate is
running against election denialism, against an opponent who has said
voting machines in the State could have flipped 200,000 votes to Joe
Biden.\85\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\85\ Vandewalker and Norden, ``Financing of Races for Offices that
Oversee Elections: January 2022.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regardless of who enjoys a fundraising advantage in any particular
State, voters are likely to be exposed to unprecedented amounts of
political spending on the issue of election denialism, with it no
longer being taken as a given that elections will be administered in a
nonpartisan manner, regardless of the identity of the administrator.
iii. what can be done
Lawmakers should support the excellent work that CISA, the EAC, and
State and local election officials have done to further election
integrity. But they should also act now to further mitigate these
growing security risks posed by domestic anti-democracy forces. There
are a variety of broadly-accepted methods for mitigating insider
threats, which State and local jurisdictions should adopt, and on which
Congress can lead by providing the needed financial support. Congress
can also provide support for the physical safety and security of
elections personnel and elections offices, as well as for risk-limiting
audits--a true election integrity measure. Others can do their part as
well: On-line media platforms and traditional media can work with civil
society to ensure they are promoting the most accurate information, and
law enforcement at all levels of government can take threats against
election administration seriously, enforcing the laws that exist to
deter these crimes.
A. Congress Should Provide Support for Mitigating Insider Threats,
Including Against Vendors
Insider threat risks have been a central focus of security efforts
in other sectors, and best practices, such as those from the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, exist to prevent and
respond to this activity.\86\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\86\ U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency,
``Insider Threat Mitigation,'' last updated January 6, 2022, https://
www.cisa.gov/insider-threat-mitigation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Among other things that can be done to both secure election systems
from insider threats and build public confidence that those systems can
be trusted, States and counties should take the following actions, and
Congress should provide resources to support these mandates, many of
which require financial resources to implement consistently.
1. Restrict access to election systems.
Election officials should ensure that an individual only have
access to critical systems--both physical and digital--if access is
necessary for that individual to perform their official
responsibilities, and only to the extent that those responsibilities
require it (this is known as the ``principle of least privilege''\87\).
In addition, election officials should require all individuals that
access critical systems to first complete a background check. A recent
regulation in Colorado,\88\ for example, restricts voting system access
to individuals who have passed a background check and are employees of
the county clerk, voting system provider, or secretary of state's
office.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\87\ Center for Internet Security, ``Election Security Spotlight--
Principle of Least Privilege,'' last accessed January 13, 2022, https:/
/www.cisecurity.org/spotlight/ei-isac-cybersecurity-spotlight-
principle-of-least-privilege/.
\88\ Office of the Colorado Secretary of State, ``Notice of
Temporary Adoption,'' June 17, 2021, https://www.sos.state.co.us/pubs/
rule_making/files/2021/20210617ElectionsNoticeTemp- Adoption.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Where possible, official procedures should require two people and/
or bipartisan teams to be present when accessing election systems,
ballots, and election records. Election staff should also be on-site
with private vendors at all times.\89\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\89\ Norden and Tisler, ``Addressing Insider Threats in
Elections.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Establish transparent procedures and monitor for
inappropriate activity.
Transparency protocols helped officials in Colorado identify the
source of leaked voting system information.\90\ A State investigation
found that the county clerk gave an unauthorized person a key card, and
this card was logged when the individual entered the election facility.
The clerk had also blatantly flouted another transparency measure by
turning off video surveillance of the voting machines before the
breach. But if the information obtained from the breach had not been
discussed so publicly, it's possible the State would have missed this
activity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\90\ Emma Brown, ``An Elections Supervisor Embraced Conspiracy
Theories. Officials Say She Has Become an Insider Threat,'' September
26, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/investigations/an-elections-
supervisor-embraced-conspiracy-theories-officials-say-she-has-become-
an-insider-threat/2021/09/26/ee60812e-1a17-11eca99a-
5fea2b2da34b_story.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Election officials must adopt and actively review transparency
protocols to ensure that every person who accesses election systems is
authorized to do so. Funding should be provided for election officials
to install key card access to facilities that hold voting systems, so
that a log of every entry can be created. All election offices should
be equipped with and require 24-hour surveillance of voting systems and
ballots, that can be reviewed and compared with access logs in the
event of unauthorized activity. Where possible, that footage should be
stored for at least 2 years. Both the access logs and surveillance data
should be made available to the State, and State officials should
ensure that local offices have sufficient procedures in place to detect
unauthorized access.
3. Remove and prosecute officials and workers who actively
undermine election integrity.
When officials do discover wrongdoing, these individuals must be
held accountable. States have different processes for removing election
officials. In some cases, the entity that appointed an election
official may simply fire that individual. In others, State officials
may hold power to remove election administrators or strip them of
election responsibilities.\91\ Officials may also seek permission from
courts to do so.\92\ State and local officials, as well as their
attorneys, should be familiar with the removal options available and be
prepared to take the steps necessary to protect our election
infrastructure from insider threats.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\91\ Oosting, ``Clerk Decries `Tyranny' After Michigan Strips Her
of Running Election.''
\92\ Colorado Secretary of State, ``Mesa County Court Judge Rules
in Favor of Removing Peters as Designated Election Official,'' press
release, October 13, 2021, https://www.sos.state.co.us/pubs/newsRoom/
pressReleases/2021/PR20211013Mesa.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Where appropriate, law enforcement officials should also pursue
prosecution against election workers who tamper with or allow
unauthorized access to voting systems and election materials. State
laws may require updating to address this conduct.
4. Increase resiliency against insider threats to vendors.
Private vendors are involved at every stage of an election, from
registering voters to counting ballots to reporting results. States can
act now to establish standards on cybersecurity, personnel security,
and supply chain integrity for their election vendors.\93\ Congress
should, as the Freedom to Vote: John R. Lewis Act does, directly
incentivize vendors to adopt these standards by limiting expenditures
of Federal funds to those vendors that conform to best practices, which
can be promulgated by CISA.\94\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\93\ Norden, Ramachandran, and Deluzio, A Framework for Election
Vendor Oversight.
\94\ Freedom to Vote: John R. Lewis Act  3908.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
5. Build in contractual safeguards.
Local election offices can also build in safeguards through
contracts when purchasing equipment and services.\95\ As a rule,
vendors should be held to the same or higher level of standards for
access and transparency as county or State employees. This can include
background checks and the requirement to always have a State or county
employee present when vendors access critical systems. This can also
mean restricting or eliminating remote access by vendors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\95\ Christopher Deluzio, ``A Procurement Guide for Better Election
Cybersecurity,'' Brennan Center for Justice, March 22, 2019, https://
www.brennancenter.org/our-work/policy-solutions/procurement-guide-
better-election-cybersecurity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Some of these solutions require statutory or regulatory changes at
the State level, but Congress can take a leading role in providing
additional resources for election offices that implementing these
changes will necessitate. Congress can also lead on building resiliency
of election vendors, at a minimum by limiting the expenditure of
Federal funds to those vendors that agree to comply with best practices
in security, including resiliency to insider attacks.
B. Congress Should Provide Support for the Security of Election
Officials and Workers
Congress should provide resources to States, via the Election
Assistance Commission, that can be used for safety training, including
prevention and de-escalation training for election workers. Funds could
also be provided for education and training for officials on how to
protect one's personal information, as well as for States to expand
their address protection services to cover election officials and
workers. The Freedom To Vote: John R. Lewis Act additionally makes it a
crime to reveal the personally identifying information of election
officials and pollworkers with the intent to threaten or intimidate
them.\96\ Resources could also be used to improve the physical security
of election offices.\97\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\96\ Freedom to Vote: John R. Lewis Act  3102.
\97\ Brennan Center for Justice and Bipartisan Policy Center,
Election Officials Under Attack, 4, 6.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
C. Online Platforms and Traditional Media Should Work with Civil
Society
The Brennan Center, along with many others, encourages social media
and other on-line speech platforms, along with traditional media, to
amplify and promote trusted, accurate information about elections.\98\
Typically, election officials are and will be trustworthy sources of
information about elections. But given the threats to the integrity of
election officials posed by candidates who actively promote election
disinformation, on-line platforms and traditional media must prepare
for the possibility of a high-level election official promoting
disinformation. Nonpartisan and bipartisan civil society groups can
serve as an additional trusted resource, to help social and traditional
media be sure they are promoting the most accurate information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\98\ Brennan Center for Justice and Bipartisan Policy Center,
Election Officials Under Attack, 10-15.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
D. Existing Laws Should Be Enforced
The Department of Justice, and local and State law enforcement and
prosecutors, should enforce existing laws against intimidation,
coercion, and threats. There must be consequences for attempting to
interfere with free and fair elections. The Department of Justice has
launched a task force to combat threats against election workers.\99\
State and local prosecutors should take these threats seriously as
well.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\99\ U.S. Department of Justice, ``Justice Department Launches Task
Force to Combat Threats Against Election Workers.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For a recent example of law enforcement bringing charges against
someone making threats against an election official, in Genesee County,
MI, the chair of the County GOP has recently pled guilty to harassing
the Houghton County clerk during her bid for re-election. The clerk
initially reported that he called her at 1 a.m., threatening to kill
her dogs. The call was traced, a warrant was obtained for his phone
records, and eventually he was charged and sentenced to a year of
probation, 240 hours of community service, and a $650 fine.\100\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\100\ Stephen Borowy, James Felton, and Gray News Staff, ``Michigan
School Board Member Sentenced to Probation for `Malicious' Phone
Call,'' WWNY/WNYF, https://www.wwnytv.com/2022/01/12/michigan-school-
board-member-sentenced-probation-malicious-phone-call/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For an example of charges against someone threatening others over
their defense of the integrity of the 2020 election, a man in
California was recently sentenced to 3 years in prison after sending
threatening messages to approximately 50 victims, ``targeting those
individuals because of their statements expressing that then-President
Trump had lost the 2020 Presidential election.''\101\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\101\ U.S. Department of Justice, ``California Man Sentenced To 3
Years In Prison For Making Threats Against Political Officials And
Journalists Relating To The Outcome Of The 2020 Presidential
Election,'' press release, December 20, 2021, https://www.justice.gov/
usao-sdny/pr/california-man-sentenced-3-years-prison-making-threats-
against-political-officials-and.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
E. Congress Should Promote Legitimate, Risk-Limiting Audits
Another important security measure that guards against a variety of
threats, including insider threats, is routine, statutory tabulation
audits that include the opportunity for nonpartisan and bipartisan
observation. Such audits can provide added confidence that a cyber
attack, insider manipulation, or innocent programming error did not
corrupt ballot scanners in such a way that the outcome of an election
was altered. In particular, risk-limiting audits can provide a
consistently high level of statistical confidence in the machine-
tabulated outcome of an election contest.
Although at least 24 States as of 2020 had laws requiring routine
post-election tabulation audits, only a few States conduct risk-
limiting audits.\102\ Congress should require--and provide funding
for--risk-limiting audits of Federal elections.\103\ This would be a
positive improvement in election integrity, and it has received
bipartisan support in the past.\104\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\102\ Cordova, McCadney, Howard, and Norden, ``Voting Machine
Security: Where We Stand Six Months Before the New Hampshire Primary'';
and National Conference of State Legislatures, ``Risk-Limiting
Audits.''
\103\ Freedom to Vote: John R. Lewis Act,  4001.104 SAFE Act, H.R.
2722,  121-123, 116th Cong. (2019); and Clerk of the U.S. House of
Representatives, ``Roll Call 428/Bill Number H.R. 2722,'' June 27,
2019, https://clerk.house.gov/Votes/2019428.
\104\ SAFE Act, H.R. 2722,  121-123, 116th Cong. (2019); and Clerk
of the U.S. House of Representatives, ``Roll Call 428/Bill Number H.R.
2722,'' June 27, 2019, https://clerk.house.gov/Votes/2019428.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
iv. conclusion
The heroic efforts of many, and in particular State and local
election officials committed to free and fair elections, gave us a safe
and secure election in November 2020 with historic turnout. Some
crucial improvements in security and resiliency had been in the works
for a number of years, such as States that transitioned to voting
systems that scan paper ballots, or that took advantage of
vulnerability assessments provided by CISA. Other resiliency measures
had to be implemented in response to the pandemic and benefited from
funding provided by Congress. This included increased mail ballot
printing to accommodate increased demand from voters, as well as the
purchase of secure dropboxes to permit those voters to safely drop off
ballots outside. Long-standing best practices, such as the provision of
emergency paper ballots, paper pollbook back-ups, and poll workers on
standby, took long hours and plenty of financial resources to implement
during an extremely high-turnout election with added pandemic-related
costs. Carrying out these practices demonstrated a commitment by
election officials to ensure eligible voters would not be turned away,
even in the case of malfunctioning equipment or a potential cyber
attack.
Now, the disinformation campaign that has sowed distrust in that
election has seeded an anti-democracy movement that poses significant
threats to our election infrastructure. The threats include sham
partisan reviews that undermine ballot and election equipment security,
while further fueling the disinformation campaign. They also include
attacks on election officials and workers that push out and disempower
the very people who administered a historically secure election in
2020. And there may be insider threats from those who seek to replace
them. Some who are running for election official positions are
themselves promoting election conspiracies in their campaigns,
highlighting how election officials themselves, election workers, or
election vendor personnel can fall victim to and push conspiracies
about the 2020 election. These insiders could be susceptible to
requests for unauthorized access and other security breaches, as we've
seen occur in a few jurisdictions already.
Maintaining a secure election infrastructure will require effort
from many parts of society in the weeks and months to come. Congress
can lead the way in this effort, by providing resources for States and
local jurisdictions to implement measures that protect against insider
threats, such as video surveillance of election equipment and
background checks for personnel. Congress should also, as the Freedom
to Vote: John R. Lewis Act does, incentivize election vendors' adoption
of best practices for personnel and supply chain security, by requiring
that Federal funds spent on election vendors go to those who agree to
abide by these security measures, and by requiring risk-limiting audits
in Federal elections. Unlike sham partisan reviews, these would be true
election integrity improvements.
Congress should further provide resources for the physical and
personal security of election officials, workers, and their offices,
while State, local, and Federal law enforcement should treat those who
threaten and interfere with fair election administration as the serious
threat to democracy that they are. Existing laws must be enforced
against these bad actors.
Our election infrastructure is strong, as shown by the 2020
election, but it is facing a growing anti-democracy threat from within.
Congress should protect democracy from that threat by investing in true
election integrity measures.

Chairwoman Clarke. I thank you, Ms. Ramachandran, for your
testimony. I now recognize Mr. Stamos to summarize his
statement for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALEX STAMOS, DIRECTOR, STANFORD INTERNET
OBSERVATORY, AND COMMISSIONER, ASPEN INSTITUTE COMMISSION ON
INFORMATION DISORDER

Mr. Stamos. Thank you very much, Chairwoman Clarke and
Ranking Member Garbarino, for having me here. Ladies and
gentlemen, thank you so much for holding this hearing.
It is an honor to be here with these incredible experts in
election integrity and infrastructure security. I think my part
today is to talk about election disinformation, about the
disinformation around elections that can sometimes be tied to
attacks against infrastructure, although not necessarily, and
especially our findings and what we learned during 2020, and
how I think CISA and Congress can react to those things we
learned.
In the summer of 2020, we were very fortunate to send a
team of interns from Stanford to go work with CISA, as all of
you know, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency.
Those interns, most of them worked on infrastructure security
projects, including Crossfeed which the Ranking Member
mentioned. But a couple of them were working on disinformation.
One of the experiences they had is that while CISA had really
strong authorization capabilities and funding to work on the
infrastructure security, a lot of the capability to understand
and deal with election disinformation did not exist at the
time.
So, as a result, at Stanford we pulled together our friends
at the University of Washington, at the Atlantic Council, and a
private company called Graphika, and we put together the
Election Integrity Partnership. There was about 130 people
involved in this project operating throughout the summer and
fall and winter of 2020 into early 2021. The goals of the EIP
were to identify election misinformation before it went viral,
to help create clear and accurate counter-messaging, and then
to increase the transparency of what happened during 2020,
partially as a reaction to the fact that in 2016, there were a
number of disinformation events that we didn't really
understand until years later and even don't truly understand
now because information was not gathered at the time.
To be clear, the EIP was very tightly scoped. We explicitly
did not handle any claims about candidates or arguments about
policy, the kind of issues that are core to the democratic
process. So, if one candidate said the other candidate was a
crook, said something about the other candidate's kids,
something like that, that was completely out of scope for us.
Our focus was on disinformation around the election itself.
Our 4 areas that we defined was: Procedural interference,
this is when you do things like lie about a poll location or
say that the election has been canceled to try to get people
not to vote; participation interference, which is to try
convince people not to vote through disinformation, such as
saying warrants are being checked when you vote, you might be
arrested at the voting booth; fraud, so content that asked
people to do something illegitimate to try to influence the
election; and then delegitimization, which is content that
delegitimizes the results based upon false or misleading
claims.
In the end, EIP had partnerships with civil society, with
CISA, the GEC, the Global Engagement Center at the U.S. State
Department, with major tech platforms, and then with thousands
of local election officials via the Multi-State ISAC. If you
are interested in our results, they are available in a not very
thin volume that I will wave around multiple times today at
eipartnership.net. You can get a paper copy there, too. But I
will summarize a couple of, I think, the key takeaways of what
we learned in 2020.
The first is the disinformation around the election and
then disinformation that led to January 6 was first primed by
months and months of narrative-building during 2020, mostly, I
think, people recognize by allies of President Trump basically
saying this election is likely to be stolen. So, the ground was
set by months and months of kind-of political messaging that
this election is likely to be stolen, you should be on the
lookout for anything that indicates that.
This led to what we call both top-down and bottom-up
disinformation. So, there is disinformation that was created by
elites that then was spread via social media, the normal media,
and others. Then there is also disinformation that would come
from the grassroots and that would be amplified by the elites.
So, you end up with this interesting cycle of kind of the
overall guidance of this is what our message is going to be
coming from the top, but then a lot of the details being filled
in by normal people on social media that amplified the social
media.
The vast majority of the election disinformation was from
Americans. There were a handful of notable incidents. Ms.
Ramachandran mentioned a really important one around Iran. I am
sure we will probably talk about that, too. I think that is
probably the most interesting one from my perspective, the
Iranian involvement. But for the most part, disinformation is
an American thing that we are doing to ourselves and doing to
each other.
Most of the content that went viral on social media didn't
go viral organically or because of algorithms or amplification.
It went viral because a small number of verified influencers
decided to make it so; that a small number of people that we
know exactly who they are, who have hundreds of thousands and
millions of followers decided that that was going to be the
controversy that day, and they were able to turn that into a
viral piece of content. We have a number of examples of that
that we can get into if you would like.
One of our findings is that disinformation has become a
real multimedia issue. So, the disinformation we are talking
about is being spread on social media, but we also see it on AM
radio, cable news, podcasts, a variety of different outlets.
So, there is not one single place that you can kind-of choke
down on this. You have to look at the overall economics of the
ecosystem.
Then an interesting finding for us is that live video
turned out to be a really big deal, and I am happy to talk more
about that.
Chairwoman Clarke. Well, thank you, Mr. Stamos. I
appreciate your testimony. I now recognize Mr. Rosenberg to
summarize his statement for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF EZRA D. ROSENBERG, CO-DIRECTOR, VOTING RIGHTS
PROJECT, LAWYERS' COMMITTEE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS UNDER LAW

Mr. Rosenberg. Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino,
Members of the subcommittee, thank you very much for giving me
the opportunity to testify today regarding threats to election
infrastructure and voter confidence. My testimony is going to
focus on a second part of the equation, the threat to voter
confidence and, in particular, the danger of fabricated claims
of lack of voter confidence in our elections being used not to
ensure that elections are secure or run with integrity, but as
a pretext to suppress the right to vote of millions of voters,
predominantly voters of color.
It is important for this subcommittee to distinguish
between legitimate, particularized, and supported cybersecurity
concerns so as to protect against future and, thankfully as
yet, unrealized security threats on the one hand from the
unsubstantiated allegations of lack of voter confidence in an
otherwise secure system on the other. The former can lead to
protections that will continue to make our elections secure.
The latter have been used with increasing frequency to make it
more difficult for voters to cast their votes and have their
votes counted. In considering these issues we urge the
subcommittee to not allow the erection of unnecessary obstacles
to voting built on the specter of false allegations of fraud
and on self-fulfilling prophesies of lack of voter confidence.
Although the right to vote is essential to all Americans,
it is perhaps most important to those populations to whom it
had been historically denied. As Dr. King put it, it is civil
right No. 1. Unfortunately, before the ink was dry on the
ratification of the 15th Amendment that guaranteed the right to
vote to all Americans regardless of race, there were those who
used every means at their disposal to stop Black voters and
other voters of color from voting. It took more Constitutional
amendments and landmark legislation, like the Voting Rights Act
of 1965, to stop practices such as poll taxes and literacy
tests and all-White primaries that had prevented voters of
color from voting.
The progress gained by these laws was great, but those who
wanted to stop voters of color from voting were not deterred.
For a few decades, they were severely hampered by Section 5 of
the Voting Rights Act, which prevented those jurisdictions with
a documented history of discrimination in voting from
implementing changes in election practices without preclearance
from the attorney general or the court. But Section 5 was
effectively gutted by the Supreme Court in its decision in
Shelby County v. Holder.
Now, all this is a preface to what is happening today.
Literally from the second Shelby County was handed down, States
formally covered under Section 5 have used the supposed lack of
voter confidence as justification for the implementation of
election practices that make it demonstrably more difficult for
voters of color to vote.
First they claim that their new practices are necessary to
stop fraud when there were is no evidence of fraud. Indeed, the
minute number of alleged fraudulent ballots is far outweighed
by the thousands of voters for whom voting is made
significantly more burdensome in the name of the fiction of
fraud.
Then where they cannot prove fraud they point to public
opinion surveys, which they say demonstrate the lack of voter
confidence in the system, necessitating stronger protections.
But these survey results are themselves the result of the lies,
both big and small, spun by those who would use such pretexts
to justify their imposing burdens, making it more difficult for
certain people, predominantly people of color and lower income
people, to vote. This happened in Texas in the failed attempt
to implement a discriminatory photo ID law. It is happening
today, where spurred by the lies that the 2020 Presidential
election was stolen, including bogus claims of voting machine
irregularities, laws have been passed in dozens of States
making it more difficult for voters of color to vote.
The biggest threat to voter confidence are these lies. Now
that every such claim of irregularities in the last
Presidential election was rejected by the courts is of little
solace. In the legend of the little boy who cried wolf, when
real danger came no one came to help him. Here there may be
legitimate concerns about the security of our election
infrastructure and Congress should be doing everything it can
to guard against those dangers where real and substantiated. It
should not be led off course by the pernicious lies of the boy
who cried wolf and it should not permit the so-called lack of
voter confidence fostered by those lies to perpetuate
discrimination against voters of color. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rosenberg follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ezra D. Rosenberg
January 20, 2022
i. introduction
Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and Members of the
U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection & Innovation.
My name is Ezra Rosenberg and I am the co-director of the Voting Rights
Project of the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law
(``Lawyers' Committee''). Thank you for giving me the opportunity to
testify today regarding ``Securing Democracy: Protecting Against
Threats to Election Infrastructure and Voter Confidence.''
My testimony will focus on the second part of the equation: The
threat to voter confidence, and in particular the danger of fabricated
claims of lack of voter confidence in our election results being used
as a pretext to suppress the right to vote of millions of voters,
predominately voters of color, not to ensure that elections are secure
and run with integrity. It is important for this subcommittee to
distinguish between legitimate, particularized, and supported
cybersecurity concerns so as to protect against future--and,
thankfully, as yet unrealized--security threats on the one hand, and
blunderbuss and unsubstantiated allegations of lack of voter confidence
in an otherwise secure system on the other. The former can and should
lead to protections that can continue to make our election
infrastructure secure. The latter have been used with increasing
frequency to make it more difficult for eligible voters to cast their
votes and have their votes counted. In considering these issues, we
urge the subcommittee not to conflate the two, and specifically not to
allow the erection of unnecessary obstacles to voting built on the
specter of false allegations of fraud and on self-fulfilling prophesies
of lack of voter confidence.
I come to the views I offer today after having devoted the bulk of
the last decade of my career litigating voting rights cases on behalf
of voters of color for the Lawyers' Committee. The Lawyers' Committee
is a National civil rights organization created at the request of
President John F. Kennedy in 1963 to mobilize the private bar to
confront issues of racial discrimination pro bono. In fact, I first
became associated with the Lawyers' Committee when I was a partner of a
large global law firm, and volunteered in 2011 to take on a voting
rights case pro bono. That case was the challenge to Texas's strict
photo ID law, which I will discuss in my testimony. After I retired
from private practice in 2014, the Lawyers' Committee asked me to join
their staff, and since I became co-director of the Voting Rights
Project in 2015, I have supervised the filings on behalf of voters and
civil rights organizations in over 100 cases dealing with voting
rights, many of them with claims brought by persons of color whose
ability to vote has been compromised under the guise of insuring voter
confidence in election integrity.
The right to vote holds a special place in our democracy. Well over
a century ago, in trying to provide an example of the essential truths
of this Nation--that a person's life, liberty, or happiness, cannot be
subject to arbitrariness and that ours is a Government of laws not of
people, the Supreme Court described the ``political franchise of
voting,'' as not ``strictly . . . a natural right,'' but ``as a
fundamental political right, . . . preservative of all rights.''\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356, 370 (1886).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although the right to vote is essential to all Americans, it has
perhaps an even more special place and is of, if possible, even greater
importance to people to whom it had been historically denied. As Dr.
Martin Luther King called it, it is ``Civil Right No. 1.''\2\
Unfortunately, before the ink was dry on the ratification of the
Fifteenth Amendment to the Constitution that guaranteed the right to
vote to all citizens, regardless of race or color of their skin, there
were those--often in positions of power--who used every means at their
disposal to stop Black voters and other voters of color from voting. It
took more Constitutional amendments and landmark legislation such as
the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (the ``Act'' or the ``VRA''), to stop
practices such as poll taxes, literacy tests, all-White primaries, and
similar means used to prevent voters of color from voting.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Martin Luther King, Jr., Civil Right No. 1: The Right to Vote,
THE N.Y. TIMES MAG., Mar. 14, 1965, at 26-27, reprinted in A TESTAMENT
OF HOPE: THE ESSENTIAL WRITINGS AND SPEECHES OF MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.
183 (James M. Washington ed., 1991).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The progress gained by these laws was great. But those who wanted
to stop people of color from voting have persevered. For a few decades,
they were severely hampered by Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act,
which prevented those jurisdictions with a documented history of racial
discrimination in voting from implementing any changes in election
practices without preclearance from the United States Attorney General
or the United States District Court for the District of Columbia. But
Section 5 was effectively gutted by the Supreme Court's decision in
Shelby County v. Holder.\3\ Additionally, while we have yet to see the
full effects of the Supreme Court's more recent decision in Brnovich v.
Democratic National Committee,\4\ signs point to that decision's making
it unnecessarily more difficult for plaintiffs to prove that a State's
election practices result in discrimination against voters of color
under Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act. (In recent testimony before
the House Judiciary Committee, I discussed these court decisions at
greater length.)\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ 570 U.S. 529 (2013).
\4\ U.S. Supreme Court no. 19-1257, decided July 1, 2021.
\5\ U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,
HEARING ON ``THE IMPLICATIONS OF BRNOVICH V. DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL
COMMITTEE AND POTENTIAL LEGISLATIVE RESPONSES,'' JULY 16, 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
All this is a preface to what is happening today. Literally from
the second Shelby County was handed down, States formerly covered under
Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act have used supposed lack of ``voter
confidence'' as justification for their implementation of election
practices that make it demonstrably more difficult for people--
predominately people of color--to vote. First, they claim that their
new practices are necessary to stop fraud--when there is no evidence of
fraud. The number of actual infractions is infinitesimal and not
remotely likely to change election outcomes.\6\ Indeed, the minute
number of alleged fraudulent ballots is far outweighed by the thousands
of voters for whom voting is made significantly more burdensome in the
name of the fiction of fraud.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ The Myth of Voter Fraud, THE BRENNAN CTR. FOR JUST., https://
www.brennancenter.org/issues/ensure-every-american-can-vote/vote-
suppression/myth-voter-fraud.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Aware they cannot prove fraud, those enacting such laws point to
public opinion surveys which, they say, demonstrate lack of voter
confidence in the system, necessitating stronger protections. But these
survey results, we will show, are the result of the lies--both big and
small--spun by those who would use such pretexts to justify their
imposing burdens making it more difficult for certain people--
predominately people of color and poorer people--to vote. This happened
in Texas in the failed attempt to implement a photo ID law that made it
more difficult for Black and Latinx voters to vote than for white
voters to vote. And it is happening today where, spurred by the lies
that the 2020 Presidential election was ``stolen'' and bogus claims of
voting machine irregularities and rogue administrators, laws have been
passed in dozens of States making it more difficult for voters of color
to vote. The biggest threats to voter confidence are these lies.
That every such claim of irregularities in the last Presidential
election was rejected by the courts is of little solace.\7\ In the
legend of the boy who cried wolf, when real danger came, no one came to
help him. Here, there may be legitimate concerns about the security of
our election infrastructure, and Congress should be doing everything it
can to guard against those dangers, where real and substantiated. It
should not be led off-course by the pernicious lies of the boy crying
wolf. And it should not permit the so-called lack of voter confidence
fostered by those lies to perpetuate discrimination against voters of
color.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Jim Rutenberg et al., Trump's Failed Crusade Debunks G.O.P.'s
Case for Voting Restrictions: Over and Over, Courts Find No Fraud, but
Efforts to Limit Rights Persist, N.Y. TIMES, Dec. 27, 2020, https://
static01.nyt.com/images/2020/12/27/nytfrontpage/scan.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ii. the use of the fraud and voter confidence myths to burden the right
to vote
As I suggested at the outset, my experience with the Texas voter ID
case provides a good example of the use of specious allegations of
fraud and lack of voter confidence to justify discriminatory voting
practices.
Prior to 2011, Texas had a robust voter identification law,
allowing voters to vote upon production of any one of multiple,
commonly-held IDs.\8\ To the extent that the voter ID requirements were
intended to prevent fraud, they seemed to be working quite well. There
had been only two convictions for in-person voter impersonation fraud--
the only sort of fraud a voter ID requirement addresses--out of 20
million votes cast in Texas between 2001 and 2011.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Veasey v. Abbott, 830 F.3d 216, 225 (5th Cir. 2016) (en banc).
\9\ Id. at 238-39.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nevertheless, in 2011, the Texas legislature passed Senate Bill 14
(``SB 14''), which limited acceptable voter IDs to a handful of photo
identification documents, namely a current or not expired for more than
60 days Texas drivers' license or personal identification card issued
by the Department of Public Safety, U.S. military card, U.S. passport,
Texas license to carry a concealed handgun, or Texas Election
Identification Certificate, or a U.S. naturalization paper with a
photograph.\10\ In the rushed process leading up to the passage of SB
14, the proponents and drafters of SB 14 were repeatedly made aware
that, if enacted, the law would have a disproportionate effect on Black
and Latinx voters. Nevertheless, they rejected dozens of amendments
that would have lessened the impact of the law, and passed SB 14.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Id. at 225.
\11\ Id. at 236, 239.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SB 14 was found by a three-judge panel of the United States
District Court for the District of Columbia to have a retrogressive
impact on the rights of Black and Latinx voters in proceedings brought
by Texas under Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act, seeking preclearance
of the law.\12\ While Texas's appeal was pending, the Supreme Court
issued its decision in Shelby County holding unconstitutional the
coverage formula which defined which jurisdictions were subject to the
provisions of Section 5, thus freeing Texas from the requirements of
Section 5. That very same afternoon, Texas announced it would start
implementing the new photo ID law, forcing the Lawyers' Committee,
representing the Texas State Conference of the NAACP and the Mexican
American Legislative Caucus of the Texas House of Representatives who
had successfully intervened in the Section 5 action, as well as other
civil rights organizations and the Department of Justice, to file suit
under Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Texas v. Holder, 888 F.Supp.2d 113 (D.D.C. 2012).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
That suit was successful, and Texas was forced to change its law,
with the district court ruling--and the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals
affirmance en banc--that Texas's photo ID law discriminated against
Black and Latinx voters under the effects prong of Section 2.\13\
Specifically, the plaintiffs proved that Black voters were almost twice
as likely as White voters, and Latinx voters almost 2 and a half times
as likely as White voters, to lack the required IDs, and that Black and
Latinx voters were similarly less likely than White voters to be able
to obtain the required IDs.\14\ As a result of these findings, the
court entered an interim remedial order allowing any voter who lacked
the required ID to vote upon execution of a declaration of a reasonable
impediment. Ultimately, the Texas legislature replaced SB 14 with SB 5,
which largely tracked the interim remedial order, and the Fifth Circuit
Court of Appeals ruled that this provided the plaintiffs with their
full remedy.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Veasey v. Abbott, 830 F.3d 216.
\14\ Id. at 251.
\15\ Veasey v. Abbott, 888 F.3d 792 (5th Cir. 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For present purposes, however, it is the findings of the
tenuousness of the justifications provided by the proponents of SB 14--
findings that the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled were material
support to a finding of discrimination intent--that are of interest.
First, the court noted that ``Texas has a history of justifying voter
suppression efforts such as the poll tax and literacy tests with the
race-neutral reason of promoting ballot integrity.''\16\ The court
reasoned that, while the ``Legislature is entitled to set whatever
priorities it wishes,'' and that ``Ballot integrity is undoubtedly a
worthy goal,'' there was virtually no evidence of in-person voter fraud
in Texas.\17\ Second, the court highlighted ``that many rationales were
given for a voter identification law, which shifted as they were
challenged or disproven by opponents.''\18\ The first of these was
fraud prevention; the second was that ``such laws fostered public
confidence in election integrity and increase voter turnout.''\19\ The
district court found that ``there was no credible evidence'' to support
these claim.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ 830 F.3d at 237.
\17\ 830 F.3d at 238-39.
\18\ 830 F.3d at 240-41.
\19\ Veasey v. Perry, 71 F.Supp. 3d 627, 655 (S.D. Tex. 2014),
affirmed in part and reversed in part on other grounds sub nom. Veasey
v. Abbott, 830 F.3d 216 (5th Cir. 2016) (en banc).
\20\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
iii. the next generation of false justifications: the attack on
democracy
While, as the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals noted in Veasey v.
Abbott, the use of fraud as justification for voter suppressive laws is
not new, the 2020 Presidential election added a new and extraordinarily
dangerous twist: Using spurious and unsubstantiated voter fraud
allegations--often directed at voting machine technology and other
election infrastructure elements--in an attempt to reverse the will of
the people altogether. This reached a crescendo in the dozens of suits
brought by former President Donald Trump and his allies--many of which
we at the Lawyers' Committee participated in, representing the NAACP as
an intervenor or amicus curiae, as invariably these suits targeted
areas of large numbers of Black voters in places such as Atlanta,
Detroit, Milwaukee, and Philadelphia.
A. The 2020 Presidential Election Was Not Perfect, But It Was Secure
During the 2020 Presidential Election, we witnessed the largest
voter turnout in American history. 159,633,396 voters turned out in the
2020 election, 20 million more than in any previous election. Turnout
was the highest in 120 years in terms of the percentage of voting-
eligible population, with 66.7 percent casting ballots. President
Joseph Biden became the first U.S. Presidential candidate to receive
more than 80 million votes, with a final tally of 81,283,098 votes, or
51.3 percent of all votes cast for President. Former President Trump
received the second highest total of any U.S. Presidential candidate,
trailing President Biden by a little over 7 million votes.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ James M. Lindsay, The 2020 Election by the Numbers, COUNCIL ON
FOREIGN REL., (Dec. 15, 2020), https://www.cfr.org/blog/2020-election-
numbers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As a result of the pandemic, an unprecedented number of ballots
were cast through early voting or vote-by-mail. Over 101.4 million
voters in the Presidential Election cast their ballots before Election
Day, nearly two-thirds of all ballots cast. Of those early votes, about
65.6 million were returned via mail-in ballots. Elections security
experts lauded the 2020 Presidential Election as the ``most secure in
American history.''\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Sara Cook, Election infrastructure officials: 2020 election
was ``most secure in American history'' , CBS NEWS (Nov. 20, 2020),
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/2020-election-most-secure-history-
dhs/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
That conclusion was shared by then-President Trump's own
appointees. A joint statement issued by the Department of Homeland
Security's Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency, or CISA,
concluded:

``The November 3d election was the most secure in American history . .
. There is no evidence that any voting system deleted or lost votes,
changed votes, or was in any way compromised. Other security measures
like pre-election testing, State certification of voting equipment, and
the U.S. Election Assistance Commission's (EAC) certification of voting
equipment help to build additional confidence in the voting systems
used in 2020. While we know there are many unfounded claims and
opportunities for misinformation about the process of our elections, we
can assure you we have the utmost confidence in the security and
integrity of our elections, and you should too. When you have
questions, turn to elections officials as trusted voices as they
administer elections.''\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Joint Statement from Elections Infrastructure Government
Coordinating Council & The Election Infrastructure Sector Coordinating
Executive Committees, Nov. 12, 2020, https://www.cisa.gov/news/2020/11/
12/joint-statement-elections-infrastructure-government-coordinating-
council-election.

This is not to say that the 2020 election--or any election--was
perfect. The Lawyers' Committee, which helps coordinate the National,
non-partisan Election Protection coalition, including the 866-OUR-VOTE
hotline, received numerous reports of voters of color having trouble
registering to vote, casting their ballot, or having their ballot
counted. A little over 54 percent of all voters who called the Election
Protection Hotline and reported their race or ethnicity were voters of
color. They reported several basic barriers to voting access, which
disproportionately impacted voters of color:

Restrictions or lack of information about voter
registration;

Lack of notice about the consolidation or closure of polling
places;

Purging of voter rolls in violation of the National Voter
Registration Act;

Lack of information about how to access vote-by-mail
opportunities;

Unreasonable vote-by-mail deadlines, due to mail delivery
and return delays;

Rejection of absentee ballots through misuse of signature-
matching procedures;

Restrictive voter identification laws, which failed to
provide alternatives to voters lacking required information
(such as those voters with nontraditional mailing addresses) or
who do not have reasonable access to Government offices that
offer accepted forms of identification; and

Long lines that resulted in hours-long wait times due to an
insufficient number of voting machines or equipment
malfunctions.
We also received reports of violations of Federal law, including
the failure to provide language assistance in violation of Section 203
of the Voting Rights Act and the denial of assistance from a person
chosen by the voter in violation of Section 208 of the Act. Many of
these problems were exacerbated by overwhelmed election officials who
were unprepared and under-resourced for the unprecedented levels of
voter participation, particularly during a pandemic.
B. The ``Big Lie'' Is Not About Election Infrastructure Security
Thus, particularly in the context of the pandemic, the 2020
election was an unqualified success insofar as ensuring that cast
ballots were counted accurately. Nevertheless, lawyers representing the
interests of former President Trump filed suit after suit in Arizona,
Georgia, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin, alleging that the
election was not secure, that it had been ``stolen'' or ``rigged.''
Often the allegations took the form of attacks on the election
infrastructure. These allegations, made in a Michigan suit, are
representative:
1. `` `[T]he absentee voting counts in some counties in Michigan
have likely been manipulated by a computer algorithm,' and []
at some time after the 2016 election, software was installed
that programmed tabulating machines to `shift a percentage of
absentee ballot votes from Trump to Biden.' ''
2. ``Smartmatic and Dominion were founded by foreign oligarchs and
dictators to ensure computerized ballot-stuffing and vote
manipulation to whatever level was needed to make certain
Venezuelan dictator Hugo Chavez never lost another election.''
3. ``The several spikes cast solely for Biden could easily be
produced in the Dominion system by preloading batches of blank
ballots in files such as Write-Ins, then casting them all for
Biden using the Override Procedure (to cast Write-In ballots)
that is available to the operator of the system.''\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Timothy King, et al. v. Gretchen Whitmer, et al., United
States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan, case no.
2:20-cv-13134-LVP-RSW, ECF. No. 172, Aug. 25, 2021, p. 15 (internal
citations omitted).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
All of these claims and other similar claims were summarily
dismissed by court after court--often by judges who had been appointed
by President Trump--and some of the attorneys making these claims were
ultimately subjected to sanctions and disciplinary proceedings for
advancing claims that were not based on facts.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ See generally Tracking election disputes, lawsuits, and
recounts, BALLOTPEDIA'S 2020 ELECTION HELP DESK, https://
ballotpedia.org; Jacob Shamsian & Sonam Sheth, Trump and his allies
filed more than 40 lawsuits challenging the 2020 election results. All
of them failed, BUSINESS INSIDER (Feb. 22, 2021), https://
www.businessinsider.com/trump-campaign-lawsuits-election-results-2020-
11; Postelection lawsuits related to the 2020 United States
Presidential election, WIKIPEDIA https://en.wikipedia.org (last
accessed January 17, 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress should ensure that electronic voting machines are both
secure from interference--domestic or foreign--and provide accessible
means for all voters that are fully auditable, both by election
officials to ensure that the votes counted by the machines match the
votes cast by the voters and by the voters themselves before they leave
the polling places. But it should do so based on sound, substantiated
evidence, not political posturing.
For example, the Lawyers' Committee was co-counsel for plaintiffs
in a case dealing with cybersecurity issues in Georgia. There, the
court described the evidence submitted by plaintiffs as ``a mountain of
evidence demonstrating the burdens to the voting process and to the
casting of a secure, reliable, counted ballot that some portion of
voters across Georgia, including Plaintiffs, had experienced as a
result of the State's continued use of voting equipment, software,
hardware, election and voter databases, that were demonstrably shown to
be antiquated, seriously flawed, and vulnerable to failure, breach,
contamination and attack.''\26\ As a result, in April 2019, the court
enjoined the use of Georgia's Direct Recording Electronic voting
machines (DRE) and Global Election Management Systems (GEMS) beyond the
2019 election cycle. But nowhere in that litigation did the plaintiffs
suggest that an election had ever been tampered with. Rather, the focus
of the case was on the real vulnerabilities of the system and the need
to take reasonable steps to protect against potential threats.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Donna Curling, et al. v. Brad Raffesnperger, U.S. District
Court for the Northern District of Georgia, no. 1:2017-cv-02989, Doc.
768, filed August 7, 2020; Curling v. Raffensperger, 493 F.Supp. 3d
1264 (N.D.GA. 2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
That, unfortunately, is not what the ``Big Lie'' is all about. It
is not tethered to reality, let alone evidence.
C. The ``Big Lie's'' Intent and Effect is to Undermine Voter Confidence
The ``Big Lie'' that the 2020 Presidential election was stolen has
become the stock in trade of numerous politicians, including the former
President, and has become a rallying call for a sector of the
electorate. This is not merely a matter of partisan politics. Were it
so, the Lawyers' Committee, as a non-partisan organization, would be
silent. The sad fact is that the repetition of the ``Big Lie'' eats at
the core of our democracy.
Studies have shown that disinformation campaigns such as the ``Big
Lie'' can have a damaging impact on voters' faith in the system. After
President George W. Bush won reelection, Republicans had a high level
of confidence in the accuracy of the election, but this figure dropped
significantly in the following decade. During that time there was a mix
of wins by both parties, but also the beginning of a vigorous campaign
by certain political sectors pressing unsubstantiated claims against
election systems. As the November 2016 election day approached, then-
Presidential candidate Trump increased the volume:

``Of course there is large scale voter fraud happening on and before
election day.
``The election is absolutely being rigged by the dishonest and
distorted media pushing Crooked Hillary--but also at many polling
places--SAD''.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ US election 2016: Trump says election `rigged at polling
places', BBC NEWS (Oct. 17, 2016), https://www.bbc.com/news/election-
us-2016-37673797.

One survey of voting age citizens at the time of the 2016 election
found that allegations of election rigging changed their belief about
whether fraud was likely if the fraud would hurt their political party.
An author of the study concluded, ``Allegations that the election is
rigged reduce Americans' support for the democratic norms that underlie
the U.S. system of government.''\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ Bethany Albertson, Allegations of Fraud Weakened Voter
Confidence in the 2016 Election, THE WASH. POST (Oct. 8, 2020),
Allegations of fraud weakened voter confidence in the 2016 election.
That could happen again.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In a study of former President Trump's claims of election fraud
conducted by Brendan Nyhan of Dartmouth and other scholars, researchers
found the claims undermined faith in elections, especially among his
supporters.\29\ Saying that confidence in elections may be a ``soft
target,'' Dr. Nyhan commented, ``It's complicated, hard to observe,
unintuitive, and relies on trust. Trust in institutions seems to be
easier to destroy than to build.'' Speaking of the unsubstantiated
claims, he added that his major worry is the damage to ``institutional
legitimacy.''\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Nicolas Berlinski et al., The Effects of Unsubstantiated
Claims of Voter Fraud on Confidence in Elections, J. OF EXPERIMENTAL
POL. SCI. (2021) 1-1, The Effects of Unsubstantiated Claims of Voter
Fraud on Confidence in Elections, (cambridge.org); David A. Graham, The
Damage of Trump's Voter Fraud Allegations Can't Be Undone, THE
ATLANTIC, Jun. 19, 2020, Study: Trump's Voter-Fraud Allegations Do
Lasting Damage.
\30\ David A. Graham, The Damage of Trump's Voter Fraud Allegations
Can't Be Undone, THE ATLANTIC (June 19, 2020), Study: Trump's Voter-
Fraud Allegations Do Lasting Damage.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dr. Nyhan's fear is well-founded. In 2006, the same year that we
saw a strong bipartisan reauthorization of the Voting Rights Act, the
United States was ranked as a ``Full Democracy'' by the Democracy
Index. Less than two decades later, much has changed. In 2021, the
United States was ranked as a ``Flawed Democracy,'' driven by growing
efforts at the State and local levels to suppress voting and to subvert
legitimate election results. As the Democracy Index's authors
explained, ``public trust in the democratic process was dealt a blow by
the refusal of Donald Trump and many of his supporters to accept the
election result'' in the 2020 elections.\31\ Just this month, an NPR/
Ipsos poll found that two-thirds of all Republican respondents
subscribe to the ``Big Lie'' that the election was stolen from former
President Trump because of rampant fraud, with fewer than half saying
they are willing to accept the results of the 2020 election.\32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Global Democracy Has a Very Bad Year, THE ECONOMIST (Feb. 2,
2021), https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2021/02/02/global-
democracy-has-a-very-bad-year.
\32\ Joel Rose & Liz Baker, Six in 10 Americans say U.S. democracy
is in crisis as the ``Big Lie'' takes root, NPR (Jan. 3. 2022), https:/
/www.npr.org/2022/01/03/1069764164/american-democracy-poll-jan-6.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
D. The Fabricated Loss of Voter Confidence Is Used To Support the
Erection of Obstacles To Voting
Worse still, misguided public sentiment of lost confidence in our
election system is then used by lawmakers as justification to impose
changes in election practices. Last spring, the New York Times studied
what they called a ``feedback loop'' in which falsehoods shape voter
attitudes and lawmakers ``cite those attitudes as the basis for major
changes.'' The paper counted 33 States where legislators said low
public confidence in election integrity was the justification for bills
to restrict voting. The report noted an instance where a State
legislator asserted such justifications yet was unable to point to
evidence supporting the claims about flawed elections, but still
claimed restrictive laws were needed because the public believed there
were problems. The Times noted that misgivings about election integrity
are not new, but the scale of the current effort involves many more
bills and far reaching restrictions, and the depressed confidence has
resulted from an organized disinformation campaign.\33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ Maggie Astor, `A Perpetual Motion Machine': How Disinformation
Drives Voting Laws, N.Y TIMES (May 13, 2021), Here's How Disinformation
Drives Voting Laws; Isaac Stanley-Becker, Disinformation Campaign
Stokes Fears About Mail Voting, THE WASH. POST (Aug. 20, 2020), https:/
/www.washingtonpost.com/politics/disinformation-campaign-stokes-fears-
about-mail-voting-using-lebron-james-image-and-boosted-by-trump-
aligned-group/2020/08/20/fcadf382-e2e2-11ea-8181-
606e603bb1c4_story.html; Rob Kuznia et al., Stop the Steal's Massive
Disinformation Campaign Connected to Roger Stone, CNN (Nov. 14, 2020),
https://www.cnn.com/2020/11/13/business/stop-the-steal-disinformation-
campaign-invs/index.html; Jane Mayer, The Big Money Behind the Big Lie,
THE NEW YORKER (Aug. 2, 2021), https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2021/
08/09/the-big-money-behind-the-big-lie.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2021, 19 States enacted 34 laws making it harder to vote,
especially for people of color and lower-income people.\34\ As the
Brennan Center for Justice reported in its most recent summary of
pending voting legislation:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ Voting Laws Roundup: December, 2021, BRENNAN CTR. FOR JUST.
(Jan. 12, 2022), https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/research-
reports/voting-laws-roundup-december-2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These numbers are extraordinary: State legislatures enacted far
more restrictive voting laws in 2021 than in any year since the Brennan
Center began tracking voting legislation in 2011. More than a third of
all restrictive voting laws enacted since then were passed this year.
And in a new trend this year, legislators introduced bills to allow
partisan actors to interfere with election processes or even reject
election results entirely.\35\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Again, Georgia and Texas are illustrative.\36\ In Georgia, State
legislators responded to the record-shattering turnout of 2020 by
passing omnibus legislation, known as SB 202, that restricts the right
to vote at nearly every step of the process and disproportionately
affects voters of color. Among its provisions, the law requires voter
identification in order to request an absentee ballot and vote
absentee; severely limits access to absentee ballot drop boxes; and
significantly shortens the period in which voters can apply for and
cast absentee ballots.\37\ These restrictions were adopted right after
the November 2020 election where voters of color used absentee ballots
to an unprecedented degree, and in the cases of Black (29.4 percent)
and Asian (40.3 percent) voters, at higher rates than White (25.3
percent) voters.\38\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ See Georgia State Conference of NAACP v. Raffensperger, N.D.
GA. No. 1:21-cv-1259-JPB, filed March 28, 2021; amended May 28, 2021;
Texas State Conference of NAACP v. Greg Abbott, et al. District Court,
Harris County, 189th Judicial District, Case no. 2021-57207, filed
September 7, 2021. (The Lawyers' Committee is, as are other civil
rights organizations, challenging the laws passed by Georgia and Texas
described in this testimony.)
\37\ SB 202/AP, Section 25, 26 28. https://www.legis.ga.gov/api/
legislation/document/20212022/201498.
\38\ Georgia State Conference of the NAACP v. Raffensperger, First
Amended Complaint, at 47.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The high turn-out, particularly by voters of color, is evidently
part of what prompted the new laws. After the results of the Georgia
senate races in early 2021, a Gwinnett County elections official in
suburban Atlanta--a county in which people of color have been a growing
proportion of the electorate--argued for voter restrictions saying,
``They don't have to change all of them, but they have got to change
the major parts of them so we at least have a shot at winning.''\39\ It
is no surprise, then, that SB 202 also prohibits the providing of food
and drink to voters waiting in line to vote,\40\ when it is well-known
that in Georgia, voters of color wait to vote for considerably longer
periods of time than do White voters.\41\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ Michael Wines, After Record Turnout, Republicans are Trying to
Make it Harder to Vote, N.Y. TIMES (Mar. 26, 2021), https://
www.nytimes.com/2021/01/30/us/republicans-voting-georgia-arizona.html.
\40\ SB 202/AP, Section 33, https://www.legis.ga.gov/api/
legislation/document/20212022/201498.
\41\ Stephen Fowler, Why Do Nonwhite Georgia Voters Have To Wait In
Line For Hours? Too Few Polling Places, GA. PUB. BROADCASTING (Oct. 17,
2020), https://www.npr.org/2020/10/17/924527679/why-do-nonwhite-
georgia-voters-have-to-wait-in-line-for-hours-too-few-polling-pl.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Despite the actual motivation for Georgia's new law, throughout the
debate on SB 202, its supporters attempted to justify the bill using
language similar to that used by former President Trump and his allies
concerning non-existent election irregularities in the 2020 Georgia
Presidential vote. Within days of the election, Representative Barry
Fleming, Chair of Georgia's House Special Committee on Election
Integrity, publicly likened absentee ballots to the ``shady part of
town down near the docks'' where the ``chance of being shanghaied'' is
significant, and concluded ``Expect the Georgia Legislature to address
that in our next session in January.''\42\ Among other things, the
preamble to SB 202 indicates that the overhaul of Georgia's election
procedures was necessary due to a significant lack of confidence in
Georgia election systems, with many electors concerned about
allegations of rampant voter suppression and many electors concerned
about allegations of ``rampant voter fraud.'' The preamble also asserts
the law was designed to ``address the lack of elector confidence in the
election system,'' reduce the burden on election officials, and
streamline the process of conducting elections by promoting uniformity
in voting.\43\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\42\ Barry Fleming, Republican Party wins on Election Day, and
future is bright, THE AUGUSTA CHRONICLE (Nov. 15, 2020), https://
www.augustachronicle.com/story/opinion/columns/guest/2020/11/15/guest-
column-republican-party-wins-on-election-day-and-future-is-bright/
43155971/.
\43\ SB 202/AP, Section 2, lines 68-148, https://www.legis.ga.gov/
api/legislation/document/20212022/201498.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although the preamble pays lip-service to concerns about voter
suppression, SB 202 increases, rather than address, those concerns.
Others in Georgia were somewhat more candid. Republican Lieutenant
Governor, Geoff Duncan, told CNN that the law was the fallout from a
10-week misinformation campaign by the former President and his allies,
including by his personal attorney, Rudy Giuliani, who ``showed up in a
couple of committee rooms and spent hours spreading misinformation and
sowing doubt across, you know, hours of testimony.''\44\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\44\ See Sara Murray and Jason Morris, Georgia's GOP lieutenant
Governor says Giuliani's false fraud claims helped lead to restrictive
voting law, CNN (Apr. 8, 2021), https://www.cnn.com/2021/04/07/
politics/geoff-duncan-voter-fraud-cnntv/index.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas passed a law, SB 1, which, among other things, empowers
partisan poll watchers with virtually unfettered access in polling
places, while at the same time tying the hands of election officials to
stop the poll watchers from engaging in intimidating conduct. Texas has
a well-documented history of voter intimidation by poll watchers that
has disproportionately affected voters of color. The courts have
acknowledged this pattern before. In 2014, a Federal district court
described this very issue: ``Minorities continue to have to overcome
fear and intimidation when they vote. . . . [T]here are still Anglos at
the polls who demand that minority voters identify themselves, telling
them that if they have ever gone to jail, they will go to prison if
they vote. Additionally, there are poll watchers who dress in law
enforcement-style clothing for an intimidating effect to which voters
of color are often the target.''\45\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\45\ Veasey v. Perry, 71 F. Supp. 3d 627, 636-37 (S.D. Tex. 2014),
aff'd and reversed on other grounds, Veasey v. Abbott, 830 F.3d 216
(5th Cir. 2016) (en banc).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
When first introduced in early March 2021, one of the predecessor
bills that would become SB 1 stated that its purpose was ``to exercise
the legislature's Constitutional authority under Section 4, Article VI,
Texas Constitution, to make all laws necessary to detect and punish
fraud and preserve the purity of the ballot box.'' Over the course of
committee hearings and floor debate on the bill, its sponsor used this
``purity of the ballot box'' language to defend the Bill. In its final
form, the bill still referenced Section 4, Article VI of the Texas
Constitution, stating that its purpose was to ``make all laws necessary
to detect and punish fraud.'' The final bill included in its first
pages a series of ``findings,'' which stated that ``fraud in elections
threatens the stability of a Constitutional democracy,'' ``reforms are
needed to the election laws of this State to ensure that fraud does not
undermine the public confidence in the election process,'' and reforms
to the election laws ``are enacted solely to prevent fraud in the
electoral process and ensure that all legally cast ballots are
counted.''\46\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\46\ Tex. Elec. Code Section 1.0015 Legislative Intent; Section
1.02 Purpose; Section 1.02, Findings, Senate Bill 1, 87th Tex. Legis.,
signed into law Sept. 9, 2021 (effective Dec. 2, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Harris County, a Texas county with a large number of Black and
Latinx voters was the county that made the greatest use of drop boxes
in the 2020 election, and was clearly the target of SB 1's prohibition
of drop boxes.\47\ But there was no evidence of even minor voting
irregularities in the 2020 election in Harris Country or anywhere else
in Texas.\48\ The Harris County Election Security Task Force issued a
final report on the 2020 election, which concluded: ``In this election
there were nearly 1.7 million votes cast in Harris County. Despite the
record turnout, the task force received approximately 20 allegations of
wrongdoing that needed to be elevated to the level of a formal
investigation. Despite claims, our thorough investigations found no
proof of any election tampering, ballot harvesting, voter suppression,
intimidation or any other type of foul play that might have impacted
the legitimate cast or count of a ballot.''\49\ The Texas Attorney
General's office spent 22,000 staff hours in 2020 investigating voter
fraud--more than double the hours spent prosecuting voter fraud cases
in 2018.\50\ These efforts resulted in 16 minor findings where voters
had listed the wrong address on their voter registration card, most of
which dated back to the 2018 election. None of these cases resulted in
jail time.\51\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\47\ Jen Kirby, The Battle Over a Texas Order Limiting Ballot Drop-
off Locations, Explained, VOX (Oct. 13, 2020), https://www.vox.com/
2020/10/10/21506522/texas-drop-off-ballot-locations-abbott-harris-
county.
\48\ Patrick Svitek, Harris County Elections Were Fair and Secure,
Task Force Finds, THE TEX. TRIBUNE (Dec. 18, 2020), https://
www.texastribune.org/2020/12/18/harris-county-elections-secure/.
\49\ Id.
\50\ Daily Kos Staff, Texas Spent Another 22,000 Hours Hunting for
``Election Fraud'' and Didn't Find a Damn Thing, THE DAILY KOS (June 2,
2021) https://www.dailykos.com/stories/2021/6/2/2033306/-Texas-spent-
another-22-000-hours-hunting-for-election-fraud-and-didn-t-find-a-damn-
thing.
\51\ Taylor Goldstein & Austin Bureau, Ken Paxton's Beefed-Up 2020
Voter Fraud Closed 16 Minor Cases All in Harris County, HOUS. CHRONICLE
(Dec. 21, 2020), https://www.houstonchronicle.com/politics/texas/
article/Ken-Paxton-s-beefed-up-2020-voter-fraudunit-15820210.php.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is difficult to overstate the nature of the new bills and laws
proliferating in the States. Not only do these laws make it more
difficult for voters to vote--whether early, by mail, or in-person--but
even more ominously, the new wave of bills and proposals is part of a
more comprehensive attack on elections, aimed at facilitating the
overriding of the actual votes of the electorate.\52\ A group of
scholars observed that an effort is under way to change State election
rules to ``entrench minority rule.'' They concluded, ``This is no
ordinary moment in the course of our democracy. It is a moment of great
peril and risk.''\53\ Against the backdrop of January 6, 2021, these
statements are not hyperbolic.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\52\ Will Wilder et al., The Election Sabotage Scheme and How
Congress Can Stop It, BRENNAN CTR. FOR JUST. (Nov. 8, 2021),
2021_11_ElectionSabotage(1).pdf.
\53\ 53 Statement in Support of the Freedom to Vote Act, Nov. 2021,
Democracy letter_November 2021_DocumentCloud.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
iv. conclusion
All this is not to say that changes in election laws are not
necessary or that Congress should be complacent about the security of
election infrastructure. Far from it. The attack on voting rights is a
key to the larger crisis of American democracy. The attack threatens to
transform elections into an instrument for a faction seeking to
monopolize power and exclude others, rather than a means for expressing
``the consent of the governed'' as a basis for building consensus to
promote the good for everyone. As the letter from the scholars
observed, ``Defenders of democracy in America still have a slim window
of opportunity to act. But time is ticking away, and midnight is
approaching.''\54\ Congress must reassert its historic role to support
free and fair elections and preserve democracy in a moment of peril.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\54\ 54 Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First, Congress must pass the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement
Act (JLVRAA) to restore the strength of the VRA to prevent racial
discrimination.
Second, Congress must enact the Freedom to Vote Act (FTVA) to
establish uniform minimum standards across the States for early voting,
same day registration, voting by mail, fair redistricting, and other
essential elements of elections.
The JLVRAA responds to the Supreme Court decisions weakening the
VRA, updating the preclearance formula to cover States and localities
with a recent record of discrimination, and clarifying the grounds they
can use to justify their election laws when challenged. Further, the
standards established by the FTVA are common-sense rules prevalent in
many States, where there was often bipartisan support.
As Congress proceeds, however, it is important to separate
frivolous and fanciful fabrications--intended to inflame passions,
shake voter confidence, justify voter suppression laws, and ultimately
and perhaps critically injure our democracy--from evidence-based
concerns addressed not only to election security, but also to ensuring
that voting is easier and more accessible for all Americans.

Chairwoman Clarke. I thank you for your testimony, Mr.
Rosenberg. Finally, I recognize Mr. Masterson to summarize his
statement for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW MASTERSON, PRIVATE CITIZEN, FORMER SENIOR
CYBERSECURITY ADVISOR, CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
SECURITY AGENCY, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Masterson. Thank you, Chairwoman, and thank you,
Ranking Member Garbarino and Members of the committee, for the
opportunity to testify today. I will skip the introduction as I
appreciate the Chairwoman and Ranking Member providing my
background I led the work in election security at CISA.
The 2020 election placed election officials at the center
of National attention in a way that we haven't seen for
decades, if ever. A record turnout and a smooth Election Day
validated election officials' incredible work. Yet despite
their heroic work, election officials are facing threats
against themselves and their systems, their workers, and even
their families. This environment is not sustainable and
additional support must be provided to these election officials
to ensure their safety and the security of our elections.
Recently, myself and a group of students at Stanford
published a report on the most pervasive threats facing
election officials and the steps we can take to mitigate those.
Those threats included physical threats against election
officials, the undermining of confidence in election results
through a now well-defined playbook available to both foreign
and domestic actors, and inconsistent funding and a lack of
governance structures around elections' information technology.
There are mitigations to these threats that can empower
election officials, further secure our systems, and offer
voters the types of evidence needed to reject this mis- and
disinformation. These mitigations fall into 3 broad categories:
Funding, election officials security, and systems security and
resilience.
First, we must fund elections consistently at the State,
local, and Federal level. Regular and consistent investment in
our elections is needed. A shared funding structure should be
implemented in which all levels of government pay for their
portion of each election.
Second, we must ensure the physical security of election
officials, offices, and staff across the country. The recent
creation of the DOJ Election Threats Task Force is an important
step, but much more must be done. First, the DOJ Election
Threats Task Force should provide data after each Federal
election regarding the scope and scale of threats against
election officials and the workers. Second, in order to ensure
comprehensive data is collected, analyzed, and shared local and
State law enforcement should be required to share activity
directed against election officials and workers with Federal
law enforcement in their State. Third, penalties must be
increased against those who threaten election officials,
workers, or their families. Congress and State legislatures
should pass laws offering harsher penalties for threats or acts
of violence against election officials or workers. Finally,
CISA should offer training and guidance on physical security
and doxing prevention measures that election officials can
take, utilizing the protective security advisors, like those in
Region 2 that the Ranking Member mentioned, in order to train
election officials.
Finally, we must continue to improve the cyber resilience
of American elections. This starts by encouraging States to
implement precertification audits of paper ballots. Second,
CISA and the EI-ISAC should provide more proactive, scalable
service to election officials, like Crossfeed as was mentioned
by the Ranking Member, a service that was provided in 2020.
This should include expanded use of Crossfeed in both scope and
scale, remote incident response services, and increased
endpoint protection and email protections for mid-to-small
counties who struggle to protect their systems.
Third, we must better define the Federal roles and
responsibilities in elections. Congress should further clarify
the roles of CISA and the EAC, making CISA the technical lead
for election security while empowering the EAC to better focus
on its other election administration missions. Creating well-
defined responsibilities for CISA and the EAC will allow both
agencies to fully achieve their core missions, eliminating the
on-going Federal infighting regarding roles and
responsibilities, and creating clear lines of communications
for election officials on these issues. This should include
moving the Federal voting system testing and certification
program to CISA.
Third, CISA and EI-ISAC in partnership with election
officials should establish core cybersecurity baselines for
election offices. These baselines should include, at a minimum,
required multifactor authentication for all critical systems, a
move of all election websites to .gov, increased access
controls, more efficient and effective patch management, and
proper network segmentation of election networks away from
State and local county networks. In establishing these
baselines, CISA should leverage its on-going support to
election offices to inform the scope and scale of
implementation of these baselines, as well as additional steps
election offices can be taking to secure their infrastructures.
Our elections are imperfect. They are massive, messy,
underfunded, and under-resourced. But they are accurate,
secure, accessible, and fair because of the tireless work of
State and local election officials. The only response to the
on-going threats against our democracy is a sustained
investment in those working hard to protect it.
I appreciate the time and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Masterson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Matthew Masterson
January 20, 2022
Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and Members of the
committee, the 2020 U.S. election was unprecedented in American
history. While many have detailed what went wrong (or right), reports
have largely overlooked the group most impacted by these changes: State
and local election officials. Election officials anticipated problems,
quietly pivoted with each changing health measure and court case, and
faced many of the worst repercussions of viral and inflammatory
misinformation. In the end the 2020 election was secure and accurate
because of their hard work and commitment to our democracy.
Trust in American elections is under attack from abroad and at
home. The Federal Government's support framework, while improved,
remains challenged to effectively ameliorate the issues election
officials face. The threats are real and evolving. Immediate support
and investment must be provided to these officials in advance of the
upcoming mid-term elections and the 2024 Presidential election.
threats to election processes \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ This testimony is based in large part on a Stanford Internet
Observatory research paper: ``How to Secure American Elections When the
Losers Won't Accept They Lost'' by Matt Masterson, Jennifer Depew,
Katie Jonsson, Shelby Perkins, Alex Zaheer.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Election officials' capacity to do their jobs is degraded by
physical threats and broad distrust fomented by bad-faith actors.--
These threats undermine officials' ability to conduct critical
community outreach, and could contribute to brain-drain at a time when
competence at the local level is needed most.
2. The playbook for undermining confidence in election results is
well-defined and available for foreign and domestic influence agents.--
The 2020 election prominently featured attempted election interference
from foreign and domestic actors. Influence agents are emboldened by
2020, while defenders of election integrity are under-resourced and
uncoordinated, leaving them vulnerable to repeated tactics.
3. Inconsistent funding and lack of governance structures around
elections IT continue to perpetuate vulnerabilities.--Despite marked
progress since 2016, emerging threats such as ransomware continue to
expose critical election systems to crippling attacks. In defending
election systems, under-resourced local governments face off daily
against well-funded nation-state adversaries, a disparity that
continually exposes election systems to attack.
recommendations
In light of the aforementioned threats, and others yet to come,
below is a set of concrete and actionable recommendations to shore up
election security and ensure election confidence. Each of these
recommendations will require coordination by relevant stakeholders at
the local, State, and Federal level.
Fund elections consistently at the State, local, and Federal level
Every year, State and local election officials across the country
struggle to obtain the funding needed to run elections. State and local
governments often push aside pleas in favor of issues perceived as more
immediate, passing over electoral needs that are commonly viewed as
seasonal despite elections that are run several times a year in most
jurisdictions. Almost every election official is commonly asked ``What
do you do the other 364 days a year?'' when discussing the operational
challenges of their work.
Securing election infrastructure is a matter of National security.
This is precisely why the Department of Homeland Security designated
election systems as critical infrastructure in 2017. Elections should
be funded commensurate with their status as critical infrastructure,
with all levels of government ensuring regular and consistent funding.
A shared funding structure should be implemented in which all levels of
government pay for their portion of each election. This practice is
done locally in several States and is sometimes referred to as ``charge
backs'' or the ``ballot real estate'' model. The idea is that each
jurisdiction that appears on a ballot in any given election is charged
for its portion of that election. For instance, if an election has a
Congressional race, State house race, mayor's race, and county
commissioner race, then the Federal Government would pay for the cost
of the House race, State government for the cost of the State house
race, city government for the mayor's race and the county for the cost
of the commissioner's race. This would ensure consistent and regular
funding of elections, with each level of government paying its share of
the cost.
Congress should establish an elections fund, administered by the
U.S. Election Assistance Commission (EAC), that State election
officials can draw down from based on the expense to run Federal
elections in their State. States should be required to pass the
majority of the money down to their local officials to cover the
additional costs of running Federal elections. This funding structure
will incentivize deliberative, planned investment that allows for risk-
based decision making and funding for human capital, systems
acquisition, and processes to ensure sustainability of those systems
over time.
Ensure the physical security of election officials, offices, and staff
across the country
Many State and local election officials faced threats of violence
due to mis- and disinformation about the 2020 election. In many cases,
officials who reported these threats received little to no support from
local, State, or Federal law enforcement officials. Many of the threats
were deemed not serious or imminent enough to necessitate action.
More must be done to protect the health and safety of election
officials and election workers, including private-sector employees who
support elections. The recent creation of an Election Threats Task
Force at the Department of Justice (DOJ) is an important and
encouraging first step. The following steps to further protect election
officials:
1. Publication and use of threat data.--The DOJ Election Threats
Task Force should provide data after each Federal election regarding
the scope and scale of threats against election officials and workers.
This report should include the number of complaints, number of credible
threats, number of acts of violence and number of prosecutions for
those threatening election officials or workers. This data would
support efforts at the State and local level to prioritize funding for
physical security, shore up gaps in security and better diagnose on-
going problems. In addition, based on this data, the DOJ task force, in
coordination with CISA, should release guidance on best practices for
election officials, counties, States, and the Federal Government to
better protect those who run elections.
2. Increased information sharing regarding threats.--From our
interviews with election officials, it became clear that Federal,
State, and local law enforcement are not sufficiently coordinated
regarding the scope, scale, and regularity of threats against election
officials. This is particularly concerning because existing structures
are in place, including State fusion centers, to facilitate this
information sharing. In order to ensure comprehensive data is
collected, analyzed, and shared, local and State law enforcement should
be required to share activity directed against election officials and
workers with Federal law enforcement in their State. In return, Federal
law enforcement should regularly report back to State and local
officials regarding the activity in their jurisdiction with full
transparency regarding any actions taken, including if investigations
have been initiated.
3. Penalties.--Congress and State legislatures should pass laws
offering harsher penalties for threats or acts of violence against
election officials. Following the 2020 election, there have been few
consequences for those who threatened election officials. Any potential
violence against election officials or workers should be treated as a
threatened attack on the process and democracy itself, and should
result in criminal liability.
4. Privacy.--Many threats against election officials and staff
directly target their homes and families. More must be done to protect
their private information from would-be malicious agents. Many States
have passed laws that protect the identity of certain subsets of
registered voters. These categories typically include law enforcement
officers, judges, and domestic abuse victims. Election officials should
be included in this category to ensure that their personal information
is not readily available publicly.
5. Prioritizing protection of election officials and workers.--
State and local law enforcement should treat threats against election
officials as credible. This may mean increasing patrols around offices
and residences, as well as further investigation into additional
threats. Because State and local law enforcement often lack sufficient
funding, State legislatures and county governments should provide
additional funding to support the protection of election offices and
workers, especially during and after election periods.
6. Physical security and doxxing training.--CISA should offer
training and guidance on physical security and doxxing prevention
measures. CISA has protective security advisors (PSA) located across
all 50 States to advise on physical security matters. These PSAs have
done a great job working with local election officials to evaluate the
physical security posture of local offices and storage facilities. PSAs
should offer additional support and training to help election officials
protect themselves and their staff from doxxing and physical harm away
from the office.
Encourage States to implement paper-based pre-certification audits
No single improvement to the security of elections was more
important in 2020 than the wide-spread use of auditable paper ballots.
Approximately 95 percent of votes cast in the 2020 election were on an
auditable paper ballot, up from just over 85 percent in 2016. In
Georgia, election officials could hand-audit ballots to show the
accuracy of the election results. In Maricopa County, Arizona, the
election officials conducted the State-required public hand audit by
bipartisan recount boards. The results of this hand audit affirmed the
results of the election in the county.
States should prioritize implementation of paper ballot audits that
are completed before vote counts are certified. These audits should
offer a transparent, bipartisan, and repeatable process by which the
results of the election as tabulated by the voting systems can be
evaluated through the review of the paper ballots.
In pursuing better, more efficient pre-certification audits, States
should also continue to pursue evidence-based elections. This means
implementing systems, processes, and procedures that maintain
transparent records of the integrity of the election. An audit is only
as good as the integrity of the artifacts to be audited. For elections,
this means that chain of custody of the ballots and proper ballot
manifests are imperative to the trustworthiness of the audit. As part
of the implementation of these post-election audits, States should
support local election offices in implementing consistently documented
chain of custody and ballot tracking procedures across the State.
Reform the Federal voting system certification process
The process for voting system testing and certification must be
reformed. Election officials have been forced into maintaining outdated
and unsupported systems for longer than their expected lifespan in part
because the EAC process has not evolved to support items like component
certification, regular patching of systems and further deployment of
commercial off-the-shelf technology. While EAC commissioners have
committed to the pursuit of these items as part of the roll-out of the
Voluntary Voting System Guidelines (VVSG) 2.0, the passage of VVSG 2.0
as the same monolithic standard as the prior VVSG makes it unlikely
that the process can be reformed enough to be responsive to the needs
of election officials.
Congress should further clarify the roles of EAC and CISA in
elections, making CISA the technical lead while allowing the EAC to
better focus on its other election administration missions. Both EAC
and CISA have limited resources and capabilities, so further
clarification of roles and responsibilities would allow each agency to
best use its time and money in support of the election community. CISA
is the more technically capable organization and should be formally
designated as the lead Federal agency for the physical and
cybersecurity support of election systems and officials. This should
include moving the Federal Voting System Testing and Certification
Program to CISA. The National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) should remain in its HAVA-created role as technical consultant
on the development of the VVSG.
The EAC should be empowered to focus on all other aspects of the
election process beyond cyber and physical security issues, allowing it
to build out its clearinghouse function, advancing data collection and
research efforts, and continuing to disperse election grants provided
by Congress. Creating well-defined responsibilities for CISA and EAC
will allow both agencies to fully achieve their core missions,
eliminating the on-going Federal infighting regarding roles and
responsibilities and creating clear lines of communication for election
officials on these issues.
In addition, regardless of who runs the program, the Federal
testing and certification process should be reformed to address the
marketplace challenges it is creating:
1. Already certified voting systems running unsupported operating
systems should be decertified.--Because these systems are
running unsupported operating systems, they are unable to be
patched to remediate known vulnerabilities. Most of these
systems cannot simply be updated because they lack the memory
or processing power to run updated operating systems. Many
election officials running these systems have expressed the
need to replace them, but have not received the necessary
funding to do so. Voting system vendors and election officials
should be notified of pending decertification and should be
given enough time to upgrade or replace their systems.
2. VVSG 2.0 should be implemented rapidly.--This would mean that
all new systems submitted to the certification program must be
VVSG 2.0-compliant to receive certification by a date
established by the EAC in the near future. The certification
program should avoid using metrics like accreditation of the
voting system test laboratories to conduct VVSG 2.0 testing or
certification of the first voting system to VVSG 2.0 as metrics
for sunsetting VVSG 1.0 and 1.1. In setting a date, the
certification program should publish a definition of what
constitutes a new voting system and make clear that this
definition will be enforced. In the past, vendors have avoided
certification to the newest standards, such as VVSG 1.1, by
modifying already certified systems, allowing them to be tested
to the older standard in perpetuity.
3. The certification program must incentivize patching of voting
systems.--Currently, the certification process disincentivizes
regular patching of systems by requiring testing (sometimes
extensive) of most software updates. This causes voting system
vendors to hold off on pursuing modifications to systems until
they reach a critical mass of changes that justify the
financial and time costs associated with certification.
Instead, the certification program should revise its policies
to allow vendors to attest to their own testing of critical
patches on already certified systems. In allowing for vendor
attestation, the certification program should require the
voting system test laboratories to review and approve vendor
testing documents prior to approval of the patch. This process
should be expedited to allow for timely deployment of patched
systems to the field, recognizing that the majority of voting
systems cannot be remotely patched. This process would be
separate from the existing de minimis change process, which
requires no additional testing by the vendor or test lab to
receive approval.
Provide election offices more scalable and proactive services through
CISA and EI-ISAC
Given the vast and decentralized nature of election administration
in the United States, the challenge for CISA and the EI-ISAC is
immense. How do you ensure that information, support, and services
reach the smallest town in Wisconsin or the most remote county in
Montana? Even if you reach those places, how do you make the
information and services relevant and usable for the election official
in Jackson County, Ohio? CISA and the EI-ISAC have made incredible
progress on this challenge since the 2016 election. All 50 States,
Washington, DC, and the 4 territories joined the EI-ISAC; intrusion
detection sensors were deployed on election infrastructure across all
50 States; thousands of State and local offices participated in
tabletop exercises; hundreds of cyber hygiene scans were conducted; and
virtually every State received a penetration test.
Even with the success of these offerings, the scalability of the
services remains a challenge. Due to resource constraints, CISA can
only perform a finite amount of on-site vulnerability assessments of
all critical infrastructure, let alone elections. In addition, many
election offices do not have the necessary IT resources to benefit from
some of the more in-depth services. Over the last 4 years, CISA has
learned the intricacies of the election sector and the systems that
support it. It has worked to prioritize the services that are most
useful, and it has developed new and scalable services, such as remote
penetration testing, to better serve the community.
In 2020, CISA recognized that it needed to be more proactive in its
work with election officials. In collaboration with the Defense Digital
Service, the agency developed and released a tool called Crossfeed,
which is used to gather information about vulnerabilities on public-
facing systems supporting critical infrastructure. Crossfeed
proactively collects data through a variety of open-source tools,
publicly-available resources and data feeds, and can operate in a
``passive'' mode where it relies on unintrusive data-gathering methods.
Moving forward, CISA and the EI-ISAC should learn from the success
of Crossfeed to identify and provide additional proactive, scalable
services to local election offices. Both entities have built a level of
trust with election officials that means they can afford to be more
aggressive in the types of support provided. For example:
1. CISA should expand the Crossfeed program.--Recently CISA
announced the continuation of Crossfeed. This is an important
first step. The agency should expand the use of the program to
include offering all 50 States, the District of Columbia, and
the territories active participation in the program with the
goal of proactive monitoring of publicly-available aspects of
State and local offices' infrastructure. This should also
include the use of Crossfeed on other election-specific
technology, such as proactively searching for voting systems
that may be inadvertently connected to the internet. Further,
CISA should offer the service to election vendors, campaigns,
and other election-related entities.
2. CISA should offer remote hunt and incident response to election
offices.--Like on-site vulnerability assessments, CISA hunt and
incident response services have traditionally involved on-site
deployment of responders to an office. This makes both services
extremely labor-intensive and difficult to scale. CISA has
piloted some remote incident response capabilities in the past,
and it is time to expand this effort along with proactive
network hunt capability.
3. EI-ISAC should expand its endpoint protection program.--
Throughout 2020, EI-ISAC worked with some State and local
offices to pilot endpoint protection for their offices. This
pilot proved to be useful for both the election officials and
EI-ISAC as it worked to gain greater insight into the scope of
activity targeting election infrastructure. This program should
be expanded to more jurisdictions, with a focus on medium-to-
small localities that lack the same or similar capabilities and
would benefit most from these services.
4. EI-ISAC should offer cloud-based email as a service to local
election offices.--Email security is one of the largest risk
areas for local election offices. Many continue to run outdated
and unpatched email servers with little ability to upgrade and
maintain them. EI-ISAC should partner with Microsoft, Google,
or other large cloud-based email providers to explore
implementation of email as a service for local election offices
and county governments. For counties that are unable or
unwilling to implement a State-based solution, the EI-ISAC
could be a viable solution from a trusted partner.
5. EI-ISAC should provide a managed solution for multi-factor
authentication (MFA).--Many election offices continue to
struggle to implement MFA across their systems. While there are
a lot of MFA solutions available in the marketplace, many
election offices are unable to implement MFA because of
outdated legacy systems and lack of vendor support. EI-ISAC
should work with State and local offices to understand the full
scope of the challenge and coordinate with a commercial
provider to offer a managed solution for local offices to
implement MFA on general office systems. In providing this
service, EI-ISAC should offer technical support and resources
for MFA implementation in existing election legacy systems. In
addition, EI-ISAC should partner with common election system
vendors to make it easier to implement MFA, as well as
encourage these vendors to implement MFA themselves. Election-
specific systems may be harder to include in this effort
because of strict requirements around certification and
implementation.
Mandate reporting of election cyber incidents to CISA and the FBI
Improved and increased information sharing regarding election cyber
incidents was an incredibly important development for the protection of
the 2020 election. Federal, State, and local officials worked together
to understand possible incidents and support response efforts in
unprecedented ways. Moving from distrust seeded by the fallout of the
2016 election to this level of partnership is a tribute to the
professionalism and commitment of State and local officials.
Building on this progress, Congress should require State and local
election offices and private-sector election providers to report cyber
incidents to CISA and the FBI. This is a necessary step for two main
reasons. First, CISA and the FBI have no ability to mandate this type
of reporting themselves. While the vast majority of possible incidents
in 2018 and 2020 were shared with the Federal Government, some were not
shared with either the Federal Government or State officials. Time is
of the essence during any cyber incident, but even more so with
elections as officials work against a hard deadline and with limited
resources. Required reporting will ensure timely and coordinated
response from all levels. Second, given the sophisticated and
persistent nature of the threats against elections, ensuring the
Federal Government has a full picture of the activity out in the field
is critical to providing a whole-of-Government response to officials.
The full capability of the Federal Government can only be brought to
bear to protect election systems when the agencies charged with support
of their defense have full visibility into the tactics, techniques, and
indicators of compromise employed by adversaries.
Establish minimum cybersecurity baselines for State and local election
offices and election vendors
In July 2021, the White House issued a ``Memorandum on Improving
Cybersecurity for Critical Infrastructure Control Systems.'' The memo
pushes Federal agencies to work more collaboratively with private-
sector companies that own and operate critical infrastructure systems
to advance basic cyber practices. The memo requires agencies and the
private sector to jointly establish voluntary guidance for the
cybersecurity of critical infrastructure systems.
CISA, the Government Coordinating Council (GCC) and the Sector
Coordinating Council (SCC) should work together to publish a set of
minimum cybersecurity practices that all election offices and companies
should adopt. These practices should recognize that the majority of
U.S. election jurisdictions are mid-sized to small counties, cities,
and townships that lack sufficient funding or IT support. We recommend
starting with the NIST cybersecurity framework and adding or
emphasizing the following:
1. Create and Maintain an Inventory of Assets.--For many election
offices, items like patch management and incident response are hindered
by a lack of understanding of what systems and software the office owns
and operates. Election offices should create and maintain an
enterprise-wide inventory list with up-to-date information on system
type and version.
2. Require Multi-factor Authentication.--All critical systems,
including business systems like email and voter registration access
portals, should require MFA for all users.
3. Ensure Network Segmentation.--All local election networks should
be properly segmented from each other and other county networks. Proper
segmentation greatly reduces the ability for malicious actors to access
or impact election networks after compromising another county
department or system.
4. Maintain Access Control.--All election-related systems should
follow the rule of least privilege. This means that only those that
need access to a system should be given access, and only the access
they need to accomplish their work. This should be applied to vendors
and staff alike.
5. Utilize Patch Management.--Implementing a patch management
program reduces the likelihood of an organization having a
cybersecurity incident particularly as a result of commodity malware.
6. Move to .gov.--All State and local election websites should be
moved to a .gov domain name. This is important for both security and to
help combat mis- and disinformation, as .gov domain names are
recognized as trusted government websites. CISA is offering .gov
domains for free and is scaling up support to help States and
localities move their websites over.
Centralize election IT infrastructure at the State level
With the passage of the Help America Vote Act (HAVA) in 2002, many
States took on much more responsibility for election administration.
HAVA's requirement for the creation of State-wide voter registration
databases and requirement for the establishment of a chief State
election official gave election leadership to several States that
previously had little or no role in the administration of elections.
For many of these States, it forced a partnership between the State and
localities that administered elections that never existed before. As
States worked to implement HAVA, many experienced pushback, and even
outright hostility, from localities that previously had sole
responsibility for administering elections.
In time, local and State election offices have largely worked
through those challenges and established defined roles and
responsibilities for the administration of elections, including voter
registration databases. Some States took full control, running top-
down, State-wide voter registration databases. Others left control
largely in the hands of the localities, serving simply as an aggregator
of data at the State level, running bottom-up registration databases.
Still, others have a hybrid system with a mix of top-down and bottom-up
characteristics. Over time, these lines were further blurred with
States taking on additional responsibility for military and overseas
voters, with many beginning to offer sample ballots, voter look-up
tools, and ballot tracking.
The 2016 election permanently changed the threat landscape for
elections. Russia, a nation-state adversary, was able to research,
remotely target and, in a small number of cases, access election
systems. This change in threat level must be met with a change in
governance structure at the State and local level. Since HAVA, States
have proven themselves capable of supporting elections by handling more
responsibility for the administration and corresponding infrastructure
of elections. In most cases, compared to local governments, States
possess significantly greater budgets, staff, and capabilities to
protect from, detect, and recover from cyber attacks against election
infrastructure. Recognizing this, we recommend the following steps.
1. Move to top-down voter registration systems.--In many cases, the
decentralized nature has served election administration well.
It has created flexibility for local election officials to
creatively solve challenges unique to their county or township.
However, voter registration systems are among the areas of
greatest risk, according to a risk assessment release by CISA
in 2020. Bottom-up States in particular have an increased
attack surface and more risk to manage.
It is time for States to take on the full responsibility of HAVA
and move to top-down voter registration systems. Local election
offices should not be asked to bear the responsibility of
managing and securing these increasingly complex and important
election systems. This move will also free up much-needed
resources for local election offices to spend on other areas of
election security and administration. A move to top-down voter
registration across all States also will create an opportunity
for the community to work collaboratively with CISA to create
guidelines and new methods for securing and auditing voter
registration systems, something that is difficult to do now
because of the diversity of systems and infrastructure among
county systems.
2. Provide State-managed email accounts.--Many cyber incidents
begin through the compromise of a local email account that is
used to compromise other systems. A substantial number of
localities maintain their own email servers. In many cases,
this results in the administration of an email server within
the county, sometimes by the local election office itself. In
other cases, the local election office is left without any
email support and is forced to use its own email account,
sometimes resulting in the use of personal email accounts.
States should utilize existing infrastructure to offer local
election offices their own email accounts through the State,
including cloud-based email services that the State is already
using for its own email systems. If State-managed email
accounts can't be offered, States should offer localities
access to Microsoft or Google cloud-based email services. Both
of these companies have offered additional protections and
default secure configurations to election customers, and would
greatly lower local offices' risk profile.
3. Broaden implementation of cyber navigator programs.--Following
the 2016 election, State election officials and their IT leads
quickly came together to evaluate risk, strategize on
mitigations and assess next steps in better defending their
infrastructure. As they secured their own systems, State IT
leads knew that the greatest risk rested across the machines
maintained by counties, townships, and cities that are actually
responsible for running elections. Most recognized that State-
level investment in local support would be necessary to
properly manage the new risk environment. To shore up
capability gaps at the local level, Illinois implemented a
program dubbed the ``Cyber Navigator Program'' that provided
State-funded IT leads to help localities evaluate risk posture
and implement a checklist of steps to improve security and
resilience. Several States, including Florida and Minnesota,
implemented similar programs. Iowa took a similar approach,
partnering with State and county IT leads to help local
auditors secure election systems. This included engagement with
the Iowa National Guard as well as cross-county support to
ensure lesser resourced auditors received services and support.
Moving forward, more States should implement similar State-
funded programs to ensure that all county election offices have
consistent and reliable IT support before and during elections.
Support good-faith security research and vulnerability assessments
Since the passage of HAVA and wide-spread adoption of electronic
voting systems, security researchers from academia and industry have
focused their attention on the vulnerabilities in those systems. The
quality of the relationship between the research community and election
community has ebbed and flowed from highly contentious to begrudging
respect.
Following the 2020 election, as election officials and industry
were besieged with claims of rigging and hacking, security researchers
saw their work distorted in pursuit of untoward goals. In an effort to
defend both their work and the security of the 2020 election,
researchers spoke out with one voice, making clear that ``[m]erely
citing the existence of technical flaws does not establish that an
attack occurred, much less that it altered an election outcome'' and
calling the claims ``technically incoherent.'' There is an opportunity
now for these two groups to find common ground and support each other
in improving both the security of election systems and confidence in
the process. This can be done in several ways:
Adopt Vulnerability Disclosure Policies (VDP)
A strengthened relationship between election administrators and
security researchers should start with States opening to good faith
research through further adoption of vulnerability disclosure policies
(VDP). These policies provide a safe haven for security researchers to
find vulnerabilities in public-facing election systems and report them
to the State election office for remediation. The Ohio Secretary of
State's office was the first election office to implement VDP, with
Iowa following closely behind. Other States have since announced their
intention to implement a VDP. In addition, some of the largest voting
system providers have announced creation of their own VDP, with four of
the largest vendors currently offering VDPs. In 2020, CISA released a
``Guide to Vulnerability Reporting For America's Election
Administrators'' that focuses on empowering election officials to
create and implement their own VDP programs. VDPs not only build a
bridge between the two communities, but also provide under-resourced
election offices access to top-level security assessments at
essentially no charge.
Moving forward, all 50 States and election technology providers
should implement VDPs for their organizations. The VDPs should follow
industry standard practices and include legal safe harbor to authorize
testing and protect researchers. States should also consider requiring
election system providers to have an existing VDP in order to be
eligible to receive contracts. In addition, EI-ISAC should work with
its executive board to create and implement a VDP that allows
researchers to report vulnerabilities in local election infrastructure
to the EI-ISAC, which would then notify the appropriate vendor or
office. In serving in this role, EI-ISAC should work with the local
election offices to determine the validity and severity of a report, as
well as possible mitigation strategies. EI-ISAC should commit to
collecting and reporting on the amount and types of vulnerabilities
reported, and work with CISA to publish guidance on remediation of the
most common vulnerabilities.
Expand open-ended vulnerability assessments
Starting in 2019, CISA began offering election system providers
access to Critical Product Evaluations. These are open-ended
vulnerability assessments of the submitted system that is part of
critical infrastructure. Testers tear apart systems looking for
hardware, firmware, and software vulnerabilities, issuing a report when
finished of the discovered vulnerabilities and their severity. This
type of open-ended vulnerability assessment has been discussed for
decades, but has never taken hold in part because the Federal testing
and certification process is not properly structured for it.
In the aftermath of the 2016 election, DEF CON, the world's largest
hacking conference, created a Voting Village, self-described as ``an
open forum to identify vulnerabilities within U.S. election
infrastructure and to consider mitigations to mitigate these
vulnerabilities.'' The Voting Village has exposed a broader range of
security experts to the inner workings of election systems and brought
election officials into the room with those experts to understand the
mindset of a hacker. The village has also elevated election system
security as the National security issue that it is. However, since its
inception, the Voting Village has been controversial with some within
the election community because of its unwillingness to provide context
around the procedural controls that exist in elections. In addition,
some organizers of the Voting Village openly mocked election officials,
going so far as to describe them as ``f--ing luddites.''
Bridging the gap between election officials and the security
community through open vulnerability assessments is critical to
continuously improving the security of elections. Doing so will
increase the number of third-party experts available with exposure to
election systems, allowing them to credibly affirm and amplify election
officials' debunking of false claims made regarding the security of the
systems.
Moving forward, the following steps should be taken to increase the
exposure of election systems to third-party security research.
1. Expansion by CISA of the Critical Product Evaluation Program.--
For many vendors, this is an important introduction to open-
ended vulnerability assessments and allows the vendor to
understand the level of effort needed to mitigate
vulnerabilities found during open-ended testing. CISA had
robust participation in the evaluation program throughout 2019
and 2020 with many of the largest voting system companies
participating. However, due to interest from other areas of
critical infrastructure and limited capacity, CISA could not
evaluate every system that was requested to go through the
program. CISA should prioritize resourcing to allow any
election system provider to submit its system to the program
and receive an evaluation prior to the 2024 election cycle. In
addition, CISA should continue outreach to private-sector
election system providers to increase the diversity of the
types of systems submitted, including voter registration
providers, election night reporting providers and electronic
pollbooks. While these evaluations are useful for vendors
themselves, making these evaluations public after sufficient
review would significantly improve awareness of potential
product security concerns for election officials looking to
make acquisitions.
2. Private-sector participation in the DEF CON Voting Village.--The
Voting Village has served an important role highlighting the
National security importance of election systems. The Voting
Village is an important forum for voting technology companies
and election officials to engage with the security research
community, but its value is currently limited because of the
lack of new systems made available at the conference. Moving
forward, the Voting Village should work more collaboratively
with industry and election officials to secure relevant
election systems for the conference. This will likely mean
establishing protocols for the village to include vendor
participation and responsible disclosure processes when
vulnerabilities are discovered. This is typical across many of
the villages at DEF CON, including the Aerospace and Healthcare
villages. For their part, election technology providers should
recognize the value that DEF CON participants can bring to
evaluating systems, particularly for systems in development,
and actively participate in the village instead of shunning it
as unproductive.
3. Incorporation of vulnerability assessments into the Federal
certification process.--Whether vulnerabilities are discovered
during CISA's Critical Product Evaluation, at the DEF CON
Voting Village, or through other channels, the ability for the
Federal certification process to intake those vulnerabilities
and work collaboratively to respond to them is critical to
deploying mitigations in the field. Currently, the EAC has no
formal mechanism to intake reporting from independent third
parties regarding voting system vulnerabilities. This leaves
the EAC in the dark and unable to respond to discovered
vulnerabilities. The certification program must create a
process by which it intakes vulnerability reporting for
certified systems and works with vendors and election officials
to respond. In addition, the certification program must reform
its standards development process to nimbly incorporate
vulnerability reporting into the feedback loop in order to
inform revisions to the VVSG.
4. Eliminate legal barriers to security research.--Too often,
especially in the elections space, security researchers are
deterred from testing for or disclosing vulnerabilities due to
fear of legal action. Specifically, Section 1201 of the Digital
Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) and the Computer Fraud and
Abuse Act present legal risk for security researchers. While
the U.S. Copyright Office has added security research
exemptions via the triennial rule-making process, the
exemptions are too narrow and only temporary. Congress should
codify strong security research exemptions for the DMCA into
law. Further, Congress should explore similar security research
exemptions for the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, contingent on
a good-faith, harm-minimizing research approach and researchers
making an attempt to disclose any discovered vulnerabilities.
conclusion
While the progress made in the 4 years between Presidential
elections was immense, it was only a beginning. Following the 2020
election, much of election official's energy and attention has turned
to responding to mis- and disinformation. This is understandable given
the scope and volume of mis- and disinformation they faced throughout
2020 and since, but could result in underappreciating the resources or
attention necessary to improve the security of their systems. In an
environment where the loser of an election may not accept the result no
matter the margin of victory, the ability to show the resilience and
security of the process is more critical than ever. Continuously
improving security measures, alongside better tools to fight mis- and
disinformation as it arises, are the keys to building confidence in
future elections.
For the foreseeable future, election administrators will be in the
spotlight, forced to deal with advanced and persistent cyber threats,
as well as physical threats of violence driven by mis- and
disinformation targeting our democracy. The spotlight is bright and
unrelenting, and more must be done to empower election officials with
the tools to deal with it. The alternative is a world in which the
hard-won progress of the security and accessibility of our elections is
a casualty of a caustic political environment driven by greed and a
thirst for power rather than the higher ideals of our democracy.

Chairwoman Clarke. I thank you and all of today's witnesses
for your testimony. I will remind the subcommittee that we will
each have 5 minutes to question the panel. As I begin, I now
recognize myself for questions.
As I said in my opening, if election security means
anything, it means, No. 1, making sure every voter can cast
their ballot; and, No. 2, that their ballot will be counted.
Mr. Rosenberg, you talked about how politicians have exploited
the perception of low voter confidence as a pretext for laws
that make voting harder, but not more secure. What do you see
as the real threat to voter confidence and how has it changed
since the 2020 election?
Mr. Rosenberg. Well, thank you for that question,
Chairwoman Clarke. The real threat we see is the lies. Because
what happens is the lies create lack of voter confidence. Then
you have those lawmakers who are intent on suppressing the vote
of people of color in order to stay in power, using the surveys
that reflect this so-called lack of public confidence in what
has been called a feedback loop, that is then used to support,
to provide justification, they say, for laws. We have seen it
happen in Georgia, in the passage of S.B. 202, in which, among
other things, it makes it more difficult to apply for and cast
absentee ballots at a time when voters of color were using
absentee ballots more than White voters were using in the 2020
election. Even prohibiting the provision of food and water to
people who are waiting in line when it is known that in
Georgia, for example, Black voters are waiting an average 9 or
10 times longer in line than are White voters. So, it is those
kinds of things that we see are the biggest threats.
Chairwoman Clarke. Well, thank you. Ms. Ramachandran, how
has this misguided notion of a rigged or stolen election
actually jeopardized the security of the people and systems
that run our elections?
Ms. Ramachandran. Thank you so much for that question,
Chairwoman Clarke. This Big Lie that has been spread around the
2020 elections has really endangered our election
infrastructure in a number of ways.
One of the primary ways it has endangered our system is
that it has encouraged and given a boost to this wide-spread
push for these sham partisan reviews. These sham partisan
reviews have multiple times resulted in valuable election
equipment having to be decertified or decommissioned because in
a legitimate election audit, the ballots and the election
equipment stay in the custody of the election officials or a
certified Federal voting system testing laboratory. They are
not handed over unsupervised to partisan outside contractors.
Once that happens, then there is a risk that something
malicious has been inserted into the equipment or that
something has been done to disrupt it, and that is what has led
to some of this equipment having to be decommissioned and
decertified. So, that is a really huge risk that comes from the
Big Lie, the spread of these partisan reviews.
Another risk is that all of this disinformation is leading
to attacks on the election officials and election workers who
have done such a heroic job in providing us with free and fair
elections. Those attacks are causing them to be deterred from
doing their jobs, pushed out, resigning. They are part of our
election infrastructure. They are the personnel that make the
system work.
Then finally, the lie may be leading some small number of
election officials and workers to actually be susceptible to
entreaties that they provide unauthorized access to election
conspiracy theorists. This has happened already a few times in
some small instances in the United States. I mentioned the one
in Colorado. There has been some unauthorized access provided
in Ohio and Michigan, as well.
Chairwoman Clarke. Well, thank you. Mr. Stamos, you have
suggested the need for clear Federal authorities around mis-
and disinformation. I have a bill to do just that, giving CISA
clear authorities to build on efforts like the Rumor Control
website. What more do you think CISA could be doing on mis- and
disinformation?
Mr. Stamos. Thank you, Chairwoman. I think a key function
that we need to have somewhere in the Executive branch is the
ability to understand what kind of misinformation/
disinformation is currently dominating the discussion on-line.
This is not going to be just around elections. Right? We have
the same problems around vaccines. If there is a natural
disaster, we end up with significant disinformation issues. If
we had a plane crash today, a tragedy, there would be
conspiracy theories and disinformation being spread. I think
that is one of the things that Congress should consider is
where should that capability exist?
The capability is really just about understanding what is
going on. But I don't think it is realistic for Health and
Human Services, the FAA, FEMA, for every part of the Government
to have a group that can do the kind of deep social media
analytics that is needed in these kinds of situations, and I
think CISA is probably the place that you want to at least
start.
Chairwoman Clarke. Thank you very much. My time has
elapsed. I now recognize the Ranking Member of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from New York, Mr. Garbarino, for
his questions at this time.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Chairwoman. I appreciate all the
witnesses' testimony so far.
First, I want to start with Mr. Masterson. You have, as we
have talked about with your bio, you have first-hand experience
administering elections at the State level. State and local,
and as you know, State and local election officials play a
tremendous role in facilitating secure elections. On top of
this already complex and burdensome responsibility, officials
in New York are now faced with the difficult task of allowing
non-citizens to vote, thanks to the new mayor, New York City
Mayor Eric Adams' decision to grant more than 800,000 non-
citizens the right to vote in municipal elections.
The New York State constitution is clear. Its citizens are
the ones who have the right to vote. But my question to you is
what are your thoughts about allowing non-citizens the right to
vote in addition to what are your thoughts about how this is
going to affect the election officials and their ability to do
their jobs?
Mr. Masterson. Yes, thank you, Ranking Member. First of
all, it is important to note that for Federal elections non-
citizens cannot register or vote in Federal elections, which I
think is appropriate. Any time election officials are presented
with additional responsibilities that include the use of more
databases, more registration, separate registration activity,
that adds a layer of complexity to their work that needs to be
met both in resourcing and in support. So, any time we talk
about changes like this and looking at sort-of the risk
analysis that applies, we have to understand that the benefits
against what we are asking these election officials to do in an
increasingly complex environment, that is also made more
difficult by the constant need to provide factual information
back out to voters. Right?
So, as decisions like this are made locally, it is our
Federal system at work, a deep understanding of what are we
asking election officials to do, how will they communicate with
the public, what impact could this have on both the
administration and confidence in the election process, is
really, really critical because it is hard work. They have
little resourcing and they are being asked to do more and more.
Mr. Garbarino. Yes, and specifically, you know, municipal
elections, the city council and the mayor only have control
over the city council, but there are not just city council
elections. I mean, there are Supreme Court seats that are up
for election in New York. There are State Court seats, special
elections to fill State and Congressional seats that are held
in the off years--in the odd years. So, you know, what are the
election officials going to have to do? Are they going to have
to create separate ballots? I mean, what kind of, you know,
process is this going to do and how confusing can it be?
Mr. Masterson. Yes, thank you, Ranking Member. I am not
specifically familiar with all the language in the bill, but
any time you are asking for sort-of a separate registration
system, it increases, as you noted correctly, the complexity of
what databases have to be administered, what the registration
process looks like, and how you create that separation, and
then how you are going to create ballots, ballot styles. I
mean, depending on how the jurisdictions administer elections,
you are talking about thousands of ballot styles and ensuring
that the right people get the right ballot styles, all things
that election officials are used to, but layering on these
responsibilities is a challenge. When making changes like this,
understanding the risks that are involved, understanding the
responsibility and the additional burden that is being placed
on the administrators is really important, so that they can do
their job and succeed at it.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate your answer. I know we focus on
your role as an election official. Now I am going to ask a
question about your role at the Election Assistance Commission.
In your report you recommended that Congress reforms the
EAC and designated CISA as the technical lead for elections,
which would allow the EAC to focus on its core mission of
election administration. Can you walk us through how this would
look in practice?
Mr. Masterson. Yes. So, I have obviously spent time at both
agencies and believe deeply in the mission of both agencies,
the EAC and CISA. Right now what you have is sort-of a muddy
waters on sort-of the technical responsibilities with the EAC
administering, for instance, the testing and certification
program and voting systems, providing guidance through their
clearinghouse.
What I would like to see, in order to save valued
resources, I mean, the EAC is small and has limited resources,
CISA much larger, but has a huge mission space, is to really
say, OK, CISA, you are the technical lead. You worry about the
cybersecurity, the infrastructure, physical security, advice,
and guidance. You support through the Elections Information
Sharing and Analysis Center the sharing of threat and risk
data. EAC, literally, you can now focus on everything else:
Grant distribution, best practices around things like poll
worker training, ballot layout. I mean, there is so much more.
So, CISA has the expertise. CISA is out with the election
officials providing thousands of assessments, right, throughout
the year and understands both the maturity, the cybersecurity
maturity of these offices and the risk framework around them.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that. I know my time has
expired, so I will yield back. Thank you, Mr. Masterson.
Mr. Masterson. Thank you, sir.
Chairwoman Clarke. Thank you very much, Ranking Member. The
Chair will now recognize other Members for questions they may
wish to ask the witnesses. In accordance with the guidelines
laid out by the Chairman and Ranking Member in their February 3
colloquy, I will recognize Members in order of seniority,
alternating between the Majority and the Minority. Members are
also reminded to unmute themselves when recognized for
questioning.
The Chair recognizes for 5 minutes the gentlewoman from
Texas, Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Madam Chair, if I could be delayed and
yield to one of the other Members, please.
Chairwoman Clarke. The gentlelady will yield at this time.
I now recognize the gentleman from Rhode Island, Congressman
Langevin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to thank you
for holding this important hearing. I want to thank our
witnesses for their testimony and their insights, very helpful.
If I could, I would like to start with Mr. Masterson.
Mr. Masterson, in your testimony you suggest a number of
statutory baselines for State and local election offices and
election vendors. What is your assessment right now of the
current technical capacity of relevant State and local
stakeholders to implement these kinds of cybersecurity
measures? How can the Federal Government assist to build
technical capacity where it is needed?
Mr. Masterson. Yes. Thank you, Representative. Thank you
for your service and support for cybersecurity work and
challenging us at CISA throughout the election on the work that
we are providing and support we are providing election
officials. I really appreciate it.
The current state is we have come a long way since 2016 and
2017 and the declaration of elections as critical
infrastructure. We see more multi-factor authentication across
election offices. We see more network segmentation and database
security access controls in place. That bore out in 2020 with
the security of the 2020 election.
But the reality is, as you know, sir, well, this is, you
know, not something that you ever finish. Right? It is a
constant and evolving process to secure the systems and on-
going evolving threats.
So what CISA could do is really reach that last mile, those
mid-to-small counties that have little to no IT support, that
are doing the best that they can with the resources they have,
and really identify, No. 1, those baseline practices, get those
in place; and then, No. 2, help them respond to emerging
threats, like we have seen with things like SolarWinds or other
vulnerabilities. Really push that information out and help them
mitigate the vulnerabilities that may be present in their
systems. The way to do that is utilizing their field forces in
combination with something like Crossfeed, which proactively
scans and looks for those types of vulnerabilities, so that
they can alert those jurisdictions you have this, we are here
to support.
Mr. Langevin. Very helpful. Thanks for the insights into
your work at CISA as well.
To all of our witnesses, I want to just turn to election
software supply chain, if I could. Again, all of the witnesses,
what capabilities do State and local entities currently have to
evaluate the security of the software supply chain and voting
infrastructure? Are there opportunities for Congress to support
improvements to those capabilities?
If we could start with Ms. Ramachandran and then work our
way down the line, that would be helpful.
Ms. Ramachandran. Thank you so much for your question.
Unfortunately, State and local election officials don't have a
Federal framework for security standards for election vendors
to rely on to help them ensure that they are choosing vendors
that are following best practices in terms of supply chain risk
management. So, one helpful way for Congress to be helpful in
this would be to either mandate or incentivize rigorous vendor
security standards.
For instance, Congress could limit the use of Federal funds
for elections to those vendors who agree to meet certain
cybersecurity personnel and supply chain best practices. Those
could be promulgated by CISA, for instance, with perhaps the
assistance of the Election Assistance Commission. This would be
one way to really sort-of help beef up and incentivize the
choice of good vendors.
At the same time, States and counties can improve their
procurement processes, negotiate for contracts in which vendors
agree to mitigate supply chain risks.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. The next witness, if you could----
Mr. Stamos. Yes. So, I will just say I think the supply
chain issue is huge overall in cyber right now. I got pulled
into the SolarWinds investigation. Against an adversary of that
level, when you have got somebody as skilled as SVR attackers
who are willing to spend 9 months or a year infiltrating the
supply chain, I think it is extremely unlikely that we can ask
either election manufacturers themselves or State and local
officials to stand up against that level of adversary on their
own.
So, I do think there needs to be a real aggressive move on
collective defense here. I think a ISAC-like model of much more
aggressive kind of openness by the manufacturers and
willingness to work with one another and then to work with the
FBI, CISA, NSA, Cyber Division, and such is going to be
critical because against attackers like that it is an extremely
difficult pull.
Mr. Rosenberg. I defer to Ms. Ramachandran on this issue.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Mr. Masterson. Sir, the only other thing I would add is the
assumption in elections that we shouldn't be reliant on the
performance of or security of the software and hardware
counting the votes, which is why paper ballots and post-
election audits are so critical, that we have that check
precertification to verify the results and to know that the
votes were counted as cast, and so a continued focus. We have
seen great improvement. As was noted, 96 percent of votes cast
in this last election were on auditable paper ballots. A
continued expansion of the use of those paper ballots and
auditing them is critical to this.
Mr. Langevin. Yes, I----
Chairwoman Clarke. The Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes
the gentlewoman from Tennessee, Mrs. Harshbarger.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you
witnesses here today. This question is for Mr. Masterson.
You know, numerous polls recently have shown that an
overwhelming majority of Americans support common-sense
election security measures, like voter ID laws, including 77
percent of Black voters, 78 percent of Hispanic voters. And
many laws because of those things have enacted such laws to
institute those voter IDs.
In your view, would Federal legislation that nullifies or
undermines these popular State election security laws, like
voter ID, increase or decrease election security, sir?
Mr. Masterson. Yes. Thank you, Representative. Voter
confidence, as the research has shown, is a fickle mistress in
that it is largely dependent on how your candidates faired in
the prior election. So, for me, legislation, whether at the
Federal, State, or local level, should be based on, No. 1, what
information, what data can we provide to voters about the
process to increase their understanding and confidence in the
individual security of their vote? No. 2, what do State and
local election officials need?
There is a reason and it is appropriate and it is good that
State and locals run elections, so that they can engage
directly with voters about the protections they put in place.
What support, what information do they need in order to secure
their process and go out and talk directly to their voters
about the steps that they have taken?
So, for me, any legislation based in those principles is
important.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes. Well, you know, cybersecurity, have
you ever watched the documentary ``Kill Chain'' ?
Mr. Masterson. Yes.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. Tell me your thoughts on that when he
delves into voter integrity and cybersecurity world.
Mr. Masterson. Yes. So, I am no movie critic, so I won't
weigh in on the cinematic value, but I think ``Kill Chain''
and, frankly, work that we did at CISA with the security
research community raises an important conversation about how
do we talk about vulnerabilities in critical systems, whether
that is voter registration, electronic poll books, election
night reporting, or voting systems? How do we get that
information in the hands of those who can fix it? Then how do
we talk to voters about that?
Then, second, as I mentioned before, what resilience
measures can we put in place such that if there is actually an
exploitation of a vulnerability, we are able to recover? We are
able to maintain the integrity of the process and ensure that
voters know that their voted was counted as cast. For me, a
large part of that is post-election audits in the form of paper
ballots precertification.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Absolutely. Well, ballot harvesting, what
are your thoughts on that? Do you think Federal legislation
that is proposed now that requires unlimited ballot harvesting
in every State would reduce election integrity and security?
Mr. Masterson. So, each State has their own requirements,
as you know, Representative, around how they manage the
collection and security of ballots. Each State knows what they
need to do to manage that. So, as I look at the security of our
ballots, at the security of our votes, ensuring proper chain of
custody, ensuring proper documentation of that as appropriate.
With that said, in my home State of Ohio we have had both
early in-person voting and vote by mail for a number of years.
The election officials have administered that with integrity
and security. So, I have confidence in their professionalism,
the bipartisan nature of the process to do that well.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well, you know, at a press conference
yesterday President Biden did say, he suggested there could be
problems with the mid-term elections without voting rights
legislation being passed by the Federal Government. So,
therefore, you know, basically what he said was it could easily
be illegitimate in the mid-terms coming up. You know, that
sends a message now that maybe this won't be done properly with
these election officials. What are your thoughts on what he
said?
Mr. Masterson. Just as in 2020, where the election
officials heroically performed in the face of a global
pandemic, record turn-out, and challenges across the board, I
have full faith and confidence in them. Would hope that nobody
would use the question of the legitimacy of our elections for
any, you know, purpose, and understand and work with those
election officials to understand the steps they take to
protect, like they did in 2020.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. Well, thank you, sir. Madam Chair, I
yield back.
Mr. Masterson. Thank you.
Chairwoman Clarke. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes for
5 minutes the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Sheila Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Thank
you for an important hearing and important statement on the
importance of voting integrity and security.
I do my questioning in the backdrop of a tragic and
unfortunate action on the floor of the U.S. Senate when I think
those who voted obviously misinterpreted their responsibilities
in securing democracy. A part of that, of course, is the
infrastructure. I want to begin the brief time that I have for
my questions to at least note that the elections representative
under the past administration clearly made sure that there was
no fraud in the 2020 election of any sizable amount.
In addition, there was no fraud of any sizable amount
indicated by the Republican secretary of state in the State of
Texas. But yet, we have been the victims of a brutal scheme of
purging voters, of establishing new crimes in voting, and a
number of impediments to mail-in voting, impediments to early
voting. So, even aside from the infrastructure, we are rife
with the challenges that we would have.
So, let me indicate for all witnesses, based upon the fatal
attack on the U.S. Capitol on January 6 that demonstrated the
very real potential for failed false narratives about stolen or
rigged elections to incite real-time vigilance, I am sorry,
violence in the weeks before January 6, former President Trump
waged an outright, overt disinformation campaign explicitly
designed to overturn the democratic will of the people.
To the persons on this panel, how have the events of
January 6 and corresponding threats of attacks on other State
capitals or to individual election officials changed the way
you think about election misinformation? That is obviously
technology and the Big Lie narrative. How might this narrative
metastasize over the course of this year and before the
Presidential election?
I would appreciate it if, starting with Ms. Gowri
Ramachandran, if I have it right, starting with you, please, of
Brennan Center, and then Alex, Ezra.
Ms. Ramachandran. Thank you so much for that question. It
is interesting that you note that the misinformation and
disinformation campaign led to violence on January 6, and asked
about how it has metastasized. Since January 6, 2021, we have
seen many election officials also being subject to threats of
violence, harassment, real physical security risks. When
Congress was counting the electoral votes on January 6, they
were, in essence, acting as election administrators, as
neutrally counting up the votes and declaring--you know,
certifying the election.
So, I think it is really a continuous chain of threats of
physical violence against those who are attempting to respect
the will of the voters. It really amplifies the need for
increased physical security protections for election
administrators.
Mr. Stamos. You----
Ms. Jackson Lee. From----
Mr. Stamos. I am sorry.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yes, just proceed. Also emphasize, thank
you, the issue of disinformation technology that can also be
threatening. Thank you.
Mr. Stamos. Yes, Congresswoman. So, something that has
changed and progressed since January 6 is the actions the major
platforms took to finally enforce a bunch of rules that were on
the books, but that were not aggressively enforced before
January 6 has meant there has been a fracturing of the social
media landscape upon which these things happen. So, we have a
really significant growth of alternative platforms that are
much more radical and that have almost no content moderation at
all, as well as a move of a lot of this content to point-to-
point messengers, most notably Telegram, which has both kind-of
small group as well as more amplifying components to it.
So, the net effect of that is that our ability to
understand what is going on is actually much reduced versus
where we were in 2020 because most of these platforms have no
official way to study them and we don't really have the legal
frameworks in place to authorize either the Government or
independent groups like our own to be working on this, which is
why we have been pushing for transparency legislation that I
would love for Congress to take up.
Mr. Rosenberg. I would just add one thing, Congresswoman
Jackson Lee, and it really has to do with your State of Texas,
which has this unfortunate history of intimidation against
people of color when they are voting. S.B. 1, which is Senate
Bill 1, which was passed this year gives partisan poll watchers
virtually untrammeled access to polling places that will
increase the opportunity for that kind of intimidation while,
at the same time, it criminalizes any obstruction with the
partisan poll workers by election judges. That, to me, is a
very serious thing, particularly in light of the events of
January 6.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Those are really strong evidences of an
attack on the election infrastructure and the cyber question,
and I am grateful to the Chairwoman for this hearing, is out of
control and will continue to be if we do not, as you have said,
provide transparency and also some framework for the
utilization during election periods.
Chairwoman Clarke. The Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes--
--
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. I yield back. Thank you.
Chairwoman Clarke. The Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes
the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Clyde.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Madam Chair. The statements that the
November 2020 election was the most secure an election--a
secure election in American history, that, in my opinion, is
the Big Lie.
You know, that is what we heard in my own State of Georgia,
but now we are finding out about massive ballot drop box
stuffing, ballot harvesting happening between 2 a.m. and 5 a.m.
in the morning. Who takes their ballot down and puts it in the
drop box between 2 a.m. and 5 a.m. in the morning?
Where one person has admitted to being paid $45,000 to
harvest 4,500 ballots. That is $10 a ballot. That is only one
person. They brought evidence to indicate that over 240 people
were involved. If they all harvested only 1,000 ballots each
that would be over 240,000 ballots. The 2020 election is called
the most secure in American history. No, I am sorry, but that
is the Big Lie.
So, I have a couple of questions for you now. Ms.
Ramachandran, do you believe that photo IDs used to verify
voter identity increase election security? Just yes or no would
be fine.
Ms. Ramachandran. No, I don't believe photo ID is
necessary.
Mr. Clyde. So, you don't believe that photo ID increases
election security. OK, that is fine.
Mr. Alex Stamos, if you would tell me, do you believe that
photo ID increases election security?
Mr. Stamos. It is not really my area, sir. I am sorry, I
don't have an opinion.
Mr. Clyde. You don't have an opinion on voter identity, OK.
All right.
Mr. Rosenberg, I believe, if I remember correctly, that you
made a comment in your statement that you called photo ID
discriminatory against people of color. So, do you believe that
photo ID increase election integrity or election security,
i.e., used to verify a voter identity?
Mr. Rosenberg. Congressman, there is no evidence of in-
person voter fraud, which is the only thing that voter ID
protects against. In Texas----
Mr. Clyde. OK. So, just yes or no. Yes or no is my question
to you.
Mr. Rosenberg. No, I do not believe it increases security
because there is no evidence of in-person----
Mr. Clyde. OK. All right, thank you. So, you are a no.
Mr. Masterson, do you believe that voter ID increases
election security by verifying a voter's identity?
Mr. Masterson. So, each State has their own identification
requirements for each part of the process, and I trust the
State and local election officials to understand what they need
to do.
Mr. Clyde. OK. So, you don't have an opinion then?
Mr. Masterson. My--I mean, each State sets it and follows
it and my opinion is that they understand what their voters
need and how they have to secure the process for each part of
the process.
Mr. Clyde. OK. All right. OK. Well, that definitely tells
me where each of the witnesses stand when it comes to voter ID.
You know, we use Government-issued picture ID for many, many
things to verify exactly who you are. I couldn't fly here
without showing a valid picture ID to TSA at the airport. In
fact, even to go eat now in Washington, DC, you have to have a
valid picture ID and a vaccination card to show who you are and
the fact that you are vaccinated. The No. 1 thing that our
Constitution protects, and that is one person, one vote, and,
you know, for folks not to think that voter ID is important is
just stunning to me.
But, Mr. Masterson, during your time at CISA you spent most
of it speaking directly to State and local election officials
about their cybersecurity capabilities and what resources they
need to secure their systems. So, what CISA services had the
greatest positive effect on election security in your opinion?
Mr. Masterson. Yes, I appreciate the question,
Representative. In my opinion, those services that we provide
at no cost out to those mid-to-small counties, including some
in your home State, that allow them to identify possible
vulnerabilities in the systems and mitigate those
vulnerabilities, so, cyber hygiene scans, penetration testing,
Crossfeed, those types of services.
Then the biggest benefit that I think we provided was the
establishment of an Information Sharing and Analysis Center,
where all election officials have access to on-going threat and
risk information.
Mr. Clyde. OK. Are there any specific services that CISA
should be looking to expand or end?
Mr. Masterson. Absolutely. I appreciate that,
Representative.
The first is expanding Crossfeed both in scope and scale.
So, scanning for additional connectivity, including working
with voting system manufacturers to look on-line if voting
systems are connected. The second is looking to expand remote
incident response services and email security. How can they
help support better email security working with State election
officials? Because we see email as high-risk and exploited
often in these mid-to-small counties.
Mr. Clyde. OK. Thank you very much. I appreciate that.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Clarke. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes for
5 minutes the gentlewoman from Michigan, Ms. Slotkin.
Ms. Slotkin. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Thanks to all our
witnesses for joining us.
The thing I want to talk about is the threats of violence
to our election officials. That is something that, I am from
Michigan, it has just been the kind of thing that has really
infected our electoral process and I fear is actually
dissuading people for running for clerk, which means people are
just not going to participate in upholding the democracy.
So, the example I have here is Tina Barton. She was a
Republican-elected clerk in Michigan, in one of my bigger
cities of Rochester Hills. She corrected like a clerical error
in 2020 on election night. Leaders of her own party claimed
that there had been wide-spread fraud in Michigan's elections,
and they tried to pressure her into casting doubt on the
results of Michigan's election.
She did the right thing. She literally got on camera and
refused, publicly rebutting this disinformation. But then like
the onslaught came. Right? Just by doing that, doing her job,
her and her husband, who is a sheriff's deputy, began to
receive death threats. They had to upgrade their own home
security systems, thousands of dollars. After 8 years of
serving Rochester Hills, she went on and now she is doing
bigger and better things at the Election Assistance Commission.
But she is not alone. We have clerks from Lansing,
Michigan. Chris Swope, he has received a number of death
threats. It is just very common. The majority of the clerks in
my area are Republican, so this isn't like a partisan, you
know, thing.
So, I just--I would love maybe, Mr. Masterson, starting
with you, you have laid out some things that CISA and DOJ can
do to protect election workers, but just tell us what works.
Like what actually works to protect the people at the ground
level who are on the receiving end of this vitriol?
Mr. Masterson. Yes. Thank you, Representative.
Accountability works. We need to see those who are
threatening election officials, their families, workers,
private industry workers in elections, we need to see them held
accountable. We have seen surprising little indictments or
enforcement against these folks. So, it starts with
accountability.
Then second, additional resources, allowing these election
officials, for instance, and judges, law enforcement officers
get this benefit in many States, but protecting their personal
information. Right? So, there are laws that could be passed to
ensure that doxing is at least difficult or hard to do against
these folks.
So, those are the two things that I think of immediately
that would help.
Ms. Slotkin. Great. Then I think maybe for you and Mr.
Stamos, you know, I have this--we are all talking about how to
make sure that our kids know what is real information and what
is disinformation. I hear all the time from moms like how hard
it is to tell their kids where they can reliably get
information and how to teach them. So, I have this--I have a
bill on digital literacy for kids.
Again, what works? Like what actually--what are the tools
that I should be telling moms to use to help their kids, you
know, tell fact from fiction? Mr. Stamos, do you want to start?
Mr. Stamos. Sure. So, you know, I mean, for the work I do,
when we talk about kids, I think a key thing to work with your
kids is who they are interacting with on-line and to keep kind-
of a presence in their on-line browsing experience. I think
there is way too many, you know, I am a parent of 3. It is
really easy for us to give our kids kind-of free range and
access. That is both risky from kind-of an interpersonal
perspective and some of the things that happen to kids when
they run into bad folks on-line, but then also their
consumption of information. You know, my sons watch a lot of
YouTube and there are a lot of videos there that aren't so
accurate, and we have to have discussions about it.
So, I think just being part of your kid's life and being--
looking over their shoulders is a big thing.
The other issues really are parents, for those of us in
this rough age range, and that is when we talk about the
disinformation around elections and such, there is actually a
real issue about older folks there. For that I don't have any
good solutions.
Ms. Slotkin. Mr. Masterson, any quick comments?
Mr. Masterson. Yes, just the other thing is establishing
the trusted sources, the trusted voices. Secretary Benson in
Michigan has done a tremendous job with this, pushing out
factual information about the elections. But then we need
amplifiers, those trusted voices in communities, including
getting kids involved. We know there are lots of opportunities
at the State and local level across the United States for kids
to serve as poll workers or to volunteer, depending on age. So,
how do we get them into the elections process, into our
democracy early, so that they can understand how it works, have
more confidence, and be participants as they reach voting age?
Ms. Slotkin. Great. Thank you, Madam Chair. My time is up.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Clarke. Thank you. With that, I would like to
thank our expert witnesses for their valuable testimony and the
Members for your questions today. There is still a lot more to
unpack in this space. I want to thank the Ranking Member for
his partnership in, you know, this endeavor.
Let me just say that the Members of the subcommittee may
have additional questions for the witnesses. I ask that you
respond expeditiously and in writing to those questions. The
Chair reminds Members that the subcommittee record will remain
open for 10 business days.
Without objection, the subcommittee today stands adjourned.
Everyone stay safe and stay healthy.
[Whereupon, at 3:18 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
