- STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVES ON THE CYBER INCIDENT REPORTING FOR CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ACT OF 2021

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVES ON THE CYBER
INCIDENT REPORTING FOR CRITICAL INFRA-
STRUCTURE ACT OF 2021

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION, AND INNOVATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 1, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-28

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-175 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2021

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            John Katko, New York
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island      Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Clay Higgins, Louisiana
J. Luis Correa, California           Michael Guest, Mississippi
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri            Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Al Green, Texas                      Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Yvette D. Clarke, New York           Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
Eric Swalwell, California            Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Dina Titus, Nevada                   Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey    Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Val Butler Demings, Florida          Peter Meijer, Michigan
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California    Kat Cammack, Florida
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          August Pfluger, Texas
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey
Ritchie Torres, New York
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Daniel Kroese, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Clerk

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, AND
INNOVATION

Yvette D. Clarke, New York, Chairwoman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York,
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island          Ranking Member
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Ritchie Torres, New York             Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex  Jake LaTurner, Kansas
officio)                         John Katko, New York (ex officio)
Moira Bergin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Austin Agrella, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
Mariah Harding, Subcommittee Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Yvette D. Clarke, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York, and Chairwoman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
The Honorable Andrew R. Garbarino, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................    12
Prepared Statement.............................................    12
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................    21
The Honorable John Katko, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    13
Prepared Statement.............................................    14

Witnesses

Mr. Ronald Bushar, Vice President and Government CTO, FireEye
Mandiant:
Oral Statement.................................................    15
Prepared Statement.............................................    18
Ms. Heather Hogsett, Senior Vice President, Technology & Risk
Strategy for BITS, Bank Policy Institute:
Oral Statement.................................................    21
Prepared Statement.............................................    23
Mr. John S. Miller, Senior Vice President of Policy, and General
Counsel, Information Technology Industry Council:
Oral Statement.................................................    29
Prepared Statement.............................................    30
Mr. Robert Mayer, Senior Vice President, Cybersecurity,
USTelecom:
Oral Statement.................................................    40
Prepared Statement.............................................    42
Ms. Kimberly Denbow, Managing Director, Security and Operations,
American Gas Association:
Oral Statement.................................................    44
Prepared Statement.............................................    46

For the Record

The Honorable Yvette D. Clarke, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York, and Chairwoman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Letter From Claroty............................................     3
Statement of Accenture.........................................     5
Letter From Multiple Associations..............................     6
Letter From NTCA--The Rural Broadband Association..............     8
Statement of the American Public Power Association (APPA) and
the National Rural Electric Cooperative Association (NRECA)..     9

STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVES ON THE CYBER INCIDENT REPORTING FOR CRITICAL
INFRASTRUCTURE ACT OF 2021

----------

Wednesday, September 1, 2021

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Infrastructure Protection,
and Innovation,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 12 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. Yvette D. Clarke [Chairwoman of the subcommittee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Clarke, Jackson Lee, Langevin,
Thompson (ex officio), Garbarino, Clyde, and Katko (ex
officio).
Ms. Clarke. The Committee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure
Protection, and Innovation will come to order. The subcommittee
is meeting today to receive testimony on ``Stakeholder
Perspectives on the Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical
Infrastructure Act of 2021.''
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare the
committee in recess at any point.
So good afternoon, everyone. I would like to thank the
witnesses for participating in today's hearing on the Cyber
Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2021.
Earlier this year, this committee held a joint hearing with
the Committee on Oversight and Reform to examine the SolarWinds
supply chain attack. Our oversight revealed a number of gaps in
Federal authorities, policies, and capabilities that Congress
must address to secure its own networks and better serve its
private-sector partners. But what stood out to me was how lucky
we were that FireEye disclosed that it had been compromised.
Where would we be if they had chosen not to?
At this hearing--at the hearing, excuse me, I asked whether
we would benefit from implementing a mandatory cyber incident
reporting framework. Microsoft President Brad Smith observed
that today information is siloed and that we need one entity in
a position to scan the entire horizon and connect the dots
between all of the attacks or hacks that are taking place.
SolarWinds President Sudhakar Ramakrishna testified having
a single entity to which all of us can report will serve the
fundamental purpose of building speed and agility and argued
that private enterprises, ``should be instructed with reporting
requirements and be made part of this community vision where
public and private sectors can work together on addressing this
issue.''
At the same hearing, FireEye CEO Kevin Mandia testified
about the importance of centralizing intelligence to improve
the speed at which the picture and vision will come together,
end quote. That hearing convinced me that Congress must act to
ensure the cybersecurity and infrastructure security agency
known as CISA receives timely cyber incident information from
critical infrastructure owners and operators. Since then, I
have worked with Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Katko to
draft legislation to establish a mandatory cyber incident
reporting framework at CISA. I would like to thank them both
for their support in this effort.
The draft legislation we are discussing today is the
product of months of dialog with Government officials and
private-sector stakeholders. I want to express my gratitude to
those who worked with the committee to provide feedback on
various drafts of the legislation. We have worked hard to draft
the legislation in a manner that will result in the greatest
security impact for both the Federal Government and the private
sector, and I am proud of the draft we have developed.
Our bill would direct CISA, after a 270-day period with
mandatory windows of stakeholder consultation and comment, to
issue an interim final rule describing, No. 1, which critical
infrastructure owners and operators are subject to the
reporting requirement; No. 2, which cyber incidents need to be
reported; No. 3, the mechanism for submitting reports; and, No.
4, other details necessary for implementation.
Importantly, our bill seeks to establish this new mandatory
reporting program in a way that sets it apart from CISA's
voluntary cyber programs by establishing a new cyber incident
review office and tasking this new office with a discrete
mission of receiving, aggregating, analyzing, and securing
cyber incident reports. The bill also aims to ensure that
covered entities benefit from the new reporting requirement in
three ways: First, our bill requires CISA to publish quarterly
reports with analyzed findings to provide better situational
awareness to its partners. Second, it directs CISA to identify
any actionable threat intelligence that should be shared
rapidly and confidentially with cyber, ``first responders,'' to
prevent or respond to other attacks. Third, it requires CISA to
notify private-sector entities that may have been impacted by
data breaches or intrusions on Federal networks.
I am pleased with the progress we have made on this
legislation but want to be clear that our work is on-going. We
remain open to additional questions and feedback because it is
important to get this right.
In recent days, I have been asked whether we would ask
compliance challenges that certain small businesses may have. I
want to be clear that we do not expect all critical
infrastructure owners and operators to be subject to this
reporting requirement. Rather, we expect it to apply only to a
subset.
That said, I would be certainly--I would certainly be happy
to explore whether we need to add language directing CISA to
provide additional compliance assistance to small businesses
that are determined to be covered entities.
I look forward to hearing additional stakeholder
perspectives on the legislation today.
Before I close and without objection, I would like to
include in the record letters of support from Claroty and
Accenture, as well as a letter signed by 18 associations,
including ITI, the Cyber Threat Alliance, the American Gas
Association, Airlines for America, and the Cyber Coalition,
among others.
[The information follows:]
Letter From Claroty
September 1, 2021.
Rep. Yvette Clarke,
Chairwoman, Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection & Innovation
Subcommittee, House Committee on Homeland Security, Washington,
DC 20515.
Rep. John Katko,
Ranking Member, House Committee on Homeland Security, Washington, DC
20515.
Dear Reps. Clarke and Katko: On behalf of Claroty, a leading
worldwide provider of industrial cyber security solutions with the
mission to drive visibility, continuity, and resiliency in the
industrial economy, it is my pleasure to send this letter in support of
your ``Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of
2021''. By way of background, Claroty's solutions are deployed in
thousands of industrial locations and facilities, in over 50 countries
across all seven continents. We serve hundreds of customers, across
many industrial verticals in critical infrastructure including energy,
water, oil & gas, pipelines, food & beverage, pharmaceuticals, and
other areas of critical manufacturing. Claroty's Operational Technology
(OT) platform has been selected, tested, and validated by the world's
leading industrial automation and cybersecurity vendors, elite system
integrators, and Managed Security Service Providers. We are the only OT
security provider to be certified by the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security's Support Anti-Terrorism by Fostering Effective Technologies
(SAFETY) Act, which was created to encourage the development and
deployment of counterterrorism technologies.
We appreciate the opportunity to provide our thoughts and insights
on your cyber incident reporting legislation. This bill is a very
important step toward building a future where the Federal Government
obtains more actionable information from the private sector on cyber
incidents so that the Internet ecosystem can be made more secure.
As Claroty reviewed the draft legislation, there were several
attributes which led us to the conclusion that this is a measure we
should support:

Creation of the Cyber Incident Review Office Under CISA is
an Important Step to Provide Comprehensive Situational
Awareness of Cyber Incidents.--As part of its creation, the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) was
chartered to provide a wide range of cyber functions and
capabilities across Federal Government, agencies, State, local,
Tribal, territorial governments agencies, and the private
sector. As part of a cyber incident notification bill, we
believe that having a single entity responsible for receiving,
analyzing, and reporting on all significant cyber incidents
would provide a common understanding of cyber situational
awareness that could ensure the U.S. National interest are more
effectively secured, and accomplished in a more timely and
efficient manner. Whether adversaries are sophisticated and
targeted, or unsophisticated and opportunistic, having an
overarching situational awareness under a single entity of the
U.S. Government provides an advantage over fragmented
Departmental views of localized hot spots. The attackers play
to their strengths of only needing to be right once, while
defenders need to right every time. So too does the U.S.
Government need to play to our strength by enabling a unified
understanding of cyber situational awareness to ensure we can
gain insights and provide actionable recommendations. As such,
we agree with your legislation's intent that CISA should be
provided clear regulatory authority to operate and enforce the
cyber incident notification legislation, with full support,
cooperation, and coordination with departments and agencies.
Additionally, there will clearly need to be an assessment
performed regarding resources and funding required to
effectively staff the agency and provide capabilities to ensure
it can successfully execute on this expanded mission. We stand
ready to help you and your colleagues in the Appropriations
committee to help in this regard.

Conduct cybersecurity reviews in the wake of Significant
Cyber Incidents.--One subtlety overlooked about the Oldsmar
water treatment facility breach in February 2021 was the
willingness of law enforcement and plant officials to share
details about the attack vector used to gain access to the
network, as well as the potential consequences to public safety
had controls not been in place to mitigate the attacker's
actions. There is tremendous value in these details for peers
across industries. Compounding the urgency of this narrative is
the news that a California water treatment facility was
breached by remote attackers just weeks earlier in January--
using the same exact attack technique in February during the
Oldsmar attack. Had details about the California attack been
disclosed in a timely manner, that Oldsmar incident may have
been prevented. Your legislation, by requiring a review of
significant cybersecurity incidents is an important step toward
making permanent this concept, which will help reduce the
number of cyber incidents across U.S. critical infrastructure.
If we look at the effectiveness of the National Transportation
Safety Board an exemplar, its successes in driving apolitical
learnings that have resulted in improved confidence and the
reduction of accidents demonstrate that should be replicated in
cybersecurity. As you look to continue making improvements in
your bill, you might consider adding more content to this
section of your bill consistent with Section 5 of Executive
Order 14028 (the section which established a Cyber Safety
Review Board, with the charter of reviewing and assessing
serious incidents against Federal Civilian Executive branch and
non-Federal systems).

The Scope of the Proposed Legislation Appropriately Calls
Out Industrial Economy-Specific Requirements.--As industrial OT
environments such as water treatment facilities and electrical
substation are being connected to the IT network, new risks are
introduced in the physical world that were not risks in the
digital world. We therefore believe that the drafted
legislation appropriately calls out not only risks to
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information
systems, but also addresses the risks to the safety and
resiliency of operational systems and processes. This broader
scope will ensure that industrial enterprises take a more
expansive view of physical and safety risk--not only to the
digital risk affecting IT systems.

The Cyber Incident Notification Period of 72 Hours is in-
line with Established Standards.--During the initial hours of a
potential cyber incident, a significant amount of fact-finding
must occur to validate that the event was truly a malicious
cyber incident and determine its potential scope and impact.
While large enterprises may be able to accomplish this rapidly,
smaller or less well-funded organizations may need to enlist
the support of third parties to effectively conduct these
activities. Establishing the initial reporting period to 72
hours is the general expectation established from the 2018
European Union's General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and
would be an effective benchmarking that most organizations are
using as a standard. Any shorter of a notification period would
run the risk of creating of too many ``false positives'' which
would not be an effective use of Federal Government resources.
As this bill moves through the legislative process, there is one
additional area that you might consider when perfecting the text.
Specifically, we encourage you to look at how this bill might create
disincentives for failure to notify. While the reporting requirements
for covered entities are clear in the proposed legislation, we are
concerned that given the increasing frequency and impact of cyber
attacks, the onus of reporting should be placed on the covered entities
for Significant Cyber Incidents and backed with disincentives for a
failure to comply. At present, organizations are open to substantial
brand and reputational risk for reporting on a cyber incident. The
executive decision is therefore tipped all too frequently in favor of
not reporting cyber incidents and working to quietly fix them behind
the scenes. While focused on privacy, GDPR has driven substantial
adoption of its obligations world-wide due to the very high fines for
violating (=20M or 4 percent of global revenue--whichever is higher)
the breach notification provision. Of note, until the financial
penalties were enacted in the latest version of GDPR, compliance was
halfhearted. At present, many organizations view reporting as having a
reputational and brand impact, and without penalties will decide not to
report incidents. Claroty believes that given the risk to U.S. National
security and interest, we must tip the financial calculus in favor of
notification, that must be done through penalties and enforcement for
organizations that are clearly in violation. We also believe that this
new set of risks will drive Boards of Directors to govern and manage
cyber risk, which will drive funding and action through the
organization more effectively. By creating effective and material
economic disincentives for organizations who do not comply with the
expected outcomes, we tip the scale in favor of reporting. To the end,
we would encourage you to engage those with experience in GDPR
compliance to understand how the financial penalties of that measure
have been received, and then decide whether that might be a valuable
addition to this bill.
My Claroty colleagues and I stand ready to assist you in your
efforts to advance this legislation and look forward to continuing our
strong working relationship with your staff to that end.
Sincerely,
Grant Geyer,
Chief Product Officer, Claroty.
______

Statement of Accenture
August 2021
Accenture supports the Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical
Infrastructure Act of 2021 and welcomes the opportunity to provide our
feedback on the draft legislation. To improve the Nation's
cybersecurity posture, the Federal Government needs to have greater
awareness of cybersecurity incidents across critical infrastructure,
and this draft legislation would achieve that. Accenture commends the
bill drafters for working on a bipartisan basis and for sharing the
draft with industry to solicit feedback and collaboration prior to
introduction.
Accenture believes the draft legislation:

Strikes the right balance by requiring narrowly-tailored
incident information that can help the Federal Government get a
more robust picture of the cyber landscape without
overburdening companies with unworkable and overly broad
reporting mandates. The legislation strikes this balance by
directing CISA to focus on the most critical of critical
infrastructure owners and operators and narrowly tailor the
definition of a covered cybersecurity incident (and excluding
potential incidents). We note that CISA's effort to identify
the appropriate covered entities could be done in harmony with
proposals for it to identify systemically important critical
infrastructure.

Tailors the incident information required to be provided to
CISA, which will help CISA get a broader picture of serious
threats to critical infrastructure by focusing on IOCs and
TTPs. Information, if available, such as behavioral
descriptors, failed/subverted controls or other investigational
artifacts can help CISA better protect other critical
infrastructure owners and operators by looking for trends and
warning others who may be similarly targeted.

Directs CISA to work to harmonize existing regulatory
requirements on incident reporting with the new requirements in
this draft bill, and coordinate with regulators that already
receive cyber incident reports to streamline processes. As the
bill drafters know, not all critical infrastructure sectors are
alike. Some sectors such as financial services are far along in
their cybersecurity maturity and have existing regulations and
practices. For those advanced sectors, it is crucial that CISA
examine existing incident notification expectations that are
both in regulation and in practice to ensure that the reporting
is aligned with the risk profile to the sector as well as the
Nation's security. Other sectors' cybersecurity posture such as
water and agriculture systems are quite nascent. For the
nascent entities, budgeting for, building the capacity for, and
implementing the new requirements and maturing their
cybersecurity posture will take some time. Still others, such
as pipelines within the transportation system and Federal ICT
providers subject to the new cyber Executive Order, have new
incident notification requirements to comply with. It is
imperative that policy makers and CISA take all of this into
account when developing the new requirements to reduce
confusion, complexity, and duplication.

Focuses on a ``prompt'' reporting standard that cannot be
shorter than 72 hours, rather than a 24-hour requirement. Once
anomalistic activity is identified, it can take some time for a
company to verify the intrusion and identify whether it is a
serious enough event to warrant reporting. From Accenture's
experience in working with many companies across critical
infrastructure to respond to such incidents, 72 hours is a
reasonable time frame to be able to determine scope, impact,
and initial TTPs and IOCs and possibly share malware samples
for further analysis. This information would be important to
report the initial understanding of an attack with updates as
new information is learned. Timing shorter than 72 hours would
likely burden CISA with incomplete, unactionable, unhelpful,
and inaccurate information. Accenture commends the bill
drafters for appropriately balancing the Government's need for
information with the affected companies' ability to perform
time-sensitive incident response. It may also be helpful to
outline a periodic update cycle even if there is no new
information, and then a close-out report indicating the
incident is contained and remediated and signaling an end to
the requirements.

Incorporates use and liability protections consistent with
CISA 2015. (There are a few provisions seemingly not carried
over from CISA 2015 and we look forward to further discussion
on those items.) While we endorse the regulatory requirement
for incident notification, the legislation should seek to
structure the Government's role as part of a partnership to
improve America's cybersecurity stance, rather than a
compliance exercise.
To improve the private/public collaboration that is so central to
this legislation, Accenture recommends 4 points for further
consideration:

Require CISA to issue a proposed rule, rather than an
interim final rule, to allow for more meaningful industry
collaboration which ultimately will result in more engagement
and buy-in from the private sector. This significant change to
critical infrastructure entities' risk management programs and
relationship with CISA warrants fulsome consultation and
consideration.

Companies would like clarification that the information they
provided, if shared outside the new office, will be anonymized
to protect sensitive information and build companies'
confidence that the information sharing will not be used
against them.

Prior to enforcement of the notification provisions,
companies would like to understand what protocols will be in
place to ensure the security of the information they provide.
This will go a long way toward building companies' confidence
that the sensitive information provided will be protected.

Include clear requirements for CISA to promptly share with
the private sector the (anonymized) IOCs, TTPs, and threat
actor profile (aka SITREP) incident information it receives
pursuant to the legislation to improve response by the affected
industry and improve resilience across critical infrastructure.
______

Letter From Multiple Associations
August 27, 2021.
The Honorable Gary Peters,
Chairman, Committee on Homeland Security & Government Affairs, U.S.
Senate.
The Honorable Mark Warner,
Chairman, Select Committee on Intelligence, U.S. Senate.
The Honorable Bennie Thompson,
Chairman, Committee on Homeland Security, U.S. House of
Representatives.
The Honorable Yvette Clarke,
Chairwoman, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection,
and Innovation, U.S. House of Representatives.
The Honorable Rob Portman,
Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland Security & Government Affairs,
U.S. Senate.
The Honorable Marco Rubio,
Vice Chairman, Select Committee on Intelligence, U.S. Senate.
The Honorable John Katko,
Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland Security, U.S. House of
Representatives.
The Honorable Andrew Garbarino,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure
Protection, and Innovation, U.S. House of Representatives.
Dear Chairs, Vice Chairman, and Ranking Members: The undersigned
associations, representing major sectors of the American economy,
including the owners, operators, and those that support and maintain
the Nation's critical infrastructure, appreciate Congress's on-going
focus on cybersecurity incident reporting legislation. Our industries
recognize the value of public-private collaboration facilitated by
mutual sharing of actionable information on significant cybersecurity
incidents and intrusions with Federal agencies. Incident Reporting
legislation pending in Congress, when harmonized with the requirements
of Section 2 of President Biden's Executive Order on Improving the
Nation's Cybersecurity, have the potential to improve the Nation's
cybersecurity posture if appropriately developed and implemented.
To ensure an effective incident reporting regime that leverages the
limited resources of Federal agencies, enables regulatory compliance,
provides liability protections, and advances National cybersecurity
interests, we believe that policy makers in Congress should, at a
minimum, follow five key principles:
Establish feasible reporting time lines of no less than 72 hours.--
Cybersecurity incidents are crisis moments for victim organizations. To
ensure that the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA)
and its interagency partners receive actionable information on truly
significant incidents, it is essential to give incident responders time
to evaluate the intrusion to determine its impact. Shorter time lines
also greatly increase the likelihood that the entity will report
inaccurate or inadequately contextualized information that will not be
helpful, potentially even undermining cybersecurity response and
remediation efforts. A formal report on a verified, significant
incident should not preclude less-fulsome notifications to CISA on a
more flexible time line.''
Limit reporting regulations to verified incidents and intrusions.--
Incident reporting should focus on verified incidents rather than
potential incidents or ``near misses.'' Reporting verified incidents,
that have been well-defined and scoped, will avoid a culture of
overreporting that will strain limited incident response capacity and
capabilities inside and outside the Government. It also can help ensure
that information received is useful and actionable.
Limit reporting obligations to the victim organization, rather than
third-party vendors or providers.--Any legislation should ensure that
the reporting obligation falls only on compromised affected entities.
Vendors and third-party service providers should not be required to
report cybersecurity incidents to the U.S. Government that have
occurred on their customers' networks and vice versa. Such a
requirement would pose numerous challenges to normal business
operations, including potentially forcing vendors or third parties to
disclose business confidential information of that customer or breach
their contractual obligations. Requiring third-parties to report
incidents could even disincentivize companies from employing outside
cybersecurity services to the detriment of those companies' own
security and resilience.
Harmonize Federal cybersecurity incident reporting requirements.--
It is imperative that Congress streamline and normalize Federal
reporting requirements to ensure resources are used to combat malicious
cyber threat activity, rather than customizing reports on the same
incident to multiple agencies. Numerous Federal agencies currently have
disparate incident reporting requirements, many of which are just being
implemented. Reported information should be aggregated, anonymized,
analyzed, and shared, with Government and industry, in a manner to
assist in the mitigation and/or prevention of future cyber incidents.
Ensure confidentiality and nondisclosure of incident information
provided to the Government.--It is imperative that any legislation have
strong and transparent rules about the confidentiality of incident
information that is shared with or by Federal agencies. Such rules
should govern not only the dissemination of incident information with
relevant interagency partners, but should specifically preclude direct
or indirect use of such information by the Federal Government. These
rules must be crafted to guarantee compliance with existing legal
regimes, including contractual, intellectual property, and privacy
obligations.
Our industries strongly believe that securing the Nation's digital
assets is a shared responsibility requiring collaboration between the
private sector and Federal partners. We stand ready to assist policy
makers as they develop their proposals on this important National
security issue.
Sincerely,
ACT/The App Association
Airlines for America (A4A)
American Fuel & Petrochemical Manufacturers
American Petroleum Institute
American Gas Association
Business Roundtable
BSA/The Software Alliance
The Computing Technology Industry Association
Consumer Technology Association (CTA)
Cyber Coalition
Cyber Threat Alliance
Edison Electric Institute
Electronic Transactions Association
Information Technology Industry Council (ITI)
Internet Association
Software & Information Industry Association
TechNet
Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA).

Ms. Clarke. Additionally, without objection, I include in
the record comments from NTCA, APPA, and NRECA.
[The information follows:]
Letter From NTCA--The Rural Broadband Association
August 30, 2021.
The Honorable Gary Peters,
Chairman, Committee on Homeland Security & Government Affairs, U.S.
Senate.
The Honorable Mark Warner,
Chairman, Select Committee on Intelligence, U.S. Senate.
The Honorable Bennie Thompson,
Chairman, Committee on Homeland Security, U.S. House of
Representatives.
The Honorable Yvette Clarke,
Chairwoman, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection,
and Innovation, U.S. House of Representatives.
The Honorable Rob Portman,
Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland Security & Government Affairs,
U.S. Senate.
The Honorable Marco Rubio,
Vice Chairman, Select Committee on Intelligence, U.S. Senate.
The Honorable John Katko,
Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland Security, U.S. House of
Representatives.
The Honorable Andrew Garbarino,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure
Protection, and Innovation, U.S. House of Representatives.
Dear Chairs, Vice Chairman, and Ranking Members: Thank you for your
leadership to promote the security of our Nation's critical
infrastructure. NTCA--The Rural Broadband Association represents over
850 small, rural telecom providers that deliver high-speed broadband
and voice service in the most remote areas of the country. These small
companies serve areas where it is difficult if not impossible to make
the business case for essential broadband network deployment without
support from programs such as the Federal universal service fund and
financing from the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Despite their small size and razor-thin operating margins, rural
carriers work hard to manage the risk presented by constant cyber
attacks against their networks, and several dozen have already joined
CyberShare: The Small Broadband Provider ISAC, which NTCA initiated to
promote the resiliency and continuity of operation of small network
operators across the United States. Nonetheless, because NTCA's members
operate on thin margins, because there is presently no program that
specifically supports costs incurred from cyber risk management
efforts, and because there are no specific mechanisms aimed at helping
smaller operators and providers in rural areas attract individuals with
cyber expertise, many small carriers (which average only 30 employees
overall) have limited resources to devote to such efforts. Indeed, in
some cases, rural operators may have only 1-2 staff who work on
cybersecurity, and even these individuals may have other functions and
responsibilities as well within the enterprise. Therefore, it is
essential that these staff are free to focus on securing networks
rather than being consumed by the need to comply with reporting
requirements.
With this as background, as you work toward passage of cyber
incident reporting legislation, please consider making the reports
voluntary for small businesses that own or operate critical
infrastructure, or at a minimum provide extended compliance deadlines
and/or other flexibility to allow small companies to make the necessary
preparations. A small business exemption will also benefit those
overseeing such compliance by cutting down on the number of reports to
review in favor of focusing on the largest networks that are most
likely to experience wide-spread cyber threats. And, in the event DHS
determines that information relating to a specific cyber incident is
necessary to obtain from smaller providers, the agency can always use
its subpoena authority to request information from such providers.
Absent a small company exemption, these carriers will benefit at a
minimum from more clearly articulated expectations and flexibility for
compliance. For example, reports should only be required for verified
intrusions that directly and substantially impact operations, providers
should have at least five business days to report after confirming an
intrusion, and providers should only be required to report intrusions
to the network they control as opposed to when they merely serve as a
conduit for an attack on a third party. Further, duplicative reporting
should be avoided, and providers should be confident that information
supplied pursuant to the new requirements will not result in litigation
or regulatory action.
Thank you for considering how new cyber incident reporting
requirements will impact the wide array of critical infrastructure
owners and operators. We look forward to working with you on this
important matter as the legislation moves forward.
Sincerely,
Shirley Bloomfield,
Chief Executive Officer, NTCA--The Rural Broadband Association.
______

Statement of the American Public Power Association (APPA) and the
National Rural Electric Cooperative Association (NRECA)
August 30, 2021.
The Honorable Gary Peters,
Chairman, Committee on Homeland Security & Government Affairs, U.S.
Senate.
The Honorable Mark Warner,
Chairman, Select Committee on Intelligence, U.S. Senate.
The Honorable Bennie Thompson,
Chairman, Committee on Homeland Security, U.S. House of
Representatives.
The Honorable Yvette Clarke,
Chairwoman, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection,
and Innovation, U.S. House of Representatives.
The Honorable Rob Portman,
Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland Security & Government Affairs,
U.S. Senate.
The Honorable Marco Rubio,
Vice Chairman, Select Committee on Intelligence, U.S. Senate.
The Honorable John Katko,
Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland Security, U.S. House of
Representatives.
The Honorable Andrew Garbarino,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure
Protection, and Innovation, U.S. House of Representatives.
Dear Chairs, Vice Chairmen, and Ranking Members: We are writing to
you regarding several introduced and draft bills that would mandate
critical infrastructure sectors to report ``cyber incidents'' to the
Department of Homeland Security's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (DHS CISA). The American Public Power Association
(APPA) and the National Rural Electric Cooperative Association (NRECA)
do not support additional cyber incident reporting mandates for the
electric sector. We believe that the incident reporting mandates
currently under discussion would burden electric utilities--especially
smaller public power and cooperative utilities--with increased
administrative tasks that will not materially increase their, or the
country's, cybersecurity posture, but would likely divert limited
resources away from securing and defending systems. That said, if
Congress chooses to enact broad mandatory cyber incident reporting
legislation for critical infrastructure, we agree with the principles
laid out in the August 27 letter lead by the Information Technology
Industry Council (ITI) and endorsed by numerous other critical
infrastructure sector entities and associations.
APPA is the voice of not-for-profit, community-owned utilities that
power 2,000 towns and cities nationwide. APPA represents public power
before the Federal Government to protect the interests of the more than
49 million people that public power utilities serve, and the 96,000
people they employ. Public power utilities range in size, from very
large to very small; approximately 67 percent of public power utilities
serve communities of 10,000 people or less. They own, operate, or use
generation and transmission infrastructure, as well as distribution
infrastructure directly serving homes and businesses.
NRECA is the national trade association representing nearly 900
local electric cooperatives and other rural electric utilities.
America's electric cooperatives are owned by the people that they serve
and comprise a unique sector of the electric industry. From growing
regions to remote farming communities, electric cooperatives power one
in eight Americans and serve as engines of economic development for 42
million Americans across 56 percent of the nation's landscape. Electric
cooperatives operate at cost and without a profit incentive. NRECA's
member cooperatives include 62 generation and transmission (G&T)
cooperatives and 831 distribution cooperatives. Both distribution and
G&T cooperatives share an obligation to serve their members by
providing safe, secure, reliable, and affordable electric service.
Combined, the members of our two groups serve close to 30 percent
of the American population, which is equivalent to more than twice the
population of Canada. Having provisioned such electric service for
decades, our members know that a reliable energy grid is the lifeblood
of the nation's economic and national security, as well as vital to the
health and safety of all Americans. Electric utilities take very
seriously their responsibility to maintain a secure and reliable
electric grid. It is the only critical infrastructure sector that has
mandatory and enforceable Federal regulatory standards in place for
cyber and physical security (collectively known as grid security).
These standards include mandatory reporting of specific cyber incidents
to the Department of Energy (DOE) via an Electric Emergency Incident
and Disturbance Report (OE-417) and to the North American Electric
Reliability Corporation (NERC) and the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission (FERC).
Outside of these mandatory reporting standards, all electric
utilities, including public power utilities and rural electric
cooperatives, participate in robust voluntary information sharing
systems such as the Electric Subsector Coordinating Council (ESCC) and
the Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC), as
well as the Multi-State Information and Sharing Analysis Center (MS-
ISAC) for public power. Most recently, electric utilities have worked
closely with the National Security Council, DOE, and DHS on the ``100
Day Electric Sector Industrial Control Systems Cybersecurity Sprint''
to encourage and support utilities' visibility and monitoring of their
industrial control system and operational technology networks, as well
as automated sharing into government. It is not clear how these bills
would impact these existing voluntary channels or existing or planned
machine-to-machine sharing.
Our biggest concerns with the various versions of incident
reporting legislation currently under discussion can be grouped into
two broad categories. The legislation: (1) Treats all critical
infrastructure entities as equally impactful to national security--
there is no accounting for the wildly differing risk profiles of an
electric utility serving millions of customers and a small distribution
electric utility without an industrial control system [a type of
operational technology] serving 250 customers; and (2) puts the onus on
the critical infrastructure entity to share information with multiple
government agencies, instead of encouraging and facilitating the
sharing of information between and among agencies. While those are the
two most significant concerns, we are also concerned that some
proposals include heavy financial fines for failure to report within a
very short time period. All of our members must be able to focus on the
matter at hand in the event of a breach and should be given the
flexibility to report once the crisis is understood and being managed.
There has also been little discussion on how mandatory reporting
requirements would impact long existing and robust voluntary
information sharing systems nor on what the government's responsibility
is in terms of actionable information sharing and support.
Given the concerns enumerated above, APPA and NRECA do not support
including electric utilities in the mandatory cyber incident reporting
legislation currently under discussion. However, if Congress chooses to
move ahead with the legislation, we urge a careful and deliberative
process that takes into account existing reporting mandates,
appropriately tailors the mandate commensurate with the risk to
national security, and adheres to the principles laid out in ITI's
letter. We appreciate the openness that your staff has shown in
discussions with our teams and we look forward to continuing our
dialog.
Sincerely,
Joy Ditto,
President & CEO, American Public Power Association.
Jim Matheson,
CEO, National Rural Electric Cooperative Association.

Ms. Clarke. Again, I thank the witnesses for being here
today and look forward to hearing their testimony.
[The statement of Chairwoman Clarke follows:]
Statement of Chairwoman Yvette D. Clarke
August 30, 2021
Good afternoon. I would like to thank the witnesses for
participating in today's hearing on the Cyber Incident Reporting for
Critical Infrastructure Act of 2021.
Earlier this year, this committee held a joint hearing with the
Committee on Oversight and Reform to examine the SolarWinds supply
chain attack.
Our oversight revealed a number of gaps in Federal authorities,
policies, and capabilities that Congress must address to secure its own
networks and better serve its private-sector partners.
But what stood out to me was how lucky we were that FireEye
disclosed that it had been compromised.
Where we would be if they had chosen not to?
At the hearing, I asked whether we would benefit from implementing
a mandatory cyber incident reporting framework.
Microsoft President Brad Smith observed that today ``information is
siloed'' and that we need ``one entity is in a position to scan the
entire horizon and connect the dots between all of the attacks or hacks
that are taking place.''
SolarWinds President Sudhakar Ramakrishna testified: ``[H]aving a
single entity to which all of us can report to will serve the
fundamental purpose of building speed and agility,'' and argued that
private enterprises ``should be instructed with reporting requirements
and be made part of this community vision where public and private
sectors can work together on addressing this issue.''
At the same hearing, FireEye CEO Kevin Mandia testified about the
importance of centralizing intelligence to ``improve the speed at which
that picture and vision will come together.''
That hearing convinced me that Congress must act to ensure the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) receives timely
cyber incident information from critical infrastructure owners and
operators.
Since then, I have worked with Chairman Thompson and Ranking Member
Katko to draft legislation to establish a mandatory cyber incident
reporting framework at CISA and I would like to thank them both for
their support in this effort.
The draft legislation we are discussing today is the product of
months of dialog with Government officials and private-sector
stakeholders.
I want to express my gratitude to those who worked with the
committee to provide feedback on various drafts of the legislation.
We have worked hard to draft the legislation in a manner that will
result in the greatest security impact for both the Federal Government
and the private sector, and I am proud of the draft we have developed.
Our bill would direct CISA, after a 270-day period with mandatory
windows for stakeholder consultation and comment, to issue an interim
final rule describing:

which critical infrastructure owners and operators are
subject to the reporting requirement;

which cyber incidents need to be reported;

the mechanism for submitting reports;

and other details necessary for implementation.
Importantly, our bill seeks to establish this new mandatory
reporting program in a way that sets it apart from CISA's voluntary
cyber programs by establishing a new Cyber Incident Review Office and
tasking this new office with the discrete mission of receiving,
aggregating, analyzing, and securing cyber incident reports.
The bill also aims to ensure that covered entities benefit from the
new reporting requirement in three ways:

First, our bill requires CISA to publish quarterly reports
with anonymized findings to provide better situational
awareness to its partners;

Second, it directs CISA to identify any actionable threat
intelligence that should be shared rapidly and confidentially
with cyber `first responders' to prevent or respond to other
attacks; and

Third, it requires CISA to notify private-sector entities
that may have been impacted by data breaches or intrusions on
Federal networks.
I am pleased with the progress we have made on this legislation,
but want to be clear that our work is on-going.
We remain open to additional questions and feedback because it is
important to get this right.
In recent days, I have been asked whether we would consider
compliance challenges that certain small businesses may have.
I want to be clear that we do not expect all critical
infrastructure owners and operators to be subject to this reporting
requirement--rather we expect it to apply only to a subset.
That said, I would certainly be happy to explore whether we need to
add language directing CISA to provide additional compliance assistance
to small businesses that are determined to be covered entities.
I look forward to hearing additional stakeholder perspectives on
the legislation today.
Before I close, I would ask unanimous consent to insert into the
record a letter of support from Claroty, as well as a letter signed by
18 associations, including ITI, the Cyber Threat Alliance, the American
Gas Association, Airlines for America, and the Cyber Coalition, among
others.
Additionally, I ask to enter into the record comments from
Accenture, NTCA, APPA, and NRECA.
Without objection, so ordered.
With that, I thank the witnesses for being here and I yield back
the balance of my time.

Ms. Clarke. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member of
the subcommittee, the gentleman from New York, Mr. Garbarino,
for an opening statement.
Mr. Garbarino.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you very much, Chairwoman. I would
like to thank Chairwoman Clarke for calling this important
hearing today. We have a large panel before us, so, in the
interest of time, I will keep my remarks brief.
There should be no question why we are here today. Over the
past year, our Nation has been subject to devastating
SolarWinds cyber espionage campaign, as well as the Microsoft
Exchange and Pulse Secure vulnerabilities, and that is just
against the Federal Government.
Our Nation's critical infrastructure has also been under
attack, and the American people have begun to feel the impact.
Everyone here remembers the ransomware attacks on Colonial
Pipeline and JBS Meats, both of which had real-world impacts.
The fact of the matter is that something here must change. We
cannot allow these devastating attacks on our Nation to
continue. We must ensure that CISA has the visibility it needs
to help defend our Federal networks and to help our critical
infrastructure owners and operators protect themselves.
I have been pleased to see our majority counterparts engage
our Members in productive conversations on this, and I hope we
can continue the constructive dialog here today. I am
particularly interested in learning from our witnesses about
how they viewed some of the key provisions of this bill and
what, if any, suggestions they have for edits.
Thank you to our witnesses for being here today.
Again, thank you, Chairwoman Clarke, for your leadership on
this incredibly important topic.
I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Garbarino follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Andrew Garbarino
I would like to thank Chairwoman Clarke for calling this important
hearing today. We have a large panel before us, so in the interest of
time, I will keep my remarks brief.
There should be no question why we are here today: Over the past
year, our Nation has been subject to the devastating SolarWinds cyber
espionage campaign, as well as the Microsoft Exchange and Pulse Secure
vulnerabilities, and that's just against the Federal Government.
Our Nation's critical infrastructure has also been under attack and
the American people have begun to feel the impact. Everyone here
remembers the ransomware attacks on Colonial Pipeline and JBS Meats,
both of which had real-world impacts.
The fact of the matter is that something here must change, we
cannot allow these devastating attacks against our Nation to continue.
We must ensure that CISA has the visibility it needs to help defend
our Federal networks, and to help our critical infrastructure owners
and operators protect themselves. I'm hopeful that this bill will help
create a two-way street of information sharing between Government and
industry.
I've been pleased to see our majority counterparts engage our
Members in productive conversations on this topic and I hope we can
continue the constructive dialog here today.
I'm particularly interested in learning from our witnesses about
how they view some of the key provisions in this bill, and what, if
any, suggestions they have for edits.
Thank you to our witnesses for being here today and again, thank
you Chairwoman Clarke for your leadership on this incredibly important
topic.

Ms. Clarke. I thank our Ranking Member for his brevity in
his opening remarks. But certainly anything that you have to
add, we are all ears. I want to thank Members--to remind
Members that the subcommittee will operate according to the
guidelines laid out by the Chairman and Ranking Member in their
February 3 colloquy regarding remote procedures. I don't see
our Chairman at this moment, but I do see our Ranking Member.
So I want to recognize the Ranking Member of the full
committee, the gentleman from New York, Mr. Katko, for an
opening statement.
Mr. Katko. Well, I would like to thank my friend and
colleague from New York, Chairwoman Clarke, for convening this
important hearing today. This legislative hearing is a
fantastic opportunity for our Members to learn directly from
industry how they are impacted by specific provisions in the
bill as well as any changes they suggest ahead of introduction.
Everyone in this hearing should recognize the urgency and
precision with which we need to act. Every single day,
entities, large and small, are affected by the scourge of
ransomware and cyber crime. From street-level criminal gangs to
nation-state actors, like Russia and China, nefarious actors
target our private-sector businesses, sting local governments
and Federal agencies millions of times per day. Unfortunately,
many of these attempts are ultimately successful.
In order to bolster our Nation's collective defense, we
must enhance our visibility across both Federal and private
networks. I have been pleased with the response we have seen
from industry so far. I want to thank our witnesses, not just
for being here today but for their diligent work in thinking
through this legislative effort.
I hope that everybody here today recognizes that our
Nation's cybersecurity cannot simply be a Federal effort or a
private effort, but that it is--it is and must be a joint
effort. There is no doubt in my mind that cybersecurity is a
deep preeminent threat to our country today. Without enhanced
collaboration and visibility, we will continue to fall victim
to the cowardly actors that target our Nation, our
constituents, and all of us on a daily basis.
I have been pleased to work with Chairman Thompson,
Chairwoman Clarke, and all our critical industry partners on
this bill. I look forward to continue prioritizing major
cybersecurity reforms through this committee on a bipartisan
basis, including my SICI bill, which is coming up in the next
few days. That is the Systemically Important Critical
Infrastructure.
One of the things that drew me to this committee other than
just my background in law enforcement over 20 years is the fact
that there is a spirit of bipartisanship here, and there is a
spirit of teamwork here that is manifesting itself again today.
I mean, I commend the Chairwoman for that and Mr. Garbarino as
well. But going forward, there is a lot of other things like my
Systemically Important Critical Infrastructure bill and many
others that are going forward, and I hope we can have the same
type of teamwork on that again as well.
So thank you, again, Ms. Clarke, for being here today, and
thank you for holding this important hearing.
Thank you for the witnesses as well, and thank you, Mr.
Garbarino.
I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Katko follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member John Katko
I would like to thank Chairwoman Clarke for convening this
important hearing today.
This legislative hearing is a fantastic opportunity for our Members
to learn directly from industry how they are impacted by specific
provisions in the bill, as well as any changes they suggest ahead of
introduction.
Everyone in this hearing should recognize the urgency and precision
with which we need to act.
Every single day, entities large and small are affected by the
scourge of ransomware and cyber crime.
From street-level criminal gangs to nation-state actors like Russia
and China, nefarious actors target our private-sector businesses, State
and local governments, and Federal agencies millions of times per day.
Unfortunately, many of those attempts are ultimately successful.
In order to bolster our Nation's collective defense, we must
enhance our visibility across both Federal and private networks.
I have been pleased with the response we've seen from industry so
far, and I want to thank our witnesses, not just for being here today,
but for their diligent work in thinking through this legislative
effort.
I hope that everyone here today recognizes that our Nation's
cybersecurity cannot simply be a Federal effort, or a private effort,
but that it must be joint effort.
Without enhanced collaboration and visibility, we will continue to
fall victim to the cowardly actors that target our Nation--our
constituents--on a daily basis.
I have been pleased to work with Chairwoman Clarke, Chairman
Thompson, and all our critical industry partners on this bill. I look
forward to continue prioritizing major cybersecurity reforms through
this committee on a bipartisan basis, including my SICI bill in the
coming days.
Thank you again to our witnesses for being here today, and thank
you Chairwoman Clarke for holding this important hearing.

Ms. Clarke. I thank our Ranking Member for his comments and
opening statement, and I am going to then proceed to our
witnesses. Should our Chairman join us, we will take a break to
hear his comments.
I now welcome our panel of witnesses. First, I would like
to welcome Mr. Ronald Bushar, the senior vice president and
global government CTO for FireEye Mandiant who works at the
intersection of public-private incident response efforts for
the types of cyber attacks we are here to discuss today.
Second, we will hear from Ms. Heather Hogsett with the Bank
Policy Institute, also known as BPI, a nonpartisan research
advocacy group representing the Nation's top banks. Ms. Hogsett
is the senior vice president of technology and risk strategy
for BITS, the technology policy division of BTI.
Third, we have Mr. John Miller, the senior vice president
of policy and general counsel for the Information Technology
Industrial Council, also known as ITI, which represents the
world's leading information and communication technology
companies.
Next, I am pleased to welcome Mr. Robert Mayer back before
the subcommittee. Mr. Mayer is the senior vice president for
cybersecurity and innovation at the USTelecom and chairs the
Communications Sector Coordination Council.
Then, finally, we have Ms. Kimberly Denbow, the managing
director of security and operations for the American Gas
Association, who also co-chairs the Cybersecurity Working Group
for the Pipeline Sector Coordinating Council and the oil and
natural gas sector.
Without objection, the witnesses' full statement will be
inserted in the record.
I now ask each witness to summarize his or her statement
for 5 minutes, beginning with Mr. Bushar.
Mr. Bushar, I believe you may be muted.

STATEMENT OF RONALD BUSHAR, VICE PRESIDENT AND GOVERNMENT CTO,
FIRE EYE MANDIANT

Mr. Bushar. Always a good start to a hearing. Apologies,
Chairwoman.
Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and
all the Members the subcommittee for the opportunity to talk
with you today about this important cyber incident reporting
topic.
FireEye Mandiant applauds your efforts to tackle this
complex issue and appreciates the open dialog we have enjoyed
with you and your staff.
Public-private partnerships are critical to the success of
any cyber incident reporting or disclosure program, both in its
development and ultimately in its execution. My comments for
today's hearing will focus primarily on the major tenets and
benefits of the cyber incident reporting framework.
But before I turn to this specific topic, let me share some
background on myself and my company to establish context for my
narrative and statements today.
I started my career in the United States Air Force as an
officer in what was at the time termed information warfare. For
more than 20 years, I have worked in cyber defense operations,
cybersecurity consulting, and incident response services in
both the Government and commercial sectors, including time at
the U.S. Department of Justice.
In my current role at FireEye Mandiant, I lead a global
team of cyber experts who deliver our capabilities and security
functionality and solutions to protect critical missions,
infrastructure, and National security interests world-wide.
As I testify today, FireEye Mandiant employees are on the
front lines of a cybersecurity battle, really, responding to
over 150 active computer intrusions at some of the largest
organizations and companies in the world. Over the last 17
years, we have responded to tens of thousands of security
incidents. It is unfortunate, but we receive calls almost daily
from organizations that have suffered a cybersecurity breach.
For each security incident we respond to, it is our objective
to determine what happened and what organizations can do to
avoid similar incidents in the future. We also maintain over
200 intelligence professionals and analysts located in more
than 20 countries, speaking over 30 languages, who pursue
attribution, identification, and more detailed information
about threat actors, their motivations, and intents.
FireEye Mandiant is encouraged by the draft legislation the
subcommittee has developed to improve cyber incident reporting.
The bill is a positive step forward in achieving important,
long-term goals of enabling early detection of malicious cyber
attacks. It would also enhance the Federal Government
situational awareness to better partner with and assist
private-sector entities that become cyber attack victims. This
whole-of-community approach is critical to increasing capacity
and to prevent future cyber attacks as well as to drive
ultimately, we believe, deterrence in this space.
Any legislation on this matter should take into
consideration the evolving cyber threat landscape; the
increasingly sophisticated tactics, techniques, and procedures
used by adversaries; and lessons learned from existing
voluntary information-sharing models as established by the
Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015. Simply put, any
reporting framework must be agile and include opportunities for
the Federal Government to pivot or adjust its reporting
requirements to keep pace with the threat landscape and actor
and adversary actions and activity.
The U.S. Government should consider a Federal incident
reporting program that goes beyond voluntary sharing of threat
indicators as authorized under the 2015 legislation. It should
also include mandatory disclosure requirements for cyber
incidents. Major tenets of such a program should safeguard the
protection and integrity of electronic and other types of data;
ensure confidential sharing; encourage entities to adapt,
recognize cybersecurity standards and practices with a minimum
threshold; provide greater incentives for private-sector
entities, including liability protections and statutory
privilege to not be disclosed in civil litigation; protect
privacy and civil rights; and provide outreach and technical
assistance to entities that do not have cybersecurity expertise
or capabilities.
FireEye Mandiant believes that strong cyber community
protection is predicated on several key concepts, and lawmakers
should consider the following additional components that we
believe would constitute a robust and ultimately successful
cyber incident reporting program.
No. 1, reporting requirements should account for two key
outcomes: Timely and relevant reporting of critical
intelligence to relevant Government authorities for assessment,
correlation, and decision support; and, No. 2, reasonable
latitude for the victim to determine nature, extent, and
potential impact of a breach or attack. In the first instance,
the timeliness and quality of the data reported to the
Government will largely determine how effective the response to
and disruption of the attack will ultimately be.
In the second instance, cyber attacks are often complex and
require sophisticated analysis to fully understand the scope of
compromise. Victims require support from external firms to
fully analyze a breach and will likely be dealing with other
business impacts and crisis management activities during such
activities.
Allowing for a reasonable amount of time to properly assess
the situation before requiring reporting will limit false
positives and redundant or contradictory information and
prevent unnecessary data collection on the part of CISA.
FireEye Mandiant encourages lawmakers to consider harmonizing
reporting requirements with existing Federal acquisition
regulations and standards to provide for consistent and
streamlined regime that simplifies business processes and
ultimately encourages and streamlines compliance as well.
Second, FireEye Mandiant strongly believes in the concept
of a public-private partner approach to cybersecurity. Unlike
most other domains at risk, cyber attacks and cyber crimes are
almost always predicated on the use of--use traversal or
compromise of privately-owned infrastructure, even when the
attacks are focused on Government or National security assets.
The private sector, especially critical infrastructure sector
businesses, is both a key component over all National cyber
resiliency and a key source of intelligence on our adversaries'
capability, intent, and activities in cyber space. Over the
past decade, many Federal agencies, including CISA, the FBI,
the United States Secret Service, and the National Security
Agency, have built strong partnerships with key cybersecurity
and critical infrastructure organizations through voluntary
programs outreach and support.
While we recognize that much more needs to be done, without
these efforts and support functions, many private-sector cyber
attacks would have likely remained undetected for much longer
and would have been much more severe. Under a new cyber
incident reporting program, these trusted relationships and
partnerships must be strengthened and enhanced to advance our
common goals in reducing the frequency and severity of cyber
attacks.
No. 3, a reporting program must encourage cooperation and
strengthen trust between public and private-sector entities. A
regulatory-based approach or a regime that focuses on punitive
actions rather than mutual benefits would be counter to the
goal of creating a strong National partnership model to counter
the increasing cyber threats we are facing.
As previously suggested, although mandatory reporting is
necessary, the focus should be on supporting organizations to
achieve compliance, not punishment for noncompliance. Fines and
other financial or legal punishments do not properly reflect
the truth that, barring gross negligence or willful misconduct,
organizations that suffer cyber attacks are victims of a crime.
Mechanisms to compel collection of critical information, when
necessary, such as subpoenas, better align to the general
concept of criminal investigation and response.
Fourth, information sharing must be bidirectional. An
incident reporting framework should allow for a consistent flow
of two-way information sharing between public and private
sectors to help maximize the ability to resolve and consider
attribution. Organizations that invest significant effort into
collecting, analyzing, and sharing cyber attack technical
information require feedback on the usefulness and value of
what they provided. They also benefit from data that can be
only provided by the U.S. Government to enhance their own
security posture and to help hone their threat detection in
response functions.
Finally, I would like to highlight several clear benefits
of broader security incident reporting and bidirectional
information sharing. Timely reporting of incidents within and
across sectors allow for early detection of large,
sophisticated cyber campaigns that have the potential for
significant impacts to critical infrastructure or National
security implications. Technical indicators, along with
contextual information, provide a more robust data set to
conduct faster and more accurate attribution in adversary
intent. This type of analysis is critical in formulating the
most impactful response to such attacks and to do so in a time
frame that has a high probability of successful countermeasures
or deterrence.
On behalf of FireEye Mandiant, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before the subcommittee today. We are
committed to working with our public and private-sector
partners to safeguard the Nation from cyber attacks by sharing
cyber threat information, lessons learned, and best practices,
including through the newly-established Joint Cyber Defense
Collaborative at CISA. We stand ready to work with you and
other interested parties to devise effective solutions to deter
malicious behavior in cyber space and to build a better
resiliency into our networks and ultimately improve and enhance
the security and well-being of all Americans.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bushar follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ronald Bushar
September 1, 2021
introduction
Thank you Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and all the
Members of the subcommittee, for the opportunity to talk with you today
about the importance of cyber incident reporting. FireEye Mandiant
applauds your efforts to tackle this complex issue and appreciates the
open dialog we have enjoyed with you and your staff--public-private
partnerships are critical to the success of any cyber incident
reporting or disclosure program--both in its development and execution.
background
My comments for today's hearing will focus primarily on the major
tenets and benefits of a cyber incident reporting framework. Before I
turn to this specific topic, let me share some background on myself and
my company to establish context for my narrative.
I started my career in the United States Air Force as an officer in
the Information Warfare Aggressor Squadron. For more than 20 years, I
have worked in cyber defense operations, cybersecurity consulting, and
incident response services in both the Government and commercial
sectors, including the Justice Department. In my current role at
FireEye Mandiant, I lead a global team of cyber experts who deliver our
unique platform of innovative security program capabilities and
solutions to protect critical missions, infrastructure, and National
security interests world-wide.
As I testify today, FireEye Mandiant employees are on the front
lines of the cyber battle, currently responding to over 150 active
computer intrusions at some of the largest companies and organizations
in the world. Over the last 17 years, we have responded to tens of
thousands of security incidents. It is unfortunate, but we receive
calls almost daily from organizations that have suffered a
cybersecurity breach. For each security incident we respond to, it is
our objective to determine what happened and what organizations can do
to avoid similar incidents in the future. We also maintain over 200
intelligence analysts, located in more than 20 countries, speaking over
30 languages, who pursue attribution and identification of the threat
actors via research and sources.
incident reporting framework
FireEye Mandiant is encouraged by the draft legislation the
subcommittee has developed to improve cyber incident reporting. The
``Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2021'' is
a positive step forward in achieving important long-term goals of
enabling early detection of malicious cyber attacks. It would also
enhance the Federal Government's situational awareness to better
partner with and assist private-sector entities that become cyber
attack victims. This ``whole-of-community'' approach is critical to
increasing capacity to prevent and deter future cyber attacks.
Any legislation on this matter should take into consideration the
evolving cyber threat landscape; the increasingly sophisticated
tactics, techniques, and procedures used by adversaries; and lessons
learned from existing voluntary information-sharing models, as
established by the ``Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015.''
Simply put, any reporting framework must be agile and include
opportunities for the Federal Government to pivot or adjust its
reporting requirements to keep pace with the threat environment and bad
actors.
The U.S. Government should consider a Federal incident reporting
program that goes beyond voluntary sharing of threat indicators as
authorized under the 2015 law--it should also include mandatory
disclosure requirements for cyber incidents. Major tenets of such a
program should:

Safeguard the protection and integrity of electronic and
other types of data.

Ensure confidential sharing.

Encourage entities to adopt recognized cybersecurity
standards and practices with a minimum threshold.

Provide greater incentives for private-sector entities,
including liability protections and statutory privilege to not
be disclosed in civil litigation (e.g., confidentiality
obligations).

Protect privacy and civil rights.

Provide outreach and technical assistance to entities that
do not have cybersecurity expertise or capabilities.
FireEye Mandiant believes that strong cyber community protection is
predicated on several key concepts. Lawmakers should consider the
following additional components that we believe would constitute a
robust and ultimately successful cyber incident reporting program:
Establish reasonable and effective time lines for reporting.
Reporting requirements should account for two key outcomes: (1)
Timely and relevant reporting of critical intelligence to relevant
Government authorities for assessment, correlation, and decision
support, and (2) reasonable latitude for the victim to determine the
nature, extent, and potential impact of a breach. In the first
instance, the timeliness and quality of the data reported to the
Government will largely determine how effective the response to and
disruption of the attack will be. In the second instance, cyber attacks
are often complex and require sophisticated analysis to understand the
full scope of compromise.
Victims require support from external firms to fully analyze a
breach and will likely be dealing with other business impacts and
crisis management activities. Allowing for a reasonable amount of time
to properly assess the situation before requiring reporting will limit
false positives, redundant or contradictory information, and prevent
unnecessary data collection.
FireEye Mandiant encourages lawmakers to consider harmonizing
reporting requirements with existing Federal acquisition regulations
and standards to provide for a consistent and streamlined regime that
simplifies business processes and compliance.
Preserve existing trusted relationships and partnerships.
FireEye Mandiant strongly believes in the concept of a public-
private partner approach to cybersecurity. Unlike most other domains of
risk, cyber attacks and cyber crime are almost always predicated on the
use, traversal, or compromise of privately-owned infrastructure, even
when the attacks are focused on Government or National security assets.
The private sector, especially critical infrastructure sector
businesses, is both a key component of overall National cyber
resiliency and a key source of intelligence on our adversaries'
capabilities, intents, and activities in cyber space.
Over the past decade, many Federal agencies, including the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, the U.S. Secret Service, and the National Security
Agency have built strong partnerships with key cybersecurity and
critical infrastructure organizations through voluntary programs,
outreach, and support. While we recognize that much more needs to be
done, without these efforts and support functions, many private-sector
cyber attacks would have likely remained undetected for much longer and
would have been much more severe. Under a new cyber incident reporting
program, these trusted relationships and partnerships must be
strengthened and enhanced to advance our common goals of reducing the
frequency and severity of cyber attacks.
Ensure compliance is non-punitive.
A reporting program must encourage cooperation and strengthen trust
between the public and private sector. A regulatory-based approach or a
regime that focuses on punitive actions rather than mutual benefits
would be counter to the goal of creating a strong National partnership
model to counter the increasing cyber threats we are facing.
As previously suggested, although mandatory reporting is necessary,
the focus should be on supporting organizations to achieve compliance,
not punishment for non-compliance. Fines and other financial or legal
punishments do not properly reflect the truth that, barring gross
negligence or willful misconduct, organizations that suffer a cyber
attack are victims of a crime. Mechanisms to compel collection of
critical information when necessary, such as subpoenas, better align to
the general concept of criminal investigation and response.
Require information to flow back into the community.
Information sharing must be bi-directional. An incident-reporting
framework should allow for a consistent flow of two-way information
sharing between the public and private sectors to help maximize the
ability to resolve and consider attribution. Organizations that invest
significant effort into collecting, analyzing, and sharing cyber attack
technical information require feedback on the usefulness and value of
what they have provided. They also benefit from data that can only be
provided by the Government to enhance their own security posture and
help to hone their threat detection and response functions.
benefits
Finally, I would like to highlight several clear benefits to
broader cyber incident reporting and bi-directional information
sharing. Timely reporting of incidents, within and across sectors,
allows for earlier detection of large, sophisticated cyber campaigns
that have the potential for significant impacts to critical
infrastructure or National security implications.
Technical indicators, along with contextual information related to
attacks, provide a more robust dataset to conduct faster and more
accurate attribution and adversary intent. This type of analysis is
critical in formulating the most impactful response to such attacks and
to do so in a time frame that has a higher probability of successful
countermeasures or deterrence.
Cyber incident information also allows for cross-correlation and
collaboration with international partners, thereby enabling a
multilateral response to state-sponsored or state-sanctioned cyber
criminals that often originate overseas and travel through an allied
nation's infrastructure.
Last, robust and centralized collection of incident information
provides the Government with a much more accurate cyber risk picture
and enables more effective and efficient investments and support
before, during, and after major cyber attacks.
conclusion
On behalf of FireEye Mandiant, thank you for the opportunity to
testify before the subcommittee. We are committed to working with our
public and private-sector partners to safeguard the Nation from cyber
attacks by sharing cyber threat information, lessons learned, and best
practices, including through the newly-established Joint Cyber Defense
Collaborative at the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency.
We stand ready to work with you and other interested parties to
devise effective solutions to deter malicious behavior in cyber space
and to build better resiliency into our networks. I look forward to
your questions.

Ms. Clarke. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Bushar, for your expert testimony here
today.
I would like to acknowledge that we have been joined by the
gentleman from Mississippi, the Chairman of our full committee,
Mr. Thompson, who will be submitting his opening statement for
the record, but I wanted to acknowledge his presence.
[The statement of Chairman Thompson follows:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
September 1, 2021
Good afternoon. I want to thank Chairwoman Clarke and Ranking
Member Garbarino for holding this important legislative hearing to
discuss the Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of
2021.
Establishing a mandatory cyber incident reporting framework at CISA
has been a priority for the Homeland Security Committee since last
Congress.
I applaud Chairwoman Clarke for engaging with stakeholders and
working so hard to get the language right.
I look forward to continuing to work with her as she continues to
refine the text.
I would also like to thank Ranking Member Katko for his support of
this important legislation.
For a decade and a half, I have served as either Chairman or
Ranking Member of this committee.
Over the years, there has been an evolution in thinking about how
closely the public and private sector need to collaborate to protect
our Nation's critical infrastructure.
I have seen the Federal Government struggle to find the right way
for critical infrastructure owners and operators to share security
information with the Government and to zero in on how to turn that
information into an actionable security product.
The Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015 was the product
of extensive negotiations on the part of both Government and industry.
When the legislation was finally enacted into law, we had high
expectations that it would spur timely sharing and enhance our Nation's
cybersecurity posture.
But the 2015 bill did not fully deliver.
There was reluctance among many in the private sector to share
information with the Department.
And, for its part, the Department struggled to turn what data it
did get into something the private sector could use to drive down risk.
It focused too much on the volume of indicators shared and not
enough on the quality of the information.
For 6 years, this committee has engaged with the Department and
stakeholders to try to correct course, but over time it has become
clear that we need a new approach.
Last Congress, former Subcommittee Chair Cedric Richmond offered an
amendment to the National Defense Authorization Act that would
establish a mandatory cyber incident reporting framework at the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency.
It was included in the House-passed package but was stripped during
conference negotiations with the Senate.
Since then, a series of high-profile, high-consequences cyber
incidents over the past year, have made it clear we need to take urgent
action to improve the way the private sector shares information with
the Government.
As Chairwoman Clarke said in her opening statement, the text we are
discussing today is the product of months of stakeholder engagement and
bipartisan negotiations to fine tune the bill.
And we are here today to further refine the legislation to ensure
it serves the purposes of the Federal Government and will result in
security benefits to covered entities.
I am committed to getting this framework right and across the
finish line this Congress.
I thank the witnesses for being here today, and I look forward to
their testimony.

Ms. Clarke. But I now recognize Ms. Hogsett to summarize
her statement for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HEATHER HOGSETT, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, TECHNOLOGY
& RISK STRATEGY FOR BITS, BANK POLICY INSTITUTE

Ms. Hogsett. Thank you.
Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and honorable
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify. I am Heather Hogsett, senior vice president of
technology and risk strategy for BITS, the Technology Policy
Division at the Bank Policy Institute.
BPI is a nonpartisan policy, research, and advocacy
organization, representing the Nation's leading banks. Through
our technology division, BITS, we work with our member banks as
well as other leading financial institutions on cyber risk
management and critical infrastructure protection as well as
fraud reduction, regulation, and innovation. I also serve as
policy committee co-chair for the Financial Services Sector
Coordinating Council, which coordinates across the financial
sector and with Government partners to enhance security and
resiliency.
On behalf of BPI's member firms, we greatly appreciate this
committee's leadership on cybersecurity and critical
infrastructure protection. We also appreciate the work of the
committee on the Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical
Infrastructure Act of 2021, which is focused on addressing the
urgent need for Government and critical infrastructure to share
cyber information to improve awareness of cyber threats and
better inform our collective ability to mitigate and respond to
them.
Banks and other financial institutions have had legal and
regulatory requirements for cybersecurity and incident
reporting for more than 20 years. In addition to required
regulatory reporting, financial firms have made significant
investments to protect the industry, developing high-trust
collaboration centers to improve resilience of individual firms
and across the broader financial system, through digital
infrastructure, comprehensive use of security tools, exercise
programs, and extensive training.
Based on past experience, we are encouraged to see that the
current draft bill includes five key elements that we believe
are vital to achieving our shared goal of protecting the
Nation's critical infrastructure. First, the bill appropriately
tailors the scope of incidents that should be reported to those
that could cause actual harm. This will ensure CISA receives
accurate and useful data to help achieve its goal of greater
situational awareness.
Second, the time line for reporting of no earlier than 72
hours after confirmation an incident has occurred strikes the
right balance to allow a firm sufficient time for investigation
and implementation of response measures while reporting timely,
accurate, and useful information to CISA. The initial stages of
an incident response require all hands on deck, and front-line
cyber defenders should be focused on investigation response and
remediation, rather than completing compliance paperwork.
Third is the need to ensure harmonization with existing
requirements. For already-regulated critical infrastructure
sectors, it is vital to ensure new requirements are harmonized
with existing laws and regulations. Financial institutions are
regularly examined for their cybersecurity operations and
compliance with reporting requirements and may be subject to
penalties and other enforcement mechanisms for deficiencies or
failures to comply.
The bill currently includes helpful provisions to require
CISA to coordinate with other agencies and regulatory
authorities to streamline reporting requirements.
The bill also builds off the Cybersecurity and Information
Sharing Act of 2015. We support the committee clearly
incorporating the key definitions and protections already
created by the CISA Act for private firms sharing information
with Government. Any bill that seeks to mandate cyber
information sharing should incorporate these protections, and
we appreciate that you have clearly defined that in your bill.
Finally, the bill addresses the need to help companies
understand if their data has been compromised by an attack on a
Government system. While the SolarWinds attack targeted several
Federal agencies, it also impacted a much broader swath of
entities, including critical infrastructure companies.
Financial services firms are required to share sensitive
and confidential information with regulators and other
Government agencies that, if breached, could pose risks to the
institution and its customers. To this end, the bill includes
language to address this need for greater transparency.
In closing, I would note that there is an additional area
that we would like to continue working with you on, and that is
around the need for improvements to bidirectional information
sharing and collaboration. Current information sharing is often
one-sided from Government--from industry to Government, and the
alerts and warnings industry receives from Government are often
delayed, limiting their usefulness.
At CISA, along with intelligence from law enforcement
agencies, strengthened coordination, and collaboration with the
private sector, we urge Congress to ensure Government agencies
are improving the speed and quality of information provided
back to critical infrastructure.
Again, thank you for your leadership on cybersecurity and
your thoughtful approach to crafting this legislation. We look
forward to continuing to work with this committee, and I am
happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hogsett follows:]
Prepared Statement of Heather Hogsett
September 1, 2021
Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and Honorable Members
of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify. I am Heather
Hogsett, senior vice president of technology and risk strategy for
BITS, the technology policy division of the Bank Policy Institute
(BPI).
BPI is a nonpartisan policy, research, and advocacy organization
representing the Nation's leading banks. BPI members include universal
banks, regional banks, and major foreign banks doing business in the
United States. BITS, our technology policy division, works with our
member banks as well as other leading financial institutions on cyber
risk management and critical infrastructure protection, fraud
reduction, regulation, and innovation.
I also serve as co-chair of the Financial Services Sector
Coordinating Council (FSSCC) Policy Committee. The FSSCC coordinates
across the financial sector to enhance security and resiliency and to
collaborate with Government partners such as the U.S. Treasury and the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), as well as
financial regulatory agencies.
executive summary
Banks and other financial institutions are increasingly under cyber
attack by foreign nations and criminal groups seeking to disrupt the
financial system and undermine the functioning of the U.S. economy. The
financial sector takes these risks seriously and has a long history of
working across industry and with Government partners to address and
manage these risks. We were the first sector to form an information
sharing and analysis center in 1999 and established a strong sector
coordinating council in 2002--both of which have served as leading
examples other critical infrastructure sectors have sought to
replicate. We are also one of the few critical infrastructure sectors
that has had cybersecurity and incident reporting requirements in law
and regulation for over 20 years.
We greatly appreciate the committee's leadership to address the
Nation's cybersecurity challenges and efforts to improve the resilience
of critical infrastructure. We share a mutual commitment to
cybersecurity and the value in sharing threat and incident information,
and support efforts to fortify CISA as a leader in this space.
As Congress considers legislation to require critical
infrastructure entities to report cyber incidents to the Federal
Government, we believe the following elements in the bill--the Cyber
Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2021--which are
discussed in greater detail below, are vital to achieving our shared
goal of protecting the Nation's critical infrastructure:

Scope.--The scope of required reporting focuses on incidents
that could cause actual harm, which will ensure CISA receives
accurate and useful data to help achieve its goal of greater
situational awareness. Approaches which seek to mandate
reporting of ``potential'' incidents are too broad and would
lead to over-reporting that is insufficiently focused on the
actual risks.

Time Line.--The time line for reporting of no earlier than
72 hours after confirmation an incident has occurred strikes
the right balance to allow sufficient time for investigation
and implementation of mitigation and response measures while
reporting timely and useful information to CISA. The initial
stages of an incident response require ``all-hands-on-deck''
and front-line cyber defenders should be focused on response
and remediation rather than completing compliance paperwork.

Harmonization.--For already-regulated critical
infrastructure sectors, it is vital to ensure new reporting
requirements are harmonized with existing laws and regulations.
We appreciate the approach taken in the bill and would
recommend continued Congressional focus to ensure
implementation avoids unnecessary duplication and establishes a
streamlined process for all required reporting.

Maintain Protections and Definitions in the Cybersecurity
and Information Sharing Act of 2015 (CISA Act).--We support the
committee clearly incorporating the key definitions and
protections already created by the CISA Act for private firms
sharing information with Government. This bill builds on that,
and the consistency for industry is important. Any bill in
Congress that seeks to mandate cyber information sharing should
incorporate these protections and we appreciate that is clearly
defined in the bill.

Helping Companies Understand if Their Data has Been
Compromised.--The SolarWinds attack targeted several Federal
agencies but also impacted a much broader swath of entities
including critical infrastructure companies. Government
agencies who are attacked should be required to notify critical
infrastructure entities when their sensitive information may be
compromised. We appreciate the language in this bill that seeks
to address this important issue.
Working Together on Other Priorities

There is an additional area that we would like to work on
with this committee and Congress that we believe is essential
to improving our cyber defense capabilities, and that is around
the need for greatly improved bi-directional information
sharing. The Government should use reported information from
critical infrastructure and other Government entities to
improve the relevancy and speed of alerts and other analyses
that can be provided to critical infrastructure. More timely
and actionable information being shared with the private sector
would benefit our collective security and resilience
capabilities.
background on existing financial services sector cybersecurity efforts
Legal and Regulatory Requirements
The banking/financial services sector is one of the few critical
infrastructure sectors that has had mandatory cybersecurity and
incident reporting requirements in law and regulation for over 20
years. As a result, we have experienced what is most effective and
would emphasize that it is important to ensure that any new
requirements are harmonized and align with existing requirements for
financial firms.
For example, financial institutions are regularly examined for
compliance with the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and its implementing
regulations, which require cyber incident reporting when unauthorized
access to or misuse of customer data occurs. The New York Department of
Financial Services Cybersecurity Regulation expanded on these
requirements and requires reporting if a cyber incident is likely to
cause harm to the financial institution's operations. In the course of
on-going robust oversight from regulatory authorities--such as the
Federal Reserve Board, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, among others--banks are
regularly examined for their cybersecurity practices including the use
of security controls, third-party risk management and senior management
and board oversight.
A summary of the main banking/financial services requirements is
attached as Appendix A.
Information-Sharing and Collaboration Efforts
In addition to required regulatory reporting, financial firms have
made significant investments to protect the industry, developing high-
trust collaboration centers to improve resilience at individual firms
and across the broader financial system, through digital
infrastructure, comprehensive use of security tools, exercise programs
and extensive training. They have also created joint initiatives to
address systemic challenges such as:

The Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis
Center (FS-ISAC),\1\ which shares cyber threat information and
best practices for nearly 7,000 members across the globe,
including 4,600 U.S. financial institutions. The FS-ISAC was
one of the first ISACs created among industry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.fsisac.com/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Services Sector Coordinating Council
(FSSCC),\2\ which strengthens the resiliency of the financial
sector against cyber attacks and other threats by proactively
identifying threats, promoting protection, driving
preparedness, collaborating with Government partners and
regulatory authorities and coordinating crisis response.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://fsscc.org/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Analysis and Resilience Center,\3\ which works to
mitigate systemic risk to the Nation's most critical financial
and electric infrastructure, and facilitates operational
collaboration between firms, the U.S. Government, and other key
partners.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://systemicrisk.org/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sheltered Harbor,\4\ a secure data repository for consumer
bank and securities holdings to protect customers, financial
institutions, and public confidence in the event a cyber attack
causes critical systems to fail; and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.shelteredharbor.org/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Cyber Risk Institute's ``Cyber Profile''\5\ which is
derived from the National Institute of Standards and
Technology's Cybersecurity Framework and incorporates financial
services regulatory requirements and industry best practices to
address one of the industry's most pressing needs to harmonize
regulation globally to improve security and resilience.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://cyberriskinstitute.org/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
discussion points: effective cyber incident reporting model
The recent string of ransomware attacks and supply chain
compromises have highlighted the need for more transparency about the
nature and depth of cybersecurity attacks affecting the public and
private sectors. BPI member banks are committed to improving
protections across critical infrastructure sectors and recognize the
value in sharing cyber threat and incident information with CISA.
As noted above, banks and other financial institutions already
adhere to extensive cybersecurity and regulatory reporting
requirements. It must be a priority for Congress to harmonize any new
requirements for reporting, oversight and enforcement with existing
regulatory requirements to minimize confusion on competing requirements
and avoid distracting from response efforts.
Based on the industry's experience with long-standing regulations
and requirements, we are encouraged to see that the current draft bill
includes the following elements that will help ensure an effective
structure for incident reporting for all critical infrastructure
sectors:
Scope
The current draft of the legislation appropriately tailors the
kinds of incidents to be reported to actual incidents, which will
ensure CISA receives accurate, timely, and useful information. Other
approaches that would collect information on ``potential incidents''
would create near-constant reporting to CISA by financial services
firms based on the number of incidents those firms see on a daily
basis. It is unclear what a ``potential incident'' is, how it would be
reported and what value that provides. As the U.S. Government seeks to
increase its analytical capabilities, it is also critical for it to be
able to turn around threat information and share it with all sectors
quickly. Collecting information on potential incidents would add noise
to the signal of material incidents and thus overwhelm, rather than
enhance, CISA's analytical efforts.
Time Line
The bill's reporting requirement of no earlier than 72 hours after
confirmation an incident has occurred, strikes an important balance
between allowing an affected entity to implement immediate response
measures while ensuring CISA receives timely, useful, and accurate
information. The initial stages of an incident response require ``all-
hands-on-deck'' to focus immediately on understanding the incident and
implementing mitigation and response measures. Other approaches that
would require reporting within 24 hours would distract from critical
work in the early stages of a response and result in reports that were
premature and likely erroneous.
Harmonization
For already regulated critical infrastructure sectors, it is vital
to ensure new reporting requirements are harmonized with existing laws
and regulations. The bill currently includes helpful provisions to
require CISA to coordinate with Sector Risk Management Agencies and
regulatory authorities to streamline reporting requirements.
As noted above, financial institutions comply with a multitude of
reporting requirements which establish key definitions, time lines, and
reporting thresholds, as well as oversight and enforcement mechanisms
which may include fines and other penalties. There is value in
reporting to CISA, but it is important to ensure Government agencies
and regulators work together quickly to develop a common reporting form
that would be good for all Government entities requiring incident
reporting. Otherwise, still more time will be spent by first responders
working with firms' legal and compliance teams to ensure that each
agency's nuanced requirement is met, rather than reporting uniformly
and allowing more time for protecting critical infrastructure.
Maintain Protections of the Cybersecurity and Information Sharing Act
of 2015
The bill incorporates existing definitions and protections from the
CISA Act, which will provide helpful continuity for industry. These
measures, which include privacy and liability protections, serve as
instrumental building blocks to greater sharing and collaboration
between the public and private sectors, and should be continued as
Congress expands the information firms are required to submit to CISA.
Helping Companies Understand if Their Data has Been Compromised
Financial services companies are required to share sensitive and
confidential information, including operational and customer data, with
regulators and other Government agencies that, if breached, could pose
risks to the institution and its customers. The current draft of the
bill recognizes the importance of ensuring that Government agencies are
also required to provide greater transparency and alert critical
infrastructure companies if their sensitive data is affected by a
breach at a Federal agency. Such notification would allow the firm to
take proactive measures to mitigate risks, helping protect the firm,
its customers, and potentially the broader sector.
future work together
Recent disruptive ransomware attacks on critical infrastructure are
a stark reminder of the threats we face and the urgent need to rethink
how Government and industry work together to protect against National
security threats. Expanding CISA's awareness of cyber incidents
affecting critical infrastructure through required reporting will help
improve the quality of cyber threat analysis that can be shared more
broadly across the public and private sectors. We appreciate the
committee's thoughtful approach and efforts to take input from critical
infrastructure sectors in crafting this important legislation and look
forward to continued collaboration.
We also look forward to working with the committee on other
opportunities to improve public-private collaboration to address
cybersecurity threats. As CISA and other Government agencies
increasingly receive incident data and other threat information, they
should be required to improve the quality, timeliness, and actionable
nature of the information that can be provided to critical
infrastructure. Current information sharing is often one-sided from
industry to Government and the alerts and warnings industry receives
from Government are often delayed, limiting their usefulness. As CISA,
along with intelligence and law enforcement agencies, strengthen
coordination and collaboration with the private sector, we urge
Congress to ensure Government agencies are improving the speed and
quality of information provided back to critical infrastructure.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify today and look forward to
any questions.
APPENDIX A
The following is a snapshot of the main banking/financial services
cybersecurity incident notification and reporting requirements, a
myriad of others exist as well.
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA).--Under the GLBA and its implementing
regulations,\6\ cyber incident reporting is triggered when a financial
institution becomes aware of unauthorized access to sensitive customer
information that is, or is likely to be, a misuse of the customer's
information. Notification to regulators is required as soon as possible
after the institution determines that misuse of customer data has
occurred or is reasonably possible (e.g. at the start of an
investigation to determine the likelihood that the information has been
or could be misused). To ensure adherence to these requirements,
regulators conduct on-going and rigorous reviews of institutions'
operating and governance processes, including data security and data
handling processes and third-party risk management measures. Failure to
report incidents and adhere to these requirements could result in
serious enforcement measures including mandatory corrective action
directives, restrictions on activities, and fines.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Interagency Guidance on Response Programs for Unauthorized
Access to Customer Information and Customer Notice. See https://
www.federalregister.gov/documents/2005/03/29/05-5980/interagency-
guidance-on-response-programs-for-unauthorized-access-to-customer-
information-and.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reporting Time Line.--As soon as possible once the
institution determines unauthorized access occurred.

Definitions.--A cyber incident is defined as unauthorized
access to sensitive customer information.

Scope of Reporting.--Covers non-public customer information
such as personally identifiable financial information,
financial transaction information, income, and credit rating
data, etc.

Reporting Mechanism.--Report provided to regulators;
information becomes part of on-going regulatory oversight/
examinations.
New York Department of Financial Services (NYDFS) Cybersecurity
Regulation. The NYDFS regulations \7\ became effective on March 1, 2017
and add another layer of mandatory cybersecurity reporting requirements
for financial services companies. A financial institution must notify
NYDFS when a cyber event triggers reporting to any other Government
body, regulatory or self-regulatory agency. Notification is also
triggered if there is a reasonable likelihood of material harm to the
institution's operations. Once a triggering event has occurred,
notification must occur as promptly as possible, but not later than 72
hours from the determination that a cybersecurity event has occurred.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See New York Codes, Rules and Regulations (23 NYCRR 500).
https://govt.westlaw.com/nycrr/Browse/Home/NewYork/
NewYorkCodesRulesandRegulations?guid=I5be30d2007-
f811e79d43a037eefd0011&originationContext=documenttoc&transitionType=Def
ault&context- Data=(sc.Default).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reporting Time Line.--72 hours from the determination that a
cyber event has occurred.

Definitions.--A cyber event is defined as any act or attempt
to gain unauthorized access to, disrupt, or misuse an
information system or information stored on an information
system.

Scope of Reporting.--Covers non-public customer information
and information technology systems.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Defined as ``a discrete set of electronic information resources
organized for the collection, processing, maintenance, use, sharing,
dissemination, or disposition of electronic information, as well as any
specialized system such as industrial/process controls systems,
telephone switching and private branch exchange systems, and
environmental control systems.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reporting Mechanism.--Report provided to NYDFS; information
becomes part of on-going regulatory oversight.
European Union General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).--In the
case of a personal data breach, notification is required without undue
delay and, where feasible, not later than 72 hours after having become
aware of it. GDPR sets specific privacy parameters for use, data
security, and handling of consumer data.

Reporting Time Line.--72 hours.

Definitions.--A ``data breach'' is defined as ``the
accidental or unlawful destruction, loss, alteration,
unauthorized disclosure of, or access to, personal data
transmitted, stored or otherwise processed.''

Scope of Reporting.--Personal data.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Personal data is under GDPR here: https://gdpr-info.eu/art-4-
gdpr/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reporting Mechanism.--Entities report to the agency
designated by each member state, which then notifies other
member states as needed.
European Union NIS Directive 1.0.--In 2016, the European Union
mandated cyber incident reporting for all sectors defined under the
term Essential Services which is like the U.S. term of Critical
Infrastructure. However, the European Union has both mandatory security
mandates on Digital Service Providers and stricter reporting
requirements on DSPs.\10\ The European Union is in the midst of
updating the NIS Directive 2.0 where notification must occur with any
event compromising the availability, authenticity, integrity, or
confidentiality of stored, transmitted, or processed data or of the
related services offered by, or accessible via, network and information
systems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Essential Services are defined by the European Union in the
NIS Directive and was implemented in 2016. See: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2016/1148/oj.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reporting Time Line.--24 hours from when an entity is aware
of an incident, and then a report 30 days later.

Definitions.--An incident means any event having an actual
adverse effect on the security of network and information
systems.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ For definition of ``incident,'' see https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
eli/dir/2016/1148/oj.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Scope of Reporting.--The directive does not define the
threshold of what is a significant incident requiring
notification to the relevant E.U. member state National
authority and defines 3 parameters for reporting: Number of
users affected; duration of incident; geographic spread. DSPs
have 5 requirements that are broader.

Reporting Mechanism.--Entities report to the agency
designated by each member state.
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPR) from OCC/Federal Reserve/
FDIC.--On Jan. 12, 2021, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
(OCC), the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Board),
and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) published a
proposed rule on ``Computer-Security Incident Notification Requirements
for Banking Organizations and Their Bank Service Providers.'' Under the
proposal, incident notification would be triggered after the
determination by a banking organization that a computer-security
incident has occurred that the bank believes in good faith could cause
significant disruption to the institution's operations and ability to
deliver products and services to a significant portion of its customers
or could pose a risk to the financial stability of the United States.
Upon determining that an event has reached the notification incident
threshold, a banking organization would be required to notify as soon
as possible but no later than 36 hours.

Reporting Time Line.--36 hours after a ``good faith''
determination of an incident.

Definitions.--A computer security incident is defined as an
occurrence that jeopardizes confidentiality, integrity or
availability of an information system or the information a
system processes, stores, or transmits;\12\ a notification
incident is defined as a significant computer security incident
that could jeopardize the viability of the operations of a
financial institution, prevent customers from accessing their
deposit and other accounts, or impact the stability of the
financial sector.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ This definition is taken from NIST which states a computer
security incident is ``an occurrence that results in actual or
potential jeopardy to the confidentiality, integrity, or availability
of an information system or the information the system processes,
stores, or transmits or that constitutes a violation or imminent threat
of violation of security policies, security procedures, or acceptable
use policies. See NIST, Computer Security Resource Center, Glossary
https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/Computer_Security_Incident.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Scope of Reporting.--Covers non-public customer information
and information technology systems.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ The NPR does not define information technology systems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reporting Mechanism.--Notification to be provided to primary
Federal regulator; intended to provide early awareness of
emerging threats to individual institutions and potentially the
broader financial system.

Mr. Mayer. Chairwoman, I believe you may be muted.
Ms. Clarke. I think I was on mute. Did everyone hear me?
Mr. Mayer. No.
Ms. Clarke. I am sorry about that. They always catch you,
don't they?
Let me thank Ms. Hogsett for her expert testimony here
today. I now recognize Mr. Miller to summarize your statement
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN S. MILLER, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT OF POLICY,
AND GENERAL COUNSEL, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY COUNCIL

Mr. Miller. Thank you.
Chairs Clarke and Thompson, Ranking Members Garbarino and
Katko, distinguished Members of the subcommittee, on behalf of
the Information Technology Industry Council, or ITI, thank you
for the opportunity to testify today on the Cyber Incident
Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2021.
ITI is a global policy and advocacy organization
representing 80 of the world's leading ICT companies. I lead
ITI's trust data and technology policy team, including our work
on cybersecurity globally. As the current vice chair of the
Information Technology Sector Coordinating Council and co-chair
of the ICT Supply Chain Risk Management Task Force, I have
significant experience partnering with CISA on efforts to
improve cyber supply chain and critical infrastructure security
and welcome your interest on this important topic. I would also
like to thank you and your staffs for the thoughtful and
collaborative approach you have taken with stakeholders while
drafting this legislation.
If narrowly scoped and carefully crafted, we believe that
an incident reporting regime can help improve the Nation's
cyber resilience and security by increasing situational
awareness across Government and critical infrastructure and
driving more effective operational collaboration in response to
significant incidents.
We commend the subcommittee for its leadership on this
issue and commitment to developing an effective and efficient
cyber incident reporting regime, and we appreciate the Act
leads many of the details to be worked out through a rule-
making process prioritizing CISA engagement with stakeholders.
Developing an effective and efficient incident reporting
regime while at the same time preserving the partnership and
collaborative model that is central to CISA's mission are both
important goals. Just last month, ITI published policy
principles for cyber incident reporting which are attached to
my written testimony and I encourage the subcommittee to
consider in full.
ITI also led a multi-association letter to Congress sent
last Friday stressing several issues that any incident
reporting legislation should address. I will focus the balance
of my time on five key recommendations included in both our
policy principles and the letter.
First, we recommend any legislation allow for feasible
reporting time lines commensurate with incident severity levels
but of no less than 72 hours. Ensuring time lines are feasible
is important for several reasons, including allowing entities
sufficient time to determine what has occurred and ensuring an
incident is properly contextualized, upholding cybersecurity
while an entity investigates an incident and to align with
global best practices. We appreciate the Act makes clear CISA
may not require reporting earlier than 72 hours after an entity
confirms an incident has occurred.
Second, we recommend any legislation maintain appropriate
confidentiality, nondisclosure, and liability protections. We
welcome the act's intent to extend liability protections and
FOIA exemptions from the CISA 2015 information sharing
legislation to reports provided pursuant to the Act but note
the language of CISA 2015 may need to be updated to align with
the specific categories of incident reporting information that
are ultimately required by the pending rule.
Further, the Act should define clear confidentiality and
privacy requirements regarding the use of shared information,
including to require that any information disseminated to
interagency partners is scrubbed of the providing entity's
identifying information.
Third, we urge Congress to harmonize existing regulatory
reporting requirements to ensure companies are able to
efficiently report incidents and not subject to contradictory
or duplicative reporting requirements that may hamper
notification. We appreciate the Act directs CISA to consider
existing regulatory requirements and work with relevant
regulatory authorities and recommend adding language clarifying
that CISA should leverage existing channels to collect incident
information whenever possible, including active interfaces with
the FBI, SEC, and financial sector regulators to truly lessen
the regulatory burden.
Fourth, we recommend any legislation establish appropriate
reporting thresholds and limit reporting to verified incidents.
The act's inclusion of minimum thresholds for reporting a
covered incident built on a risk-based analytical model and its
focus on verified incidents, as opposed to near misses hit the
mark. However, there is ambiguity in the minimum threshold
language that could be resolved through the concept of an
incident categorization matrix which could more accurately
determine the severity of actual harm posed by incidents,
enabling finer prioritization and more precise reporting.
Finally, we maintain that reporting obligations in any
legislation should fall only on impacted entities, not on
vendors or third-party service providers. An incident reporting
requirement with a broader scope could disrupt normal business
operations, including potentially forcing vendors or third
parties to disclose business confidential information of
impacted customers or breach their contractual obligations and
result in flooding CISA with multiple, duplicative reports
diverting limited resources away from cyber incident response.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today. I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]
Prepared Statement of John S. Miller
September 1, 2021
Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and distinguished
Members of the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure
Protection, and Innovation of the House Committee on Homeland Security,
thank you for the opportunity to testify today. My name is John Miller,
senior vice president of policy and general counsel at the Information
Technology Industry Council (ITI).\1\ I lead ITI's Trust, Data, and
Technology team, including our work on cybersecurity policy globally,
and I have deep experience working on public-private security
initiatives in the United States, including currently serving as co-
chair of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA)-
sponsored Information and Communications Technology Supply Chain Risk
Management Task Force (ICT SCRM Task Force), and as vice chair of the
Information Technology Sector Coordinating Council (ITSCC), the
principal IT sector partner to CISA on critical infrastructure
protection and cybersecurity policy. I am honored to provide ITI's
perspective on the important topic of cyber incident reporting and the
legislation the subcommittee is considering today.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See ITI membership list at: https://www.itic.org/about/
membership/iti-members.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ITI represents the world's leading information and communications
and technology (ICT) companies. We promote innovation world-wide,
serving as the ICT industry's premier advocate and thought leader in
the United States and around the globe. ITI's membership comprises
leading innovative companies from all corners of the technology sector,
including hardware, software, digital services, semiconductor, network
equipment, cybersecurity, and other internet and technology-enabled
companies that rely on ICT to evolve their businesses. Cybersecurity is
rightly a priority issue for governments and our industry, and we share
the common goals of improving cybersecurity, protecting the privacy of
individuals' data, and maintaining strong intellectual property
protections. Further, our members service customers across all levels
of government and the full range of global industry sectors, such as
financial services, health care, and energy. We thus acutely understand
the importance of cybersecurity as not only a global business
imperative for companies and customers alike, but as critical to our
collective security. As a result, our industry has devoted significant
resources, including expertise, initiative, and investment in
cybersecurity efforts to create a more secure and resilient internet
ecosystem.
The SolarWinds compromise and the latest wave of damaging
ransomware attacks, along with other recent cyber attacks, serve as an
important reminder that the cyber threat landscape is constantly
evolving and that we need innovative new policy ideas to help confront
the emergence of new threats. We have seen policy makers increasingly
consider incident reporting as a potentially appropriate tool to
improve Government's ability to leverage its resources toward not only
helping victim organizations recover from incidents, but ideally to
help protect others from similar threats or vulnerabilities. If
narrowly scoped and carefully crafted, we believe that an incident
reporting regime can help improve the Nation's digital resilience and
security.
We commend the subcommittee for its leadership on this issue and
its commitment to developing an effective and efficient cybersecurity
incident reporting regime. As a general matter, we appreciate that the
Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2021
(hereafter ``the Act'') leaves many of the details to be worked out
through a rule-making process in which CISA solicits feedback from
stakeholders, as opposed to laying out stringent requirements in
statute.
Just last month ITI published our Policy Principles for Cyber
Incident Reporting in the United States (hereafter ``Policy
Principles'') to help inform on-going efforts domestically, which is
attached as an Appendix to my testimony (see Appendix A). We make ten
recommendations to policy makers in the Policy Principles, all of which
we encourage the subcommittee to take into account as it considers
incident reporting legislation and works on further refinements to the
Act. We also led a recent multi-association letter to Congress
stressing several key areas aligned with our principles that should be
included in any incident reporting legislation.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Letter available here: https://www.itic.org/documents/
cybersecurity/MultiassnLetter-SecurityIncidentReporting-
08.27.2021FINALFINAL.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
After briefly providing important context to help inform the
current security incident reporting debate, I will focus the bulk of my
written testimony on five recommendations that were included in our
Policy Principles, as well as the above-referenced multi-association
letter, including: (1) Establishing feasible reporting time lines of no
less than 72 hours; (2) ensuring appropriate confidentiality,
nondisclosure, and liability protections; (3) limiting reporting to the
impacted organization, rather than third-party vendors or providers;
(4) harmonizing Federal cybersecurity incident reporting requirements;
and (5) limiting reporting to verified intrusions and incidents. My
testimony concludes by stressing the importance of seizing the
opportunity to develop a workable security incident notification regime
while preserving CISA's collaborative role with private-sector
partners.
i. security incident reporting in context
Devising a successful cybersecurity incident reporting regime
requires an understanding of adjacent and overlapping cybersecurity
information sharing and data breach notification measures, as well as
the evolving global policy debates regarding this issue.
a. Clarifying and Understanding Terms Can Help Efficiently Harmonize
Requirements
In thinking about security incident reporting, it is essential that
policy makers and other stakeholders recognize that it is distinct from
other concepts with which it is often confused: Primarily, data breach
notification and cybersecurity threat information sharing. Security
incident notification such as that contemplated by the Act requires
organizations to report on the details of a cybersecurity incident that
has already occurred to help increase visibility into such events; data
breach notification requirements are also triggered post-incident but
relate specifically to reporting details regarding the unauthorized
access to or disclosure of personally identifiable information or other
sensitive data for privacy purposes. Importantly, policy makers should
consider that in some instances a single incident could trigger both
types of notification and reporting requirements and should consider
how to reduce potential inefficiencies in reporting. Both of the
preceding two concepts are distinct from cyber threat information
sharing, which refers to the proactive sharing of threat information to
help all entities better understand cybersecurity threats and take
steps to prevent future cyber attacks. Given the subcommittee's intent
to leverage the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015 (CISA
2015) in the security incident reporting context, including to extend
CISA 2015's liability protections, it is critical to understand both
the differences and similarities between the two concepts. We further
elaborate on all three of these concepts in our Policy Principles (see
Appendix A).
b. The Global Policy Debate Can Help Inform U.S. Policy
ITI is an active participant in policy conversations on
cybersecurity incident reporting globally. Indeed, it is not only the
United States that is considering implementing a mandatory incident
reporting regime. Europe, in the proposal for a revised Network and
Information Systems Directive (NIS 2 Directive), as well as Australia,
in their Security Legislation Amendment (Critical Infrastructure) Bill
of 2020, which revises the Security of Critical Infrastructure Bill of
2018, are contemplating mandatory incident reporting as a way to
increase Government visibility into cybersecurity events.\3\ We have
similarly encouraged both the European Commission and the Australian
Government to adopt the principles discussed in my testimony and
referenced in ITI's Policy Principles.\4\ These global efforts are
relevant and important to consider as Congress seeks to develop
legislation that establishes a mandatory incident reporting regime, as
the subcommittee acknowledges in the Act by requiring the CISA director
to align the reporting requirements CISA develops with international
standards.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Security Legislation Amendment (Critical Infrastructure) Bill
of 2020, first reading text, available here: https://
parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlinfo/download/legislation/bills/r6657_first-
reps/toc_pdf/20182b01.pdf;fileType=application%2Fpdf; proposal for NIS
2 Directive text, available here: https://digital-
strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/proposal-directive-measures-high-
common-level-cybersecurity-across-union.
\4\ ITI Comments on NIS 2 Directive, available here: https://
ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/
12475-Cybersecurity-review-of-EU-rules-on-the-security-of-network-and-
information-systems/F2004660_en; ITI Comments on Security Legislation
Amendment Bill of 2020, available here: https://www.aph.gov.au/
DocumentStore.ashx?id=04c36c84-3067-4ffb-bec2-
53c780079a02&subId=701444.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ii. recommendations for a successful security incident notification
approach
ITI's Policy Principles set forth ten recommendations that policy
makers should incorporate to develop and implement a successful
cybersecurity incident notification regime. While all of these
recommendations are important, my testimony focuses on five key
recommendations below. Please refer to the Policy Principles at annex
for the full set of recommendations.
a. Establish Feasible Reporting Time Lines
In our Policy Principles, we recommend that any legislation allow
for reasonable reporting time lines commensurate with incident severity
levels, but of no less than 72 hours. Ensuring that time lines are
feasible is important for a number of reasons, including:
Allowing companies sufficient time to determine what has
occurred.--Requiring an entity to report an incident on a shorter time
line may be insufficient for companies to determine the nature of the
issue--is it a cyber attack or is it merely a network outage? In the
early hours following the discovery that something anomalous has
occurred, our companies are focused on figuring out what has happened
and developing a response plan. Indeed, the primary initial focus for
companies should be on identifying and responding to malicious
activities, rectifying the problem, and ensuring (or restoring)
business continuity.
Upholding cybersecurity while a company investigates the issues.--A
shorter time line for reporting may also serve to undermine
cybersecurity, in that such a requirement can expose information about
an incident before a patch is applied or operations are restored,
making operators and their customers vulnerable to additional attacks
by hackers.
Ensuring resources are leveraged appropriately and ensuring the
incident is properly contextualized.--Requiring reporting on a shorter
time line may also divert limited Government resources away from
addressing incidents that are actually having a significant impact. If
entities are required to report incidents before they have the
opportunity to verify what has occurred, an agency such as CISA runs
the risk of being inundated with reports that do not offer meaningful
information or otherwise lack the appropriate context. It is incredibly
difficult to narrow the scope on the back end when an agency is sifting
through reports trying to retroactively determine what is important.
Instead, the focus should be on only requiring incident reporting of
severe and significant attacks that cause actual disruption or loss and
that include specific parameters.
Aligning with global best practices.--A 72-hour time line also
aligns with global best practices, which we believe is of great
importance to facilitating interoperability of approaches. For example,
the German IT Security Act and various state-level notification
requirements in the United States allow for a reporting window of 72
hours.\5\ Article 33 of the EU's General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) also states that in the case of a personal data breach, impacted
companies shall without undue delay and, where feasible, not later than
72 hours after having become aware of it, notify the personal data
breach to the competent supervisory authority.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ German IT Security Act 2.0 available here: https://
www.bundesrat.de/SharedDocs/beratungsvorgaenge/2021/0301-0400/0324-
21.html; Regarding state-level time lines, see, e.g., New York
Department of Financial Services reporting requirements: https://
www.crowell.com/NewsEvents/AlertsNewsletters/all/Newly-Proposed-Cyber-
Reporting-Rules-for-Banking-Organizations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We appreciate that as currently drafted, Subsection (d)(5) of the
Act makes clear that the CISA director may not require reporting any
earlier than 72 hours after an entity has confirmed that an incident
has occurred. We also stress that requiring a formal report on a
verified, significant incident should not preclude an impacted
organization from voluntarily providing less-fulsome notifications to
CISA on a more flexible time line. Indeed, should an entity want to
notify CISA of an event before a formal report is finalized and
submitted, it should have the ability to do so. Section (f) of the Act
seems to contemplate such a layered approach, which would allow for an
initial voluntary, preliminary notification to CISA, with more
substantial reporting coming once the impacted organization has
confirmed that an incident reached the severity metrics established in
the IFR called for by the Act.
b. Maintain Appropriate Confidentiality, Nondisclosure, and Liability
Protections
In ITI's Policy Principles we also stress the importance of
ensuring the confidentiality of information provided in incident
reports. It is imperative to have strong and transparent rules about
the confidentiality of incident information that is shared with or by
Federal agencies in order to cultivate trust in the process and between
the private and public sectors. Such rules should govern not only the
dissemination of incident information with relevant interagency
partners but should specifically preclude direct or indirect regulatory
use of such information. Such rules should additionally govern how
unclassified information on a specific incident is further shared with
the U.S. Government, other governments, and with nongovernmental
entities. These rules must be crafted to guarantee compliance with
existing legal regimes, including contractual and privacy obligations.
This is an area that we believe could be strengthened in the Act.
Indeed, it is our view that the language surrounding how the
information provided in an incident report can be used based on the
Act's Subsection (e): (1) Does not provide a sufficient level of
confidentiality for industry partners. The language lays out broad
circumstances where information can be shared (i.e., for a
``cybersecurity purpose''), but it does not provide details as to how
that information will be protected from disclosure. We believe that the
Act should define clear confidentiality and privacy requirements
regarding the use of such information and that it should require that
any information that is further disseminated is scrubbed of all
identifying information of the entity that provided it.
We also make the point in our Policy Principles that it is
important that policy makers ensure that there are appropriate
liability protections maintained in incident reporting legislation, so
that information provided in a report cannot later be used against an
entity. Of course, if there are instances in which entities have
engaged in unlawful misconduct, such liability protections would not
apply. We also believe that security incident reporting legislation
should make clear that cybersecurity incident reports shared with the
U.S. Government should be exempt from FOIA requests. Given this
recommendation, we welcome the Act's provisions in Section (f) which
offer protection to entities that report or provide information under
Section 106 of CISA 2015. At the same time--and this is an issue which
extends beyond the specific legislation that is being considered at
present--we believe that the language in CISA 2015, which is primarily
limited to ``cyber threat indicators,'' may well need to be updated to
include the categories of incident reporting information that are
ultimately required to be included in the reports submitted to CISA
under the Act. Adding such definitional clarity to CISA 2015 itself
will help to ensure that entities receive liability protection for all
relevant information that is shared, whether through voluntary cyber
threat indicator sharing, or mandatory or voluntary incident reports
provided to CISA under the Act.
c. Limit Reporting to the Impacted Entity
Another question that arises not only in the domestic conversation
on incident reporting but in the global conversation as well is who is
responsible for reporting an incident to the competent authority (CISA,
in the case of the Act). We believe that the reporting obligation
should fall only on the impacted entity, and that vendors or third-
party service providers should not be required to report cybersecurity
incidents to the U.S. Government that have occurred on their customers'
networks.
An incident reporting requirement with a broader scope would pose
numerous challenges to many organizations' normal business operations,
including potentially forcing vendors or third parties to disclose
business confidential information of impacted customers or breach their
contractual obligations. Such a requirement, if scoped broadly to
incorporate third parties and vendors, may also result in duplicative
incident reports which, as mentioned previously, could inundate CISA
with multiple duplicative reports that they then must sift through,
diverting limited resources away from meaningfully addressing
significant cybersecurity incidents.
d. Streamline Incident Reporting Requirements
There are currently several different measures that govern Federal
cybersecurity incident reporting, making for a complex and often
confusing landscape. Numerous Federal agencies currently have disparate
incident reporting requirements, many of which are just starting to be
implemented. For example, the banking sector is subject to multiple
specific notification requirements (see, e.g., 12 CFR part 30, appendix
B, supp. A (OCC); 12 CFR part 208, appendix D-2, supp. A, 12 CFR
211.5(l), 12 CFR part 225, appendix F, supp. A (Board); 12 CFR part
364, appendix B, supp. A (FDIC) (italics omitted); NPRM on Computer
Security Incident Reporting Requirements for Banking Organizations and
their Bank Service Providers) as is the defense industrial base (see 32
CFR  236.4--Mandatory cyber incident reporting procedures). There are
also reporting requirements captured in FISMA (see 44 U.S.C.  3553-54
& associated Binding Operational Directive 16-03); FedRAMP Incident
Communications Procedures; NERC Incident Reporting and Response
Planning as required by FERC; and the US-CERT Federal Incident
Notification Guidelines. Additionally, Section 2 of the President's
Executive Order on Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity includes a
number of provisions aimed at improving incident reporting on the part
of Federal contractors. There may also be interactions with existing
privacy reporting requirements or with law enforcement processes. And
additionally, as alluded to above, various State laws impose data
breach reporting requirements, often stemming from the same incidents.
To alleviate the confusion that is brought about by this complex
incident reporting landscape, we urge Congress in our Policy Principles
to harmonize existing regulatory reporting requirements to ensure that
companies are more efficiently able to report incidents and are not
subject to contradictory, duplicative, or otherwise confusing reporting
requirements that may serve to hamper the notification process. We also
recommend that reported information be aggregated, anonymized,
analyzed, and shared in a manner that facilitates the mitigation and/or
prevention of future cyber incidents.
All that being said, we appreciate that the Act recognizes in
Subsections (d)(7)(A) and (B) that covered entities may be subject to
existing regulatory requirements, and that it directs the CISA director
to consider those existing regulatory requirements in establishing
reporting requirements for covered entities, including working with
other regulatory authorities to see whether and how streamlining is
feasible. While we appreciate the inclusion of this provision, the Act
currently does little to actually lessen the regulatory burden. We
recommend adding language that clarifies that CISA should leverage
existing channels to collect incident information whenever possible,
including having existing interfaces such as the FBI, SEC, and
financial sector regulators provide updates based on engagement with
the private sector. This could be accomplished by directing the Office
of Management and Budget to issue guidance to Federal regulators and
law enforcement requiring agencies to share information related to
covered incidents against covered agencies with the Cyber Incident
Review Office.
e. Establish Appropriate Reporting Thresholds and Limit Reporting to
Verified Incidents
We appreciate that the Act attempts to establish minimum thresholds
for reporting a ``covered incident'' based on a risk-based, analytical
model. We consistently encourage policy makers to take a risk-based
approach to cybersecurity, and incident reporting is no exception. It
is important that the threshold for requiring an incident report is
sufficiently narrow and clearly delineated. Reporting requirements
should include specific parameters and be mapped to objective criteria,
and incident severity levels should be related to identifiable harms,
such as to public health and safety, or operational disruption.\6\
However, the considerations outlined in the Act's Subsection (4)(A)
introduce ambiguity that is not resolved in the minimum threshold
language outlined in Subsection (4)(B). Relatedly, providing additional
rigor around what constitutes a ``significant cyber incident'' would be
helpful.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Currently, the United States approach to categorizing cyber
incidents in the National Cyber Incident Response Plan defines a
``Significant Cyber Incident'' as a cyber incident that is (or group of
related cyber incidents that together are) likely to result in
demonstrable harm to the National security interests, foreign
relations, or economy of the United States or to the public confidence,
civil liberties, or public health and safety of the American people.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In our Policy Principles, we recommend that policy makers explore
the idea of an incident categorization matrix, which can represent the
severity of an incident more accurately, therefore allowing for
prioritization of incidents. We believe that a similar concept would be
useful to introduce here and encourage the subcommittee to include
language that directs CISA, in conjunction with interagency partners,
to develop such an incident categorization matrix. A categorization
matrix can be used to help determine the severity of, and potential
for, actual harm posed by an incident more accurately, helping to
prioritize incidents and ultimately enabling more precise reporting.
Focused reporting that is limited to severe incidents that may result
in actual harm reduces the burden on information security teams and
frees up resources for the essential tasks of examining and remediating
incidents and securing an organization's systems.
Similar approaches have been proposed by CISA and have already been
adopted by the United Kingdom (UK) and Australia. The United Kingdom's
National Cyber Security Center developed a Cyber Attack categorization
system, with incidents broken down into six categories, ranging from a
category 1 national cyber emergency to a category 6 localized incident.
Along with breaking out incidents into categories, the United Kingdom's
matrix includes a definition of the type of incident, information about
who responds to that incident, and what activities responders should
undertake.\7\ This approach helps lend additional clarity to
determining the severity of an incident and allows for resources to be
deployed more efficiently. Australia has developed a similar Cyber
Incident Categorization Matrix, which lays out similar categories
ranging from 1-6 and provides illustrative examples of the types of
incidents and impacted entities that fall in a given category. This
matrixed approach allows the Australian Cybersecurity Centre to triage
incident reports and respond appropriately based on level of impact.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Overview of NCSC cyber categorization matrix available here:
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/news/new-cyber-attack-categorisation-system-
improve-uk-response-incidents.
\8\ Matrix available at https://www.transparency.gov.au/annual-
reports/australian-signals-directorate/reporting-year/2019-20-6.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We applaud the committee's focus on incidents that produce actual
harms as established by the minimum thresholds for a ``covered
cybersecurity incident'' as set forth in Subsection (4)(b). This
emphasis on incidents that cause disruption of business operations,
compromises of the integrity or confidentially of data, and loss of
services ensures CISA's limited resources can be effectively and
efficiently leveraged. We were pleased to see that the Act focuses on
such confirmed incidents, as we have observed a somewhat troubling
trend in proposed incident reporting policies globally which require
entities to report ``potential'' incidents or ``near misses.'' In our
view, requiring the reporting of ``potential'' incidents does little to
improve cybersecurity and could inadvertently create an information
overload, preventing the competent authority from prioritizing actual,
confirmed incidents, and undertaking appropriate action to respond,
particularly when it is not clear what would constitute a ``potential''
incident. As we noted in the multi-association letter and in our Policy
Principles, reporting verified or confirmed incidents that have been
well-defined and scoped will help to avoid a culture of overreporting
that will strain limited incident response capacity and capabilities
inside and outside the Government. It will also help ensure that
information received is useful and actionable.
iii. prioritizing partnership and collaboration puts cisa in the best
position for success in cyber incident reporting
ITI has long advocated that public-private partnerships are
essential to improving cybersecurity, and CISA and its predecessor
entities at the Department of Homeland Security have been established
as key partners to industry on issues such as cybersecurity threat
information sharing and supply chain risk management. These
partnerships are essential to: (1) Identify potential threats; (2)
understand how and to what extent risks can be managed; and (3)
determine what actions should be taken to address risks without
yielding unintended consequences. The Act we are discussing today
acknowledges that Government and industry often have access to unique
information sets; this is certainly the case in the context of a
security incident, which is why sharing or reporting certain categories
of information can help all relevant stakeholders see the complete
picture, increasing situational awareness, and driving more effective
operational collaboration in response to significant incidents.
The private sector ICT community has not only been foundational in
developing the infrastructure of cyber space but, for well over a
decade, in providing leadership, innovation, and stewardship in all
aspects of cybersecurity, including helping to develop and
participating in numerous public-private partnership structures and
efforts. For example, global ICT companies have long participated in
sector coordinating councils (SCC), self-organized, self-governed
councils that allow owners and operators of critical infrastructure to
engage on a range of cybersecurity strategies, policies, and activities
with CISA and other U.S. Government counterparts, and also participate
in the ICT SCRM Task Force launched in 2018. I am pleased to serve as
the vice chair of the ITSCC and to work closely with my counterparts in
the Communications SCC, as well as CISA and other U.S. Government
partners as co-chair of the ICT SCRM Task Force.
We believe that if an incident reporting regime is crafted
carefully, it can be a helpful tool to improve Federal agencies'
situational awareness into cybersecurity incidents as well as to drive
improvements in operational collaboration between CISA and industry. In
order to realize such an effort, CISA's role as a trusted and
collaborative partner to industry must be preserved, if not
strengthened, as it must be able to continue to engage with relevant
stakeholders, including critical infrastructure owners and operators,
on not just the cybersecurity incident notification and reporting
requirements contemplated here but on the array of other important and
on-going cybersecurity and supply chain risk management partnership
activities referenced above.
This is an important moment in the history of CISA, still a
relatively new agency that has had to adapt itself to meet what seems
like a new set of threats and challenges every year. The legislation
under consideration by this subcommittee holds the promise of not only
developing an effective and efficient cybersecurity incident reporting
regime, but in doing so in a way that preserves the partnership and
collaborative model that this subcommittee set out when it created CISA
3 years ago. We urge the subcommittee to ultimately adopt legislation
that achieves both of these goals.
conclusion
Members of the subcommittee, ITI and our member companies once
again commend you for your leadership on this issue. We appreciate your
approach to engaging with stakeholders to ensure the partnership model
that CISA was founded on will be protected and continue to evolve as it
tackles these new threats. We encourage you to keep both the
partnership model and goal of improving operational collaboration in
mind as you consider how to best refine the Act in order to lend
additional clarity to questions around issues including minimum
thresholds for incident reporting, confidentiality and liability
protections, and conflicting or duplicative reporting requirements.
ITI stands ready to provide the subcommittee with any additional
input and assistance as it seeks to develop an approach to
cybersecurity incident reporting for critical infrastructure owners and
operators. And we reiterate our request that the subcommittee consider
our full set of Policy Principles, which, when taken together, will
help policy makers to structure a clear, straightforward incident
reporting regime that provides actionable, appropriately contextualized
information.
I would like to again thank the Chair, Ranking Member, and Members
of the subcommittee for inviting me to testify today and for your
interest in and examination of this important issue. I look forward to
your questions.
Thank you.
Appendix A.--ITI Policy Principles for Security Incident Reporting in
the U.S.
july 2021
The SolarWinds compromise has demonstrated how the cyber threat
landscape is constantly evolving, resulting in the emergence of new
threats. In search of a suitable policy response, policy makers have
increasingly turned to incident reporting policy regimes as a
potentially appropriate tool. The proposals introduced to date often
conflate multiple issues and misunderstand the goals and the
applicability of security incident reporting.
ITI recognizes the importance of cybersecurity incident reporting
to inform actions to respond to incidents and to contain or prevent
further impacts. ITI views the concepts related to security incident
reporting as distinct from those of cyber threat information sharing or
a data breach notification (see box for details). If a report provides
sufficient technical details about the suffered incident, Federal
agencies can understand the nature of the attack and take steps to
mitigate the associated risk. Likewise, actionable reporting may help
Government officials to prioritize incident response assistance to
affected organizations, particularly while dealing with an active
campaign targeting multiple organizations. This assumes that affected
organizations required support and that the principles articulated
below have been fully adopted.
As such, if carefully crafted, incident reporting has the potential
to be a helpful policy lever. It is through this lens that we offer our
recommendations on several key areas that policy makers should consider
in developing an effective, efficient security incident reporting
regime.
Security incident reporting is distinct from other concepts with
which it is often confused: Data breach notification and cyber threat
information sharing. While some incidents may blur the line between
these concepts, it is important to understand the difference between
these terms and what each process is meant to achieve.
Security Incident Reporting focuses on the past because it reports
on the details of a cybersecurity incident that has already occurred.
This could include the vector of compromise, the systems and
information compromised or targeted by the attacker, and any attributes
of the attacker's behavior. Reports may focus on the actual or the
potential harm caused by an incident. Information conveyed in the
reporting highly depends on the reporting time line, reporting purpose
(and use) and segment needs.
Data Breach Notification relates specifically to the unauthorized
access to or disclosure of personally identifiable information or other
sensitive privacy data. In the United States, there are more than 50
State and local laws focused on data breach notification.
Cyberthreat Information Sharing focuses on the future and refers to
the proactive sharing of threat information to help all entities
understand threats and take steps to prevent successful cyber attacks.
Threat information sharing should be voluntary and may include
indicators such as anomalous network activity or methods of
circumventing security controls.
develop and adopt an incident categorization matrix
Policy makers should ensure that the threshold for reporting
requirements is mapped to specific objective criteria and specific
incident severity levels related to identifiable harms, such as to
public health and safety, or operational disruption.\1\ Reporting
requirements should only focus on severe and significant attacks that
cause actual disruption or loss and should include specific parameters.
An incident categorization matrix \2\ can represent the severity of an
incident more accurately which helps with the prioritization of
incidents and ultimately supports more precise reporting. Focused
reporting that is limited to severe incidents reduces the burden on
information security teams and frees resources for the essential tasks
of examining and remediating incidents and securing the organization's
systems. Moreover, it reduces the likelihood of an informational
overload for applicable authorities that would undermine their ability
to prioritize responses and divert limited agency resources from
critical risk mitigation activities. These considerations are also key
in the context of defining the scope and object of reporting (e.g.,
avoiding the confusion of ``incident'' with other concepts or expanding
to ``potential'' incident reporting). We recommend policy makers
advance the joint understanding of the matrix and severity concept, by
facilitating a consensus-driven processes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Currently, the U.S. approach to categorizing cyber incidents in
the National Cyber Incident Response Plan defines a ``Significant Cyber
Incident'' as a cyber incident that is (or group of related cyber
incidents that together are likely to result in demonstrable harm to
the National security interests, foreign relations, or economy of the
United States or to the public confidence, civil liberties, or public
health and safety of the American people.
\2\ Similar approaches have been proposed by CISA and are already
adopted by the United Kingdom and Australia.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
establish feasible reporting time lines commensurate with incident
severity level
Any incident reporting legislation should ensure that time lines
are aligned with global best practices. The required time lines should
be commensurate with incident severity levels but allow for at least a
72-hour reporting window after an entity has verified the incident.
Anything shorter is unnecessarily brief and injects additional
complexity at a time when entities are more appropriately focused on
the difficult task of understanding, responding to, and remediating a
cyber incident. Shorter time lines also greatly increase the likelihood
that the entity will report inaccurate or inadequately contextualized
information that will not be helpful, potentially even undermining
cybersecurity response and remediation efforts.
limit responsibility for reporting only to the compromised entity
Any legislation should ensure that the reporting obligation falls
only on compromised entities. Vendors and third-party service providers
should not be required to report cybersecurity incidents to the U.S.
Government that have occurred on their customers' networks. Such a
requirement would pose numerous challenges to normal business
operations, including potentially forcing vendors or third parties to
disclose business confidential information of that customer or breach
their contractual obligations.
ensure confidentiality and appropriate protections around sensitive
information shared with federal agencies, including against regulatory
use
It is imperative to have strong and transparent rules about the
confidentiality of incident information that is shared with or by
Federal agencies. Such rules should govern not only the dissemination
of incident information with relevant interagency partners but should
specifically preclude direct or indirect regulatory use of such
information. Such rules should additionally govern how unclassified
information on a specific incident is further shared with the U.S.
Government, other governments, and with nongovernmental entities. These
rules must be crafted to guarantee compliance with existing legal
regimes, including contractual and privacy obligations. A designated
centralized reporting agency should provide a secure method of
communication. This could be as simple as publishing a PGP encryption
key or using the Traffic Light Protocol (TLP). Trust is essential.
establish targeted liability protections and appropriate exemptions
from the freedom of information act (foia)
Entities providing incident reports should receive liability
protections for providing such information to Federal agencies,
including engaging in activities related to monitoring or network
awareness of their information systems, other than in instances where
entities engage in willful misconduct. Additionally, cybersecurity
incident reports shared with the U.S. Government should be exempt from
FOIA requests.
harmonize federal cybersecurity incident reporting requirements
There are currently several different measures that govern Federal
cybersecurity incident reporting, making for a complex and oftentimes
confusing landscape.\3\ To alleviate such confusion, Congress should
consider harmonizing existing regulatory reporting requirements to
ensure the efficient sharing of covered cybersecurity incidents.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See, for example, banking sector notification requirements: 12
CFR part 30, appendix B, supp. A (OCC); 12 CFR part 208, appendix D-2,
supp. A, 12 CFR 211.5(l), 12 CFR part 225, appendix F, supp. A (Board);
12 CFR part 364, appendix B, supp. A (FDIC) (italics omitted); NPRM on
Computer Security Incident Reporting Requirements for Banking
Organizations and their Bank Service Providers; defense industrial base
mandatory reporting requirements: 32 CFR  236.4--Mandatory cyber
incident reporting procedures; FISMA reporting requirements: 44 U.S.C.
 3553-54 & associated Binding Operational Directive 16-03; FedRAMP
Incident Communications Procedures; NERC Incident Reporting and
Response Planning as required by FERC; and US-CERT Federal Incident
Notification Guidelines.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
designate a single point of contact for companies to report security
incidents to within the government
Incident response and recovery resources are in short supply. To
effectuate the efficient use of limited resources, the Federal
Government should designate, and adequately fund, a single point of
contact for all companies that need to report an incident. If existing
reporting requirements have not been harmonized and sector-specific
reporting requirements remain in place, impacted organizations should
not be required to report an incident twice. All future legislative
proposals should designate CISA as the single point of contact where no
sector-specific regulator exists, and appropriate resources should be
allocated for that purpose.
define an appropriate and flexible reporting template
All incident reports should follow a standardized template to
ensure consistent reporting across agencies and industries. Consensus-
driven processes are needed to refine the elements of such a template
to ensure consistency with existing frameworks, like MITRE ATT&CK or
VERIS, and international industry best practices, as well as to ensure
that the template fits the needs and existing practices of a particular
sector. Reporting entities can use such a template to report the most
relevant information where available. By way of example, the template
may include appropriate and reasonably obtained information on: (1) The
attack vector or vectors that led to the compromise; (2) the indicators
of compromise; information on the affected systems, devices, or
networks; (3) information relevant to the identification of the threat
actor or actors involved; (4) a point of contact from the affected
entity; and (5) impact, earliest known time, and duration of
compromise.\4\ Entities should have the option to report additional
types of information on cybersecurity incidents to help to identify
emerging trends or otherwise preempt attacks. Entities should also not
be penalized for or precluded from reporting an incident if all
information, including the information proposed in this list, is not
available.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ This initial list is based on the following CISA documents:
https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/publications/
Law%20Enforcement%20Cyber%20Incident%20Reporting.pdf https://
www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/publications/Non-
Federal%20Entity%20Sharing%20Guid-
ance%20under%20the%20Cybersecurity%20Information%20Sharing%20Act%20of%-
202015_1.pdf; other resources are available: https://us-cert.cisa.gov/
sites/default/files/publications/Federal_Incident_Notification_Guide-
lines.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
align reporting processes and mechanisms to ensure consistency with
industry best practices and allow for bi-directional information
sharing
The protocols and mechanisms of reporting an incident should be
consistent with existing frameworks, recognized sectoral,
international, and industry best practices. To ensure incident
information is shared quickly and continuously, sections 2.f and 2.g of
Executive Order 14028 direct improvements to the inter-agency sharing
of incident information. In addition to these provisions, Federal
agencies also need to streamline legal agreements involving industry
partners to allow for bi-directional sharing of incident information.
build agency capability to act on security incident reports
Security incident reporting will be of limited utility if the
designated recipient agency does not have the capacity to ingest and
act on the information it receives. A manual-intensive approach will
quickly max out resources and elevate the risk that important alerts
are inadvertently missed. Before a security incident reporting scheme
is established, the designated recipient agency should have the
capability to automate data collection so that internal data can be
cross-referenced with externally available data. This will inform and
improve the orchestration of incident response actions.

Ms. Clarke. We thank you for your expert testimony here
today, Mr. Miller.
I now recognize Mr. Mayer to summarize his statement for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT MAYER, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
CYBERSECURITY, US TELECOM

Mr. Mayer. Good afternoon, Ranking Member Garbarino,
Chairwoman Thompson, and Ranking Member Katko, and other
distinguished Members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify at today's hearing to express our
industry support for the provisions included in the Cyber
Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2021.
My name is Robert Mayer, and I am the senior vice president
for Cybersecurity and Innovation at USTelecom, the broadband
association representing broadband providers, suppliers, and
innovators connecting our families, communities, and
enterprises. My diverse membership ranges from large publicly-
traded global communications providers, manufacturers, and
technology enterprises to local companies and cooperatives, all
providing advanced communication services to markets, urban and
rural, and everything in between.
I also serve as the chair of the Communications Sector
Coordinating Council, which represents five communication
segments: Broadcast, cable, satellite, wireless, and wire line
and as co-chair of the Department of Homeland Security
Information and Communications Technology Supply Chain Risk
Management Task Force. In all of these roles, I have seen
first-hand how the cybersecurity threats we face are real and
growing.
On an almost daily basis, we learn of attacks by nation-
state adversaries and global criminal enterprises that disrupt
or exploit access to functions that support our daily lives. We
in industry recognize the core interest of Government in
enhancing the Nation's cybersecurity and the key role of
Government-industry partnership in doing so, including through
more robust and coordinated information sharing and incident
reporting and response. We also recognize the unique resources
the Government has available to aid private-sector
organizations when responding to a major cybersecurity crisis.
For these reasons, I am here today to express our industry
support for legislation that would establish cyber incident-
reporting capabilities within CISA. We believe that the
following elements are critical success factors in any incident
reporting regime, and we are encouraged to see that they are
included in the current proposal.
First, when a cybersecurity incident occurs, impacted
organizations need time to investigate the incident, determine
whether reporting criteria have been met, and comply with
applicable best practices. The proposed legislation provides
for a reporting window that is flexible and large enough for
industry to triage the incident.
Second, defining reporting thresholds is a highly technical
exercise that requires extensive subject-matter expertise. The
thresholds need to be specific enough to avoid ambiguity so
that industry knows exactly how to comply. The legislation
under consideration directs Federal agency experts to define
thresholds in consultation with industry. Moreover, to avoid
undermining the system with overreporting, only confirmed
cybersecurity incidents that will be reported, not potential or
unverified incidents. This grounds the thresholds and criteria
that are verifiable, attributable, and actionable.
Third, the legislation strives to protect the Government's
industry partners when they are victims of cyber attacks. By
building upon liability protections afforded in the
Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015, the stage is set
for strong, legal, and conceptual foundation for such
protections.
Fourth, when the Government collects sensitive information
from industry partners, it has a responsibility to protect that
information. To that end, the legislation includes provisions
to ensure data from incident reports is not shared
inappropriately or leaked once it is provided to CISA.
Fifth, any policy requiring ISPs to report customers'
incidents would be cause for concern on a number of grounds,
including public policy and privacy concerns, disruptions to
business relationships, and operations and possible legal
issues associated with those kinds of disclosures. The
reporting obligations in the proposed legislation reside with
the victims of cyber attacks and not intermediaries or third
parties.
In addition to the above critical success factors that are
included in the bill, we are further encouraged by the
following aspects of the proposed legislation. Cyber incident
reporting is best enforced with subpoenas rather than fines.
The legislation under consideration today wisely relies on
subpoenas rather than fines as an enforcement mechanism for
cybersecurity reporting.
CISA should serve as a central hub for information sharing
and incident reporting. This legislation appropriately directs
CISA to shape and maintain this reporting and information-
sharing program. CISA is uniquely well-suited to serve as a
central hub for cybersecurity information sharing and incident
reporting. While CISA has a central role to play, a new
reporting concert should take into account that other Federal
agencies will consider to be engaged with the private sector.
Recognizing that cybersecurity is a shared responsibility
across the ecosystem, we appreciate that the legislation
requires the U.S. Government to take its obligations to report
and share cybersecurity information seriously, just as industry
takes its own obligations seriously. USTelecom and the
communications sector stand ready to work with the committee to
advance this legislation and will continue to collaborate in
partnership with CISA to continuously advance our Nation's
cybersecurity, risk management, management, and response
capabilities.
Thank you for your leadership and for prioritizing this
critical issue. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mayer follows:]
Prepared Statement of Robert Mayer
Wednesday, September 1, 2021
Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, Chairman Thompson, and
Ranking Member Katko and other distinguished Members of the committee,
thank you for the opportunity to testify at today's hearing to express
our industry's support for the provisions currently included in the
Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2021.
My name is Robert Mayer, and I am the senior vice president for
cybersecurity & innovation at USTelecom--The Broadband Association,
representing broadband providers, suppliers, and innovators connecting
our families, communities, and enterprises. Our diverse membership
ranges from publicly-traded global communications providers,
manufacturers, and technology enterprises, to local Main Street
companies and heartland cooperatives--all providing advanced
communications services to markets, both urban and rural, and
everything in between.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ USTelecom The Broadband Association, www.ustelecom.org.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I also serve as the chair of the Communications Sector Coordinating
Council and as co-chair of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
Information and Communications Technology (ICT) Supply Chain Risk
Management Task Force.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Communications Sector Coordinating Council, www.comms-scc.org;
ICT Supply Chain Risk Management Task Force, https://www.cisa.gov/ict-
scrm-task-force.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In all of these roles, I've seen first-hand how the cybersecurity
threats we face are real and growing. On an almost daily basis, we
learn of attacks by nation-state adversaries and global criminal
enterprises to disrupt or exploit access to functions that support our
daily lives. Some of these attacks--such as those mounted against
SolarWinds and its Government and private-sector customers, and the
attack against Colonial Pipeline that had the effect of gas price
spikes and gas shortages down the East Coast--target critical functions
that enable the basic activities of commerce and consumers' lives. We
now have actual experience with a significant disruption to critical
infrastructure, highlighting the importance of securing all 16 critical
infrastructure sectors including water, transportation, energy,
finance, information technology, and communications.
We in industry recognize the core interest of the Government in
enhancing the Nation's cybersecurity, and the key role of Government-
industry partnership in doing so--including through more robust and
coordinated information sharing and incident reporting and response. We
also recognize the unique resources the Government has available to aid
private-sector organizations when responding to a major cyber crisis.
The Council to Secure the Digital Economy (CSDE), founded by
USTelecom and other key industry partners, described the necessary
foundations for this coordination in its 2019 Cyber Crisis Report,
noting that in the midst of a cybersecurity crisis, Government and
industry must be prepared to mobilize together rapidly and collaborate
with relevant responders.\3\ This means building close working
relationships with the companies whose diverse leadership, assets, and
operational experience within the digital ecosystem provide unique
value in the global fight against cyber threats.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Council to Secure the Digital Economy, Cyber Crisis:
Foundations of Multi-Stakeholder Coordination (2019), https://
securingdigitaleconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/CSDE_CyberCrisis-
Report_2019-FINAL.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We've seen this partnership work, perhaps most significantly in
recent years in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic's unprecedented
demands on IT and communications systems to keep us connected,
learning, and working, just as threat actors used our increased
reliance on connected technology to find new avenues to exploit.
Throughout the pandemic, the Communications Sector has worked hand-in-
hand with DHS's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
(CISA), the National Telecommunications and Information Administration
(NTIA), the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and other
Government agencies to allocate and deliver resources, establish access
for critical workers, maintain services, and address threats.
This collaboration was not a response to top-down regulatory
directives, but rather an operationalization of trusted partnerships
cultivated over decades between Government and industry and across
diverse members of the ICT sector. It worked--together, we kept the
Nation connected through the pandemic, and this successful experience
in communications security and reliability is a model to follow in the
years ahead.
We have also seen the benefit of this engagement in the DHS ICT
Supply Chain Risk Management Task Force over the past 2 years. When I
last had an opportunity to testify before this committee, the Chair and
Ranking Member expressed interest in addressing the essential segment
of small and medium-sized businesses (SMBs). The IT and Communications
Sectors have similarly recognized the unique set of challenges SMBs
face and that these challenges constitute a National security
imperative as U.S. critical infrastructure relies on the defensive
posture of these individual, yet highly-connected organizations. This
year, USTelecom produced a survey examining these challenges and found
that critical infrastructure SMBs are distinctly vulnerable to breaches
that can take longer to detect and from which to recover.\4\ As we
enter the Task Force's third year, we plan to continue focus on the
critical element of SMBs and how we can further leverage cross-sector
and Government-industry partnership to provide greater support.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ USTelecom, USTelecom 2021 Cybersecurity Survey: Critical
Infrastructure Small & Medium-Sized Businesses, at 6,
www.ustelecom.org/cybersurvey.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For these reasons, I am here today to express our industry's
support for the committee's efforts to facilitate establishing cyber
incident reporting and analysis capabilities within CISA rooted in the
foundational information-sharing framework of the 2015 Cybersecurity
Information Sharing Act. In the context of this hearing, we see the
Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2021 as
another foundational building block in the growing whole-of-Nation
collaboration across industry and Government.
To support our collective interest in leveraging trusted
partnerships to enhance cybersecurity, information sharing and incident
reporting must be done effectively and efficiently. With this in mind,
we believe that the following elements are critical success factors in
any incident reporting regime, and we are encouraged that many of these
are included in the current legislation proposed by Chairwoman Clarke
and Ranking Member Katko:
1. The reporting window should be large enough for industry to
triage the incident.--When a cyber incident occurs, impacted
organizations need time to investigate the incident, determine
whether reporting criteria have been met, and comply with
applicable best practices. The committee should consider giving
CISA discretion to establish reporting windows within
reasonable parameters and with appropriate flexibility afforded
to meet the unique needs of a given situation. If the mandatory
reporting window is too short, CISA will likely receive an
overwhelming quantity of ``false alarm'' reports that do not
merit reporting, which could strain Government resources and
undermine the value of the reporting program.
2. Thresholds for incidents that merit reporting should be clearly
defined by subject-matter experts, and only confirmed incidents
should be reported.--Defining reporting thresholds is a highly
technical exercise that requires extensive subject-matter
expertise. The thresholds need to be specific enough to avoid
ambiguity, so that industry knows exactly how to comply. Given
these complexities, the committee should consider directing
Federal agency experts to define thresholds in consultation
with industry, rather than attempting to include thresholds in
legislation itself. Moreover, to avoid undermining the system
with over-reporting, only confirmed cyber incidents should be
reported--not potential or unverified incidents. The thresholds
must be grounded in criteria that are verifiable, attributable,
and actionable.
3. Legislation should protect the Government's industry partners
when they are victims of cyber attacks.--There are numerous
operational benefits to affording protection to entities that
report cyber incidents. The Cybersecurity Information Sharing
Act of 2015 provides a strong legal and conceptual foundation
for such protections, but the committee should also consider
ways it and CISA can leverage consultation with stakeholders to
refine these protections in the incident reporting context.
Different organizations may provide unique insights into how
incident reporting affects them legally and operationally.
4. The Government must safeguard the sensitive information it
collects.--When the Government collects sensitive information
from industry partners, it has a responsibility to protect that
information. To that end, the committee should consider
provisions to ensure data from incident reports is not shared
inappropriately or leaked once it is provided to CISA. We must
ensure that the victim names reported to CISA are not shared
outside the agency. This is essential to ensuring the
information is safeguarded appropriately and not misused.
5. Reporting obligations should reside with the victims of cyber
attacks and not intermediaries or third parties.--Any policy
requiring Internet Service Providers (ISPs) to report
customers' incidents would be cause for concern on a number of
grounds, including public policy and privacy concerns,
disruptions to business relationships and operations, and
possible legal issues associated with those kinds of
disclosures.
In addition to the above critical success factors that are included
in the bill, we are further encouraged by the following aspects of the
proposed legislation:

Cyber incident reporting is best enforced with subpoenas
rather than fines. The legislation under consideration today
wisely relies on subpoenas rather than fines as an enforcement
mechanism for cybersecurity reporting. Where fines are
inherently punitive--and may in some cases actually punish
entities that aim to report cyber incidents in good faith--
subpoenas enable the Government access to the information it
seeks and also inform industry more specifically about the
Government's interests and priorities. This will enable the
overall information-sharing regime to improve with the benefit
of experience over time.

CISA should serve as a hub for information sharing and
incident reporting, but must work with its partner agencies.
This legislation also directs CISA to shape and maintain this
reporting and information-sharing program. Since the agency's
statutory establishment in 2018, CISA is well-suited to serve
as a hub for cybersecurity information sharing and incident
reporting. CISA's expertise and on-going relationships will
enable it to build an effective information-sharing framework
that will be nimble enough to keep pace with cybersecurity
innovation over time. However, any new mandatory reporting
requirements should not overlook the extensive collaboration
that industry currently has with the broader Federal
Government. While CISA has a critical role to play and can
serve as a central location for reporting, other Federal
agencies will continue to be engaged with the private sector.
Indeed, consistent with the Federal Government's
recommendation, many companies will contact law enforcement if
they have a cyber incident. If a company has a significant
intrusion, its first reaction may be to reach out to the FBI,
for example, who could take any appropriate criminal action
(e.g., seize back some of the ransom payment). Policy makers
should ensure that a new reporting construct takes into
consideration this dynamic and does not inadvertently punish a
private entity for heeding the Government's advice and/or put
the entity in the middle of two competing Government agencies
in the wake of an attack.

Information-sharing obligations should be reciprocal between
Government and industry partners. We also appreciate that the
proposed legislation places expectations on Government
stakeholders to report cyber incidents and share cybersecurity
risk information. Recognizing that cybersecurity is a shared
responsibility across the ecosystem, we appreciate that the
legislation would require the U.S. Government to take its
obligations to report and share cybersecurity information
seriously, just as industry takes its own obligations
seriously.
USTelecom--The Broadband Association and the Communications Sector
stand ready to work with the committee to advance this legislation and
will continue to collaborate in partnership with CISA to continuously
advance our Nation's cybersecurity risk management and response
capabilities.
Thank you for your leadership and for prioritizing this critical
issue. I look forward to your questions.

Ms. Clarke. We thank you for your expert testimony here
today, Mr. Mayer.
I now recognize Ms. Denbow to summarize her statement for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF KIMBERLY DENBOW, MANAGING DIRECTOR, SECURITY AND
OPERATIONS, AMERICAN GAS ASSOCIATION

Ms. Denbow. Thank you. Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke,
Ranking Member Garbarino, and Members of the subcommittee. I am
Kimberly Denbow, managing director of security and operation of
the American Gas Association, AGA. I have led AGA's Security
Policy and Technical Program for nearly two decades. I am a
former member--voting member--former voting member of the TSA
Surface Transportation Security Advisory Committee and co-
chaired the Cybersecurity Subcommittee. I presently co-chair
the Cybersecurity Working Group for both the Oil and Natural
Gas Sector Coordinating Council and the Pipeline Sector
Coordinating Council. Thank you for inviting me to share my
perspective on the Cybersecurity Incident Reporting for
Critical Infrastructure Act of 2021 and sharing AGA's general
approach to cybersecurity.
AGA represents more than 200 local energy companies that
deliver clean and affordable natural gas to 95 percent of
natural gas customers in the United States. AGA supports the
provisions necessary for a workable incident reporting
framework, as laid out in the Cyber Incident Reporting for
Critical Infrastructure Act of 2021.
These provisions include report timing of 72 hours after
confirmation of the incident, clarity provided around
supplemental reporting, harmonization of new reporting rules
with preexisting reporting requirements, leveraging the
information sharing and analysis centers, and operator
liability, information, and regulatory protections.
Properly framed cybersecurity incident reporting can help
counter adversaries and minimize impact. With slight
alterations, particularly regarding private-sector involvement,
this bill can be even stronger. Suggested improvements include
specified outreach to sector coordinating councils in
development of the interim final role; ensure flexibility and
regular updates to the list of covered entities; ensure CISA
has the staffing and sector-specific expertise necessary to
coordinate and communicate with operators; and limit CISA
director discretion to ensure any disclosure of reported
information is nonattributional.
Cybersecurity management is an endless evolution. For
nearly two decades, AGA operators worked within a structured
oversight model, conceived by TSA, our pipeline security
authority. This unconventional and nonregulatory model achieved
something the traditional stick-and-carrot approach could not.
Constructive information exchange at a level of confidence and
cooperation not typically available to regulators. TSA Surface
Transportation has always done more with less and on a
shoestring budget.
For instance, to develop the TSA pipeline security
guideline, the mechanism that underpins pipeline security and
has advanced pipeline security by orders of magnitude, TSA
collaborated with pipeline operators, CISA, and other entities.
The quality output from TSA has been the result of the
dedication of TSA staff in partnership with pipeline operators
toward a shared common goal: Pipeline security. That said, when
done right, regulations can be beneficial.
For example, through the collaboration of nearly 70
organizations, including TSA, CISA, trade associations, and
pipeline operators, the consensus-based standard API 1164
Version 3 Pipeline Control Systems Cybersecurity was developed
as a tool to help operators manage cyber risks and control
system environments and at critical connection points along the
supply chain.
As TSA transitions from the structured oversight model to
more traditional regulation, API 1146 Version 3 will be the
most efficient way to put effective pipeline cyber regulations
in place.
In a similar manner, this cyber incident reporting
legislation has the potential to advance constructive reporting
requirements. The key to meeting this potential lies with CISA
and its commitment to the partnership. The AGA board of
directors supports an industry-wide cybersecurity commitment
and recently agreed to support reasonable cybersecurity
regulations. While there is no single cybersecurity solution
for absolute system protection, vigilance, technological
capability, and leadership commitment will continue to keep
America's natural gas delivery system safe, secure, and
reliable.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I look forward to
the exchange of ideas.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Denbow follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kimberly Denbow
September 1, 2021
Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and Members of the
subcommittee, I am Kimberly Denbow, managing director of security &
operations, of the American Gas Association (AGA). I have led AGA's
security policy and technical program for nearly 2 decades. Also
relevant to this hearing, I am a former voting member of the
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) Surface Transportation
Security Advisory Committee for which I helped stand up and co-chaired
the Cybersecurity Subcommittee. I also helped stand up and presently
co-chair the Cybersecurity Working Group for both the Oil & Natural Gas
Sector Coordinating Council and the Pipeline Sector Coordinating
Council. Thank you for inviting me to share my perspectives on the
Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2021 and
AGA's general approach to cybersecurity.
Founded in 1918, AGA represents more than 200 local energy
companies that deliver clean and affordable natural gas throughout the
United States. There are more than 76 million residential, commercial,
and industrial natural gas customers in the United States, of which 95
percent--more than 72 million customers--receive their gas from AGA
member utilities. Natural gas is a necessary fuel for a clean and
secure energy future, providing benefits for the economy, our
environment, and our energy security. Alongside the economic and
environmental benefits and opportunities natural gas offers our country
comes the great responsibility to protect our distribution pipeline
system network from cyber compromise.
Technological advances over the last 30 years have made natural gas
utilities more cost-effective, safer, and better able to serve our
customers via web-based programs and tools. Unfortunately, the
opportunity cost of a more connected and more efficient industry is
that we have grown to be an attractive target for increasingly
sophisticated cyber criminals and terrorists. The cyber threat
landscape is evolving at an alarming rate comparable to biological
virus mutations. This said, America's investor-owned natural gas
utilities are meeting the threat daily via skilled personnel, robust
cybersecurity system protections, an industry commitment to security,
and a successful on-going cybersecurity partnership with the Federal
Government.
Safety and security are core values for America's natural gas
utilities. AGA and its member companies are committed to investing in
leading security technologies, utilizing best practices and training,
and promoting an industry-wide vigilant security culture to help
fortify our security defenses.
cyber incident reporting for critical infrastructure act of 2021
Effective cybersecurity incident reporting is essential to
dampening wide-spread cybersecurity compromise. AGA supports the Cyber
Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2021, which
establishes the criteria AGA members argue is necessary for a workable
incident reporting framework. A few provisions of particular interest
and which have industry's support include report timing, supplemental
reporting clarity, recognition of existing reporting requirements,
Information Sharing & Analysis Centers (ISACs), and liability
protections. Additional details are outlined below:

Incident Report Timing.--Providing covered entities 72 hours
after confirmation to report on cybersecurity incidents
appropriately recognizes that owners/operators need a
reasonable amount of time to not just identify but also to
verify the validity of a cybersecurity incident before
reporting. This minimizes the reporting of non-credible
incidents, which can be excessive and resource-intensive with
negligible value-add.

Supplemental Reporting.--The latest draft of this
legislation helpfully clarifies what qualifies as supplemental
reporting and offers the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) director
(and covered entities) the useful option of a flexible
reporting time line so as not to specifically ``prioritize
incident response efforts over compliance.'' This synchronizes
the efforts of CISA with the operator, ensures incident
investigation is prioritized, and eliminates unnecessary
supplemental information submission.

Information Sharing and Analysis Organizations.--We
appreciate the latest draft bill's increased reliance on
industry Information Sharing & Analysis Centers (ISACs) for
Government-private-sector outreach as well as incident
reporting. Permitting owners/operators to leverage existing
mechanisms through third parties, such as AGA's Downstream
Natural Gas ISAC, strengthens the function of these entities to
the benefit of all stakeholders, since such organizations have
sector-specific threat analysts who can provide additional
perspectives to CISA.

Harmonizing Reporting Requirements.--AGA's member natural
gas utilities are among the most regulated in the country at
the State, Federal, and local level. Complicating matters, well
over 50 percent of AGA members are combination natural gas-
electric utilities with separate electric sector requirements.
As such, we appreciate efforts to reduce potential conflicting
mandates by harmonizing the cyber incident reporting
requirements with preexisting cyber reporting requirements.

Industry Legal Protections.--We appreciate the inclusion of
reasonable information disclosure rules, liability protections
for reporting entities (familiar to industry as they mirror
those in the Cybersecurity Act of 2015), and regulatory
protections in the legislation. Without these provisions, it
would be hard to imagine the sort-of streamlined and trusted
public-private incident reporting partnership this legislation
contemplates.
While the draft legislation sets a strong foundation for moving
forward, there are a few policy areas where we recommend some expansion
and/or clarification. Not surprisingly, most of our suggestions
surround additional private-sector involvement in the overall process,
per below:

Rulemaking Detail [SEC .2220A(d)(1) In General].--This
section outlines the incident reporting rule making process.
While we appreciate that ``appropriate stakeholders'' will be
able to comment on the interim final rule, we strongly
recommend greater specific outreach to critical infrastructure
organizations (Sector Coordinating Councils, ISACs, individual
covered entities, industry organizations, etc.) in developing
the rule. Private-sector engagement from the beginning will
ensure the rule will be reasonable, credible, and based on
vital critical infrastructure experience and operational
capabilities.

Who are the Covered Entities? [SEC .2220A(d)(2) Covered
Entities].--The list of covered entities should be flexible and
updated regularly (or as necessary) as companies change
operations. DHS should be able to accommodate such changes. To
help determine covered entities, we recommend: (1) Consulting
with the private sector, (2) utilizing preexisting Government
lists that identify critical facilities, (3) a periodic review
and update of covered entities, and (4) a process that allows
critical infrastructure entities to appeal their inclusion on
the list.

Ensuring CISA has the Tools it Needs. [SEC .2220A(d)(6)
Responsibilities of Covered Entities].--This subsection focuses
on industry's coordination with CISA personnel. This
coordination will only be effective and efficient if CISA has
the staffing and sector-specific cybersecurity expertise
necessary to communicate with private companies in vastly
different business sectors. As such, we recommend adding
language to ensure that ``CISA will coordinate with SRMAs'' (or
similar).

Director Authority [SEC .2220A(e)(1) Authorized
Activities].--This subsection lists the exceptions under which
the director may disclose information provided to the Office.
The discretion allotted the director in the first two
exceptions (A and B) are overly broad, which could lead to
literally ANY ``cybersecurity purpose'' as a reason to disclose
sensitive company information. AGA recommends adding clarifying
language to each exception (A) and (B) specifying ``to
circumvent national security or national economic harm.''
Cybersecurity incident reporting, framed properly, can be the
difference between pivoting against our adversaries in an effective
manner and minimizing impact, or fumbling to our adversaries'
advantage. Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of
2021 provides the structure while also delivering agility. With slight
alterations, it can be even stronger.
natural gas utility cybersecurity management: an endless evolution
America's natural gas delivery system is the safest, most reliable
energy delivery system in the world. This said, industry operators
recognize there are inherent cyber vulnerabilities with employing web-
based applications for industrial control and business operating
systems. Gas utilities employ multiple mechanisms to support a robust
cybersecurity program, including participating in an array of
Government and industry cybersecurity initiatives. The most important
resource is the existing cybersecurity partnership between the Federal
Government and industry operators. This partnership fosters the
exchange of vital cybersecurity information which helps stakeholders
adapt quickly to dynamic cybersecurity risks. That partnership should
continue to be supported by Congress.
the immeasurable value of authentic partnership
For nearly two decades, AGA favored effective partnership above
cybersecurity regulations, which we felt served as a ceiling that
stifled robust cybersecurity management. We valued the structured
oversight model conceived by TSA, our Federal regulator for pipeline
security. Though the model was unconventional by Federal Government
standards, it achieved something the traditional ``stick-and-carrot''
approach could not--constructive information exchange and at a level of
confidence and cooperation not typically available to regulators. The
TSA ``Pipeline Security Guidelines''\1\ (Guidelines) coupled with the
trust fostered between industry and Government advanced pipeline
security by orders of magnitude over the years. Whereas regulations
serve as a ceiling to which operators rise but are not incentivized to
exceed, Guidelines serve as the floor upon which an operator's program
may be built and continuously improved based on the operator's system-
specific risks and applicable counter measures.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.tsa.gov/sites/default/files/
pipeline_security_guidelines.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
a shared common goal
Some have suggested cyber compromise in the pipeline industry is a
direct consequence of the structured oversight model. TSA has been
criticized for not doing more prior to the recent issuance of the
pipeline security directives. For the record, TSA Surface
Transportation did more with less and on a shoestring budget. The TSA
Pipeline Group has been the epitome of innovation--leveraging the
infrastructure subject-matter expertise of pipeline operators,
partnering with CISA and Idaho National Labs for in-house industrial
control system cybersecurity knowledge, and collaborating with the
Department of Transportation's Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration (PHMSA) on cybersecurity reviews of control centers. AGA
helped champion the CISA/TSA Pipeline Cybersecurity Initiative \2\ and
promoted effortlessly the Pipeline Validated Architectural Design
Reviews.\3\ The quality output has been the result of the dedication of
TSA and CISA staff, in partnership with pipeline operators, toward a
shared common goal--pipeline security.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.cisa.gov/pipeline-cybersecurity-initiative.
\3\ https://us-cert.cisa.gov/resources/
ncats#Validated%20Architecture%20Design%20Review- %20(VADR).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
driving change
Over the past few years, more than 70 organizations, including TSA,
CISA, PHMSA, the Department of Energy (DOE), Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission, National Institute of Standards & Technology (NIST), trade
associations, and numerous pipeline operators, worked on revising a
standard managed by the American Petroleum Institute (API) for control
system cybersecurity. The revision was designed to align with existing
cybersecurity guidelines, the NIST Cyber Security Framework,\4\ and
prominent industry cyber standards. This recently-updated consensus-
based standard, API 1164 version 3, ``Pipeline Control Systems
Cybersecurity''\5\ (API 1164 version 3), helps the operator manage
cyber risks associated with control system cybersecurity environments
by providing requirements and guidance for proper isolation of control
system environments from non-control system environments. It also
addresses enhanced protections at critical connection points along the
supply chain.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework.
\5\ API Standard 1164, 3d edition.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Walking the Talk
The AGA Board of Directors continues to be forward-leaning on
multiple fronts--with security at the forefront. Actions and activities
include:

Creation of the Downstream Natural Gas ISAC, which
facilitates the sharing of threat information within the
natural gas industry and across sectors by providing analysis,
coordination, and summarization of threat indicators and other
relevant information to its members--a community of nearly 100
percent of our Nation's natural gas utilities and transmission
companies;

Membership-wide adoption of the AGA Commitment to Cyber and
Physical Security \6\ to demonstrate dedication to ensuring the
natural gas pipeline infrastructure remains resilient to the
growing and dynamic cyber and physical security threats; and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.aga.org/sites/default/files/sites/default/files/
media/commitment_to_cy- ber_and_physical_security_sep2016.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Development of a three-point Cybersecurity Action Plan which
encompasses enhancing cyber standards for gas utility
operations, collaborating with CISA for the enhancement of a
cybersecurity verification tool, and developing an operator
accountability mechanism. The roadmap includes the progression
from guidelines to regulations.
Recently, the AGA Board passed a resolution in support of
reasonable cybersecurity regulations. Such regulations would be
characterized by four critical components:
1. a risk-based methodology,
2. a framework organized by the functions Identify, Protect,
Detect, Respond, and Recover,
3. operator flexibility to pivot to a constantly-evolving cyber
threat landscape, and
4. alignment with natural gas industry cybersecurity guidelines and
standards for operational technology.
These four critical components are satisfied by API 1164 version 3.
An Effective & Timely Transition
As TSA, in collaboration with CISA, transitions from issuing
pipeline security directives to issuing cybersecurity regulations, the
Federal Government is encouraged to leverage API 1164 version 3 which
reflects practical, attainable, sustainable, and measurable state-of-
the-art cybersecurity protections tailored specifically to pipeline
operations. Given the imminent threat that prompted issuance of the
pipeline security directives, incorporating this standard by reference
will be the Federal Government's most efficient way to put effective
pipeline cyber regulations in place.
A Commitment to America--A Commitment to the Communities We Serve
America's natural gas utilities are cognizant of enduring cyber
threats and the continued need for vigilance through cybersecurity
protection, detection, and mitigation mechanisms. There is no single
solution for absolute system protection. Through a combination of
cybersecurity processes and timely and credible information sharing
amongst the Government intelligence community and industry operators,
America's natural gas delivery system remains protected, safe, and
reliable, and will remain so well into the future.

Ms. Clarke. Ms. Denbow, I want to thank you for your expert
testimony here today.
I thank all of our witnesses for testifying.
I will remind the subcommittee that we will each have 5
minutes to question the panel.
I will now recognize myself for questions.
This first question is to all of our witnesses today. For
the past several months, I have worked with stakeholders to
craft legislation that, No. 1, gives CISA the visibility it
needs to be a more effective partner to the private sector;
and, No. 2, informs our understanding of cyber threats in a way
that supports long-term systemic improvement to the
cybersecurity ecosystem. Many of the questions about how to do
this effectively are questions of scope, defining what
information CISA needs to be bringing in and setting clear
expectations about what CISA needs to be putting out.
What specific information does CISA need about a cyber
incident in order to detect cyber campaigns early and help
other owners and operators defend themselves? Is this the same
information CISA needs in order to understand threats over time
and help owners and operators buy down the risks?
Mr. Bushar. So I can start, Chairwoman, answering that
question.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you.
Mr. Bushar. So I believe, you know, generally speaking,
that CISA will require what we often term technical indicators
of compromise, or IOCs, as part of any analysis function and
collection effort on their behalf. So what we often recommend
is the ability for the victims and the covered entities to be
able to provide technical indicators of compromise, which can
include things such as IP addresses, domain names, tools,
pieces of malware software that are being used in the attack,
along with techniques, not necessarily software, but
behavioral-based techniques that the victims are observing the
attackers taking, such as phishing, lures, or email, and things
of that nature.
That sort of information, when correlated across sectors or
across industries or even within several organizations, can
often increase the rapidity and accuracy of attribution of
threat actors.
The additional context that CISA may require related to
strategic analysis would have to do with things such as
targeting. What I mean by that, that would be information more
related to what sort of data or information systems appear to
be targeted by the threat actor, what data was confirmed to be
taken out of the environment, if that is known, what sort of
people or personas attempted to be compromised during the
attack, whether that is, you know, positioned--executive
positions in the organization, other sorts of key leadership
inside the organization. Those can all be useful information--
points of information for analysis of threat actor intent and
where they would likely see similar sorts of attacks and
behavior emerging again across sectors or within sectors. So
those two broad categories of information we feel are valuable
to CISA to collect and understand, again, in a nonattributional
way, wherever possible, or at least in a anonymized way for
each victim.
Ms. Clarke. So, if the other panelists agree with Mr.
Bushar, let me ask what information and intelligence do your
industries need from CISA in order to defend against threats
today and in the future? What makes information actionable for
your purposes?
Mr. Bushar. Yes, that is great question, Chairwoman. It is
very similar to the answer in the direction of CISA, and
frankly. So, when the Government has access to that sort of
indicator information, again, in a nonvictim attribution model,
we in the private sector can often make use of that information
in similar ways by correlating information, by comparing that
information to what we are seeing across our customer set, and
to deconflict or to understand where these threat actors may be
operating that we don't have perfect visibility.
It is really completing, you know, that fuller picture for
everyone in the community to understand where threat actors are
acting and how they are behaving and how to catch them as well.
So that data is extremely valuable to commercial companies to
put into detection tools, to software, to drive more rapid
again detection and, ideally, prevention, right? So the
ultimate goal in feeding information back from the Government
to the private sector would be to inoculate. To use kind-of a
comparison, it would be an inoculation. So we saw the first
victim. We understand what happened there. Now, I can take that
vaccine of information and apply it to all my other clients.
Now if that same threat actor tries to use that exact same
capability against other victims, it won't work; they are
protected.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Bushar.
My time has elapsed.
I now recognize the Ranking Member of the subcommittee, the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Garbarino, for his questions at
this time.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Chairwoman. Actually, I want to
follow up--I wasn't aware I was going to start, but I wanted to
follow up on what you were just talking about with what should
be reported. My question to witnesses is, on a covered
incident--and we have different groups on here, telecom and
banks and energy--it shouldn't be a one-size-fits-all approach,
right? How do we determine--is this something we set out
legislatively in the actual text, or are we going to have to do
this in rule making? Or how do we make sure it is done right in
the rule making?
Ms. Denbow, I will start with you. I saw you raise your
hand real quick.
Ms. Denbow. Thank you. This is something that is very near
and dear to my heart. I believe that the quickest way to get to
an effective solution is, again, to consult with the Sector
Management Risk Agencies and the Sector Coordinating Councils.
That is where you are able to bring together the communities
that have the subject-matter expertise in the various critical
infrastructure sectors already there. So you already have that
learning curve taken care of, and you are diving right into the
middle of the pool, so to speak.
Mr. Garbarino. Mr. Mayer, you wanted to add onto that?
Mr. Mayer. Yes, I do. Thank you. So I think definitely it
is not about putting legislative language in that becomes very
prescriptive in terms of how to characterize an incident
because incidents are evolving, and we need the flexibility to
take in the information, relevant information associated with
different attacks.
One of the things that, I think, speaks relative to
legislation is you have already identified some considerations
that would be considered. So, for example, how sophisticated is
the attack? Is this a novel attack, something, though, we
haven't seen before? Who is going to be affected by the attack?
What is the potential impacts of cascading effects? Does it
impact industrial control systems, skaters, different systems?
How does that work? I think that we can work within those
parameters. As I fully anticipate, we will have an opportunity
to engage CISA in the interim rules and then the final rules,
is to bring subject-matter experts--sector-specific subject-
matter experts, because what works, involves our networks and
our systems is different than what Kimberly's systems look like
or what the banking systems look like.
We really need--and this is something where I think
industry makes a very significant contribution, is we bring
subject-matter experts to the discussion to the partnership
with CISA. These are front-line workers, so there are some
limitations in terms of how much we can demand from them, but
we really can't go forward in making these kind of decisions
around how to define a covered incident without that kind of
industry-specific input.
Mr. Garbarino. I actually appreciate that both of your
answers because I think it is great idea, Ms. Denbow, that we
deal specifically with the 16 different critical infrastructure
subgroups there are now. I think DHS should--maybe there is
something we can put in that maybe they set up different
requirements for different ones, but they deal specifically
with those agencies. I think that is a great idea.
Another question I have is about the quarterly reporting.
Mr. Mayer, you just talked about how these things happen very
quickly. Is CISA releasing a report every quarter? Is that good
enough? I mean, and the reason why is 3 months later it might
not mean anything anymore? I mean, things move very quickly.
Mr. Mayer. Yes, so I tell you, I credit CISA--they are not
going to wait 3 months. The 3 months, as I understand it, in
the context of the legislation is designed to encapsulate what
they learned, aggregate the information, and anonymize it, and
push it out.
CISA has been incredibly responsive and timely in pushing
out information about threats. We send them information on all
types of malware, on ransomware. In some instances, they have
affiliated with NSA in pushing out information, affiliated with
the FBI. They are not sitting on the information. Then we
engage with CISA I would say pretty much on a daily basis when
it comes to receiving alerts and what--you know, sharing what
we have discovered in our systems, what they are observing
either on the Federal agency. So the dialog is already taking
place. I think the benefit of this is there is going to be a
virtual cycle because, as these incidents evolve, there are
going to be new PTPs, new tactics and techniques and procedures
that are going to require different ways of responding to them.
CISA is going to have the benefit of more data and information,
and they are going take those lessons learned, I believe, and
deliver them in an un-Classified way to the critical
infrastructure sector. So I think it is a balance, and I think
it is accretive in terms of its value.
Mr. Garbarino. Right, Ms. Denbow, did you just want to add
something real quick? I saw you raise your hand.
Ms. Denbow. I actually--thank you. I actually do. With
respect to working with CISA and our various sector risk-
management agencies and their intel groups, it is very
important that the intelligence community comes together with
the operators to be able to determine what is worse,
downgrading from this Top Secret level to that next level so
that they are not spending time trying to reclassify something
that really is of no use to the operator.
For example, we are still waiting on a threat briefing in
response to the issuance of the secured--pipeline security
directive. The challenge there--and it is not on the staff at
TSA or CISA because they are doing the best that they can--is
trying to downgrade that information to a level that is
valuable to the operators. What would be great if we could get
subject-matter experts from the field sitting in with CISA and
TSA to say, ``You know what, that is what needs to be
downgraded; not that. That wastes your time. That wastes our
time. Just give us this.''
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that. I am out of time, but I
appreciate those answers. Thank you.
I yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Ranking Member.
I now recognize the Chairman of the full committee, the
gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Thompson, for his questions at
this time.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I apologize
for being a little late. I was on a call with the FEMA
administrator. We are managing Hurricane Ida down in my State
right now.
As you have indicated, I have a statement for the record.
I am glad to hear from the witnesses their interest in your
legislation. One of the things we are trying to do is to get it
right. Stakeholder engagement is absolutely important. As you
know, this might be our 2.0 initiative, because we tried a
similar effort in our Cyber Act of 2015 to incentivize
volunteer public, private information sharing and,
unfortunately, no one has gotten out of what they bargained
for.
So what I would like to get from our witnesses, starting
with Mr. Bushar, is, how do you--how can we make sure this
cyber incident reporting legislation is crafted in a way that
brings real security value so we aren't having the same
conversation 6 years from now?
Mr. Bushar. Yes, sir. Thank you for that question. I think
it goes to what I--what I stated in my opening statement, as
well as some of the other witnesses here today, there has to be
some flexibility in the rule-making process. I think what we
have learned in the interceding 6 years between the legislation
being drafted in 2015 and today is, you know, there is
certainly some limitations to voluntary regimes. Let's be
honest, right? I think you are only going to get so much, you
know, cooperation there. I think it has been tremendous, but
maybe there are certain groups or certain, you know, commercial
entities that just aren't incentivized to share that data
today.
The other factor I believe that comes into play, is really
important in terms of getting this legislation correct, is the
flexibility in the process because, as we stated, the threats
change and rapidly evolve, and that is not only on the
capabilities of the adversaries we are dealing with; it is also
the technology and the underlying capabilities of the companies
using IT infrastructure and the way that that becomes more
critical to their operations and business over time.
So we have to be able to adjust what is important from an
information collection and sharing regime over time. There has
to be an ability for, you know, regulated but also cohesiveness
in the way that information is collected and used. As I stated
in my testimony, I think that two-ways communication
information sharing has to be effective, timely, and relevant
to the sector partners participating as well.
Whether it is mandatory or voluntary, I think the more
collaboration that occurs over time will strengthen that
information sharing and collaboration environment in such a way
that you will be much better positioned to defend our critical
infrastructure over time.
Mr. Thompson. All right.
Ms. Hogsett. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Ms. Hogsett [continuing]. May I--may I add to that?
Mr. Thompson. Yes, please.
Ms. Hogsett. Thank you. That is a really important question
that you asked, and so I want to just focus on two things. I
think, first, this is why the scope, as you have put it in the
bill, is so important to get right.
If you are seeking to sort-of boil the ocean and get
information on a lot of things out there, you are going to wind
up with a situation where CISA is deluged with information that
is not helpful to them, it is not useful, and they also get
bogged down with information that isn't really the actual
threat and the highest risks that we want them and everyone
else to focus on.
So I think through the rule-making process, that will allow
the opportunity for engagement with sector-specific--excuse
me--sector risk management agencies, our Sector Coordinating
Councils, to talk about those risks that we all believe from
our vantage point are important.
So beyond the scope, I think also, then again, you know,
setting up a process where there is a regular feedback loop so
CISA is also regularly getting feedback from owners and
operators of critical infrastructure about what they are
finding valuable.
I think if we can--that has often been missing. So if we
can kind-of close that so that CISA then also has real-time,
you know, valuable information for them to help improve their
operations, those would be, I think, a couple of key pieces. It
is set up, the way the bill is drafted, to allow for that. But
I think your role, of course, helping oversee that as it is
implemented would also be a critical thing that we would
highlight.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Would any other witness like to comment?
Mr. Mayer. Real quickly, if I may, you know, there is a
concept that Tony Sager, who led a big team at NSA, talks
about, which is the fog of more. When you are in a situation
like this and where you are in triage mode, what you don't want
to do is you don't want to put so much information out there to
CISA that you are putting information that is extraneous, that
is noise, that is not focused. So you want some time, and that
is why we think the 72 hours from a confirmed event is an
important period of time to put in place, and the flexibility
to engage in conversations after that.
I think what you are setting up, Chairman, is what I
consider to be a virtuous cycle, where--you talk about 6 years
down the road. We know that the attacks are going to be
probably very different than they are right now. We are going
to have different types of networks, more software. We are
going to be certainly in AI--in a world of AI, where systems
are working with very complex algorithms.
What we need to do is we need to build information up so
that we can look at the attacks; they actually become an
opportunity for us to understand what our adversaries are doing
to see where we are failing, to see what is working, and build
that into--going forward--into the kinds of expectations we
will have for refining the reporting, refining the information
that comes back, and, most importantly, I think, for
collaborating with CISA, collaborating with the intelligence
community, collaborating with, you know, organizations that are
looking at criminal activities.
What--the beauty of this legislation in my mind is you are
building the opportunities for a broader and more effective
partnership in the context of a mandatory requirement. I think,
you know, credit to the committee for recognizing the value of
maintaining the partnership--the best parts of the partnership,
but also on insisting on accountability and incenting companies
to participate in this process. I think that is the big story.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I yield back. Again, thank you for this very
thoughtful legislation, and I look forward to its approval. I
yield back.
Ms. Clarke. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chair will now recognize the other Members of the
subcommittee for questions they may wish to ask the witnesses.
In accordance with the guidelines laid out by the Chairman
and Ranking Member in their February 3 colloquy, I will
recognize Members in order of seniority, alternating between
the Majority and Minority.
Members are also reminded to unmute themselves and turn on
their cameras when recognized for questioning.
The Chair recognizes for 5 minutes the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Clyde, at this time.
Mr. Clyde.
OK. I am going to go forward, then, and have the Chair
recognize for 5 minutes the gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr.
Langevin, for his questions at this time.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to thank our
witnesses for their testimony today.
Mr. Mayer, if I could start with you. In your testimony,
you recommended that only confirmed incidents should be covered
by this bill, not potential or universal incidents. I want to
explore that idea.
The SolarWinds breach has brought new attention to the
issue of incident reporting, and for good reason. It took
FireEye stepping forward and confirming that they had been
compromised for the revelations of the largest SolarWinds
campaign to come to light.
So let's say that, in the future, a nation-state is
conducting a similar espionage campaign against a U.S. critical
infrastructure sector. So if critical infrastructure operators
in this sector are not obligated to report suspicious network
activity to CISA and they are only obligated to report once
they have discovered a breach of confidentiality, integrity, or
ability, how would we be meaningfully better positioned to
proactively identify and mitigate this hypothetical espionage
campaign than we are right now?
Mr. Mayer. So I think, sir, that is--that is an important
question. So when I--when we say ``confirmed,'' does that mean
you are going to have every aspect confirmed, that you are
going to have attribution confirmed, that you are going to know
every system that is impacted? No. That is going to take some
time. In fact, if you look at SolarWinds, I believe it took
months--8 months or so to even detect it.
I think, in my mind, if you have a significant cyber
incident that has the kind of impact on confidentiality,
integrity, and availability, you are going to know it--you are
going to know it when you see it. It is going to be a very
obvious impact on a pretty significant system, on a pretty
significant function.
U.S. Government, then CISA more likely than not is going to
be aware of these types of events. They are going to affect
Federal systems. They are going to be observable in some cases.
So I think, you know, in the spirit of this legislation
here, once a company realizes that it has been hit in a very
significant way and has some visibility into that attack at
some level and is maybe beyond the initial hours and days of
triage, I would have every expectation, certainly in my sector,
that there would be a conversation with CISA.
Of course, there are provisions here that, if companies are
not responsive, there are mechanisms in place to apply a stick
that I think would be very painful and incent companies to come
forward.
Mr. Bushar. If I may, sir, can I add to that testimony
briefly?
Mr. Langevin. Sure.
Mr. Bushar. So, actually speaking directly to, you know,
the experience that we had during SolarWinds, I think the way
to think about your question is this way.
So in the early days of our analysis of what was happening
inside of our own organization, we had some information that
looked suspicious, but, you know, early, early on, we weren't
quite sure if that was misbehavior potentially by an employee
or just anomalous or something, you know, unusual happening
with our technology inside the organization.
Once we had confirmation that there was, in fact, a
significant compromise, we actually--that is when we came
forward and made the voluntary notifications to Government
agencies.
I think the point here is that, not that you would never
disclose or you would wait until you had all the information
available, but simply that, you know, in many cases in our
experience, you could have situations where initial indicators
aren't indicative of an actual true compromise, and you want to
allow organizations time to fully analyze what is happening in
their environment and determine that there is, in fact, a real
impact, and then have the qualifying event to report to CISA.
That speaks to the relative value and taking the noise out
of the data that we talked about earlier.
Mr. Langevin. Yes. You know, I think, first of all, you
know, we should ask FireEye when they think they would have
reported under this bill. You know, Mandia has testified that
he put hundreds of people on it for weeks before the
disclosure, not 72 hours. It was weeks. You know, and those
were weeks where Russia was stealing data.
Any comment on that?
Mr. Bushar. Yes, sir. I mean, again, that is a great point.
It is--I think it is a reason why we are actually endorsing,
you know, a named time line. It is, you know--we are--at the
time and still to this day, organizations, when it is the--the
breach is not affecting covered data, privacy data, HIPAA data,
et cetera, it is really under your own recognizance to
determine the appropriate time line and agencies and
authorities to report to.
I think, by providing guidelines and actual criteria, you
are providing us, you know, a very clear structure for
organizations to report within. I think it is--there is
something to keep in mind here, and I think it is captured
inside the bill already, which is 72 hours gets that initial
window, and it gives some reasonable balance between analysis
time and getting first indicators and warnings, you know, of
the hurricane, let's call it, coming, to CISA.
But I--you know, I can say with assurance to you that that
information is likely to change, adapt, and evolve beyond the
72 hours. So I think, in the bill, the way it is captured in
terms of updating that information is also critically
important. It can't just be that first reporting. There has to
be information updates as more is learned throughout the
investigation and analysis. I think----
Mr. Langevin. Yes.
Mr. Bushar [continuing]. That speaks to your question
regarding Mr. Mandia's testimony.
Mr. Langevin. So, just so I am clarifying, so you don't
think that FireEye testified--you don't think that FireEye
reported early enough? Just to be clear, that is your
testimony?
Mr. Bushar. No. Not--I wouldn't say it that way, sir. I
think we did the best we could under--and under, you know,
voluntary analysis and trying to understand what was the
appropriate, again, timeliness and reporting authorities under
a stressful situation.
I do--we believe strongly that a reasonable period of time,
you know, within that 72-hour window, does make sense for most
entities, at least for an initial reporting requirement.
Mr. Langevin. Well, OK. I know that my time is--you know,
is close to end. Let me just say that, Madam Chair, you know,
as I am highlighting here, I am a bit concerned about the gap I
see between the amount of information CISA needs to
meaningfully improve the cybersecurity of our critical
infrastructure sectors and the amount of information that CISA
would receive would--only to be notified of--for confirmed
cyber incidents.
You know, further illustrate this concern with the second
example. Let's say that there is a threat actor who is
deploying destructive ransomware across critical infrastructure
providers, but it has not yet activated--activated it yet. This
is not unusual behavior. Once a confirmed cyber incident
occurs, threat actors know that news will spread quickly and
they will have a limited opportunity to act before cyber
defenders close off the vulnerability and root out their
malware.
This means threat actors are likely to start encrypting the
files of all of the targets they have compromised as fast as
possible. By the time that CISA learns of this first ransomware
attack, it could be too late for it to take any meaningful
action and mitigate the threat to other entities in the sector,
or, importantly, in other sectors which are vulnerable to the
same malware.
So, you know, Madam Chair, as we continue to consider this
bill, I hope that we are going to continue to explore what
definition of cyber incident will best ensure that CISA is able
to do a job proactively when--job and proactively warn critical
infrastructure providers of threats.
I know my time has expired, so I will yield back, Madam
Chair.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much, Mr. Langevin. Point well
taken.
Wanted to just make sure that everyone is aware we will
probably do a second round of questioning after we hear the
questions posed by the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Clyde, for 5
minutes at this time.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke, for holding this
very important hearing with Ranking Member Garbarino.
As previously stated by my colleagues, cyber attacks are
one of the biggest national security challenges that our
nations face. I am dedicated to working with all of you in
finding solutions that mitigate these threats.
I think one of the biggest challenges in addressing and
understanding cyber attacks is encouraging entities to come out
of the shadows and report these incidents to CISA.
There seems to be a fear that these stakeholders, that they
could be unfairly blamed for these attacks. As a society, I
think we do not blame the store clerk when a business is robbed
by a gunman. We blame the perpetrator, and we work to bring
them to justice. So I think our society must take the same
approach when organizations report cyber instances and stop
blaming victims for taking the correct actions to address these
attacks.
So I have got some questions. I want to follow up on
something that Mr. Bushar said, and--but I will get to that.
The Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014
requires the OMB to define a major incident, and directs
agencies to report major incidents to Congress within 7 days of
identification. The legislation we are discussing today would
require the director to determine the time frames, but no
earlier than 72 hours. I think there is a disconnect between
the way the Federal Government and the private sector report.
So what I would like to know is whether this 72 hours or
this 7 days is the appropriate period, and if--or is it
something else in between? I think, Mr. Bushar, you said that
72 hours was probably sufficient. But, Mr. Miller, if I could
get your input on that. I would also actually like to hear from
each of the witnesses what their thoughts are on that time
frame. What should the appropriate time frame be? Thank you.
If I could go in with Mr. Miller first, and then
alphabetically, Ms. Hogsett, Mr. Mayer, and Ms. Denbow.
Mr. Miller. Thanks very much for the question,
Representative Clyde.
Yes. Well, as we say in our written testimony and as our
policy principals indicated and as I think we have heard from
several other witnesses today already, it does seem like 72
hours does hit the--kind-of the sweet spot, if you will, for a
variety of different reasons.
You know, I don't want to be duplicative of some of the
other points that were made here, but, you know, just to put a
fine point on something, you know, whether we are talking about
the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015 and the
information sharing under that act, or if we are talking about
incident reporting requirements here, you know, the--the goal
of these--hopefully of these bills and laws is not to share the
information or just, you know, provide an avalanche of
information or as much as possible. Really do need to report
information in a way that is going to be usable, not only by
CISA, but by critical infrastructure, by other companies, such
as FireEye, that are working, you know, on the front lines of
these incidents.
So 72 hours seems to be the amount of time that many
cybersecurity professionals say is sufficient to determine what
has occurred and to provide some of that additional contextual
information that is needed, you know, to conduct the
investigations, to actually make sure that, you know,
cybersecurity--that you are actually also paying attention to
trying to shore up your systems and avoid further damage.
Also, it does seem to be in line with kind-of a global
standard, if you will, in the 72 hours time frame----
Mr. Clyde. Well, thank you.
Ms. Hogsett, do you concur with that?
Ms. Hogsett. Sure. I think what we are all trying to do is
we recognize the benefit and the value of providing more
information into a central place in the Government--in this
case, CISA--to help everybody else sort-of avoid attacks if it
hasn't already hit them instant.
So what you note around FISMA and the 7-day, I would have
to go back and look specifically at when that time line kicks
in, because we have often found in industry, when the clock
starts ticking can be very different. We believe, as structured
in this legislation, it does allow, as John noted, a reasonable
time period for a firm to do initial investigation without
interfering with that important work that needs to happen,
while still providing then useful information that could
benefit others.
I think the larger point that you highlight, though, is
that we do have already in place varying different standards,
and there is a need to ensure that there is harmonization.
Industry certainly faces this. We have it with our existing
regulations. Government agencies are likely also now, as you
highlight, you know, to have to face that.
So this is something that we would encourage and would love
to continue working with you and Congress on to help ensure
that there is more of a standardized baseline and that everyone
has a clear time line and a clear set of expectations around
reporting.
Mr. Clyde. OK. Thank you very much.
Mr. Mayer.
Mr. Mayer. Yes. So I will be quick here just to add. I
think--I am looking for the language. I can't find it right
now. But two things.
One is the legislation recognizes that there is a balance
between the agency's desire to get situational awareness and to
get information out that could be useful, and the desire of a
company to have--feel that they have some sense of what
happened. Again----
Mr. Clyde. Right.
Mr. Mayer [continuing]. Going back to what constitutes
confirmation, you are going to know it. You have got a serious
cascading impact on critical infrastructure. You may not know
attribution, you may not know all the elements, all the systems
that have been impacted. You will know you are dealing with a
significant incident. So I think you accomplish that balance.
The other thing I would add--and, again, I am looking for
it here, in the Executive Order 14028 that the White House
issued on improving the Nation's cybersecurity with respect to
what Federal agencies are required to do and their contractors,
they established, subject to check, I believe 3 days as the
time line for providing information.
So I am sure a lot of thought went into that, discussion
with other agencies. As it was pointed out, I think there are
general standards around that time. So it is a reasonable
amount of time. I think if you tried to make it 7 days, I think
a good case could be made that things would be, you know, at
that point, too far down the road in terms of potential damage.
So----
Mr. Clyde. OK.
Mr. Mayer [continuing]. We wouldn't--I don't think anybody
on the industry is going to--you are going to find anybody
arguing for that--that amount of time----
Mr. Clyde. Well, all right. Thank you. Maybe we should
tighten up the Federal Government's requirement then.
Last, Ms. Denbow, do you concur with that? I saw you
shaking your head yes.
Ms. Denbow. Thank you very much, Congressman.
There is not really a good answer to exactly what the right
number should be. Should it be 72? Should it be 70? Should it
be 68? It is more of--the key is that they are allowed to
confirm first that they have an incident rather than just
speculating that they have an incident.
By giving it the 72 hours, now you are allowing the
operator more time to gather valuable, useful information
rather than just spitting information to CISA, where CISA is
going to come back and ask more questions anyway.
So it just allows that little comfort zone and space to be
able to do the investigation that is needed to be able to
provide preliminary information.
Mr. Clyde. Well, thank you very much.
Madam Chair, I see my time has expired, but I appreciate
the witnesses' information here.
You know, it is my intent that we have good industry input
in the rule-making process to establish this bill, because I
think that is very, very important. So thank you, and I yield
back.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Clyde.
The Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes the gentlewoman from
Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee.
Ms. Lee, are you muted? I think you may need to unmute.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Can you hear me?
Ms. Clarke. We can hear you now.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair, for your leadership on
this very crucial issue. I just have two questions that I would
like to pose for those who would answer it and give their
insight.
We know that a key consideration on the value of reporting
is sharing information on the cyber attack, how a system was
breached or compromised so that effective defenses can be
developed.
I would like to raise the point of whether or not is it
important for Pfizer--CISA to share this type of data with
critical infrastructure owners and operators knowing that, even
to date, there are at least 85 percent or more of the critical
infrastructures in the private sector?
The second question would be how this legislation would
have impacted Colonial Pipeline and the trajectory that they
utilized, which was not open, which was not--they did not come
forward quickly, and they did not provide information quickly.
So I pose those two questions, and I do those to the
particular witnesses who choose to answer them. Or either I
will call on each of you.
Mr. Bushar. Yes, ma'am. I will take a shot at the first
question.
It is absolutely important and critical, and as we
testified today, that the bidirectional information sharing is
absolutely important for any information-sharing regimen to be
considered. So those indicators, those technical pieces of
information around the specific vulnerabilities that were
exploited and the way in which they were exploited are exactly
the sorts of data points that CISA should be collecting and
then, you know, turning around to covered entities or to
specific sectors as appropriate.
As we know, in much of our infrastructure today, it is
fairly common technology sets, so that, in many cases, those
sorts of information and indicators will apply broadly. But
there may be very, very specific vulnerabilities that only
apply to certain pieces of technology that are only relevant in
certain industries, and, therefore, CISA will be--you know,
they will have to tailor that information sharing in a way that
is, again, relevant to the defense--defensibility of those
particular pieces of technology in those sectors.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Can you hear me?
Mr. Bushar. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Good. Can I have other witnesses answer
the question, please?
Ms. Denbow. I will gladly answer. This is Kimberly with the
American Gas Association.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Ms. Denbow. Yes, ma'am.
So, repeating what Ron said, yes, the bidirectional is
extremely important.
Going on to the Colonial Pipeline matter. I will say that
for nearly a dozen years, if not more so, the oil and natural
gas sector, as well as the pipeline sector coordinating
councils, have been asking Government for a more streamlined
reporting approach. Regardless of whether it was mandated or
voluntary, we said: Is there a one-stop shop where we can
report a cyber incident? And there is constant, well, yes;
well, no, not really.
So until that can be worked out, I believe the industry
operators are reporting to whom they feel they need to report
to, one, under certain given requirements, but then, also, I
know that, at least with AGA-member utilities, we tell them to
connect with the FBI.
So, given the absence of that further information, that is
kind-of what we are working under, as well as to report to the
TSOC, the Transportation Security Operations Center.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So legislation--thank you. Legislation
that would give a framework for this would be helpful, and also
the sharing of information would be helpful as well?
Ms. Denbow. That bilateral part is so important. We feel
like--we feel like when we share with the Government, it
becomes a landfill of information with nothing valuable coming
back out to us in a timely fashion. That is not to criticize
the individuals that are working with the process on the
Government side. Much like having a valuable by-product out of
landfills, such as renewable natural gas, it would be valuable
if we could have a valuable by-product out of this data
landfill being bidirectional information sharing in a timely
fashion of actionable information.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Any other witnesses----
Mr. Miller. Congresswoman Jackson Lee, could I also jump in
on this briefly?
Ms. Jackson Lee. I would be very pleased if you would, Mr.
Miller. Thank you.
Mr. Miller. Thank you very much.
You know, just to add on to this--the bidirectional point.
It is absolutely critical, and, you know, again, as I was
suggesting earlier, you know, it is not only bidirectional
information sharing. I mean, what is really key is what is
the--what is the goal, and what is the--and what is this bill,
for instance, trying to do with--this incident notification
bill?
I think that the bill does a good job of articulating some
of the different operational, you know, goals that the bill has
for CISA. You know, greater situational awareness is certainly
part of it. We can all agree that that would be useful, not
only for the Government, but for the critical infrastructure
community.
But then, also, at least based on our conversations with,
you know, the relatively new team at CISA, you know, I think
they are really interested in driving deeper operational
collaboration between CISA, other Government partners, critical
infrastructure owners and operators. I mean, that is really
key, right, to--you know, we always hear cybersecurity is a
team sport. Maybe it is a cliche because it is true, right?
I mean, CISA--we shouldn't think of it as, you know, does
CISA have the information it needs to protect the world from
cyber threats, because that is--they are never going to have
enough resources to do that. So they have to work with the
private sector, and that is why private sector also needs this
information.
Ms. Jackson Lee. This is a new world. We even expect
ransomware from now on, and I think we do need this
cooperative, collegiate, and important dialog and discourse
every moment, if we can, in order to fight against those who
intend to really break our infrastructure.
Madam Chair, I am sorry, I am not seeing the time, but do I
have any more time?
Ms. Clarke. Ms. Jackson Lee, your time has expired. We are
entering into a second round of questioning. If your time
permits and you have further questions, please keep your camera
on and we will acknowledge you.
Having said that, I want to acknowledge----
Ms. Jackson Lee. That is it. Thank you so very much. I
appreciate your patience.
Ms. Clarke. Absolutely. Absolutely.
I am going to acknowledge myself for 5 more minutes. There
are a few more questions that I have for our panelists, and I
know that our Ranking Member will be joining me in questioning.
Mr. Bushar, how can CISA use data on cyber incidents to
empower security researchers outside of CISA to improve
security systemically across sectors? Can CISA do this in a way
that protects confidentiality and anonymity of covered
entities?
Mr. Bushar. Thank you for that question, Madam. Yes,
absolutely. There is valuable use cases for information that
CISA can share with either universities, public sector, other
public-sector entities or private-sector research firms to do
deeper-dive analysis, more complex, you know, analytics on
information. Things that were mentioned earlier by, I believe,
one of the other Members related to more complex sorts of
calculations related to machine learning algorithms or other
sorts of artificial intelligence-based capabilities that are--
today reside largely either in the private sector and academia.
I think there is a huge amount of value in that
collaboration and information sharing to allow a broader
research community to fully understand and analyze not only
individual attacks, but, again, the totality of what we are
seeing in cyber space, and hone in on what are some key areas
of either resiliency or defensibility, you know, to better
protect our sectors or our infrastructure overall.
To your other question related to how that information can
be shared or can it be shared anonymously or in a protected way
for covered entities, absolutely. We do this all the time as
part of our cooperation, not only with Government entities but
with research partners, et cetera, where we are able to take
collective data in a way that removes any sort of attribution
to the source of that information or to the identity of the
victim.
It is how we produce a number of our own strategic reports,
you know, in--for our customers and for the wider community,
and we believe that there is concrete ways for that to be done
in a way that protects the identity and confidentiality of the
sources of that information but benefits all parties from a
research and development effort perspective.
Ms. Clarke. From your perspective, having worked with CISA
and critical infrastructure clients to respond to incidents,
what role do you see incident response firms like Mandiant
playing in this new reporting regime? Are you concerned that
forcing security vendors to report on their customers will
undermine trust and discourage owners and operators from
working with the companies that have expertise and tools to
make them more secure?
Mr. Bushar. Thank you for that question, Madam. Yes. On the
point of the role that private security firms play in
protection and response to cyber threats, it is certainly a
capacity issue, as was stated earlier. We believe that there is
roles specifically for the Government to assist directly with
victims as well as private-sector partners like us and other
firms.
In order to do that in either model, frankly, there has to
be a trust relationship. These are often some of the worst days
that organizations are facing. There is very, very sensitive
information that is being analyzed within the--during the
breach and within the organization. You are in a situation of
high trust with your clients, whether you are Government
support, whether you are FBI, whether you are Mandiant
responding to a breach.
The challenge with a mandated model where you are asking a
trusted partner of a victim to then report independently of
that victim's authorization to the Government of the fact of a
breach puts us in a real challenging position--any individual--
any organization in a challenging position of betraying one
trust in order to provide information to another partner. We
don't believe that that encourages a real cooperation or
collaboration or effective way of sharing information.
It also can potentially create challenges with contracts
and language around legal requirements that we put in place
whenever we are working with clients in a trusted manner.
So I do think that the model that has been put forth in
this bill, where it is the covered entity themselves, it is the
organization that is the victim that is required to and
responsible for ultimately reporting is the right model. I
think organizations like ourselves are in a good place to
advise and support that compliance for the victim, but that
organization's security vendor should not be compelled to do
that independently of the client that they are working on
behalf of.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. One of the goals in drafting this
legislation was to provide CISA with enough information to
analyze and understand threats, but do--but to do so without
inundating CISA with false positives or inaccurate helpful--
unhelpful reports. I think that was raised in the conversation
with Mr. Clyde. Toward that end, we have directed CISA to
consider a number of factors when defining covered cyber
incidents.
This is to the panel. What are the risks of improperly
scoping the definition of covered cyber incidents, and how
would that frustrate the goals of cyber incident reporting?
Yes.
Mr. Mayer. So I might start here. So what you want to look
for is the Goldilocks solution here. It can be too narrow or it
could be too broad, and you really have to find that right
balance in terms of, you know, laser on that kind of
consideration. So the fact that there is a process of
engagement, that there is going to be a continuous dialog, I
believe, there will be opportunities to say, we didn't do
enough, we did too much, or it was too narrow, too broad, and
to refine that. But I think there are risks on both sides of
that equation.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Mayer.
Ms. Hogsett, I think I saw your hand.
Ms. Hogsett. Yes, ma'am. Thank you.
I agree with Robert. I think the thing--the point that we
would caution here is, for a number of our financial
institutions, they will potentially see thousands of pings
against their systems. So if you leave the definition and the
scope too broad, you would literally have, from a single firm,
potentially hundreds if not thousands of reports going in,
which just is a massive amount, and it is not really the things
that are going to, I think, cause the level of concern that you
are looking to focus on.
So, again, we do believe that, you know, the opportunity
for public comment and dialog with sectors through the rule-
making process will help us get to a good place, but we also do
need to be respectful that this is going to be a new--new work
capability for CISA to build, and we don't want to send too
much information to them, because that would be too much noise
in the system and you would miss potentially really big things.
Also, for a firm who is then having to report, what that
means is you are taking your front-line cyber defenders away
from focusing on defending the firm and continuing to keep up
with this dynamic threat environment that we have, and instead
they are focusing on making sure that they are submitting
Government reports so that they are not, you know, missing that
perspective.
So I think that is a really critical component to get
right, and we appreciate at least that the structure you have
put in place would allow for that dialog to get to the
Goldilocks moment that Robert mentioned.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you.
My time has expired. I thank my Ranking Member for his
indulgence, and I now yield to him for any additional questions
that he may have.
Mr. Garbarino. Of course, Madam Chairman. That is actually
an important question to get out, so I appreciated and enjoyed
the witnesses'--their answers.
I want to do a little follow-up. Ms. Hogsett, maybe you
could--since most of your Members already deal with reporting
requirements, both nationally and for a lot of States, what can
we do--is there anything we can do in this legislation to help,
you know, harmonize, you know, what you--what your Members have
to--have to do so that they are not sending--they are not
reporting on several different hacks, you know, one for one
agency, one for another, you know, based on different
standards? You know, how--what can we do so it is easier for
your Members to comply with this law?
I will extend that to some of the other witnesses as well
after she answers, because I am sure you all have great
opinions.
Ms. Hogsett. Well, thank you for the question. That is a
really critical thing for us.
Attached to my testimony, we did include sort-of a
compendium or a summary of the variety of requirements that we
already have. This is why there is a provision in the bill
currently that requires CISA to coordinate and harmonize
requirements for those sectors that already have them in place.
So, for us, this would mean, you know, we would really
strongly encourage CISA to work not only with our sector risk
management agency, which is Treasury in our case, but also
Federal Reserve Board, the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. I mean, we
have a multitude. Hopefully, we have done a lot of that work to
help funnel that to a good place where we can help align for
them with what we already do, but that is really such a
critical point for us, that this gives us an opportunity,
hopefully, to have a streamlined requirement with a common set
so firms can provide information to one place, and then CISA
should be in a position to help work across the Government,
including independent regulatory agencies, to share that
information out.
Based on the conversations we have been having with our
regulators, we do think that everyone is really trying to align
and do the right thing to help everybody, you know, protect
their institutions, their organizations, and also the broader
sector and our Nation. So this is a unique opportunity to do
that, and your help and support by ensuring in the
implementation that that coordination--that required
coordination occurs would be really helpful for us.
Mr. Garbarino. Great. Thank you.
Anybody else want to add on to that?
Ms.--Mr. Miller?
Mr. Miller. Sure. Thank you, Ranking Member Garbarino.
Yes. You know, as I mentioned in my--I mentioned it briefly
in my oral testimony, and it is certainly in my written
testimony as well. I mean, this is really a major issue, and,
frankly, even extends beyond the cyber incident reporting
context, right? I mean, we have often talked about the need for
regulatory streamlining, because we not only--we have a lot of
different sector-specific regulators. You know, I don't need to
say anything more about that since Heather just took care of
that.
But, you know, the reality is there are a number of
different security incident notification requirements out there
already, right, on companies, you know, not only in the
regulated sectors, but, you know, Federal contractors. We have
the new Executive Order provision that was mentioned earlier.
One of the things that we recommend is really, you know,
leveraging these--the various existing channels that are
already set up and having CISA do that to really make sure
that, you know, that, frankly, the information is also being
shared amongst the regulators, the Federal agency, right? We
are talking about bidirectional information sharing but, in
this context, it is almost tridirectional.
We also need CISA talking to FBI and the financial
regulators and anyone else who really has information or is
receiving these reports. One of our recommendations is that
perhaps, you know, the Office of Management and Budget could
issue guidance to Federal regulators and law enforcement
requiring this sort-of sharing of information to make sure that
we are actually having a--you know, an impact on the regulatory
overload, you know. I appreciate the bill for taking the first
step in acknowledging the need, so thank you.
Mr. Garbarino. Yes. Ms. Denbow, I know you are--I think one
of the next things we have to do is maybe do a little Federal
preemption, all these different State rules that you all have
to deal with. We won't get into it now, but I know--I am sure I
could guess how you all feel, but----
Mr. Miller. Right. It is beyond your scope perhaps, but
there are also international rules that we need to deal with,
so----
Mr. Garbarino. Oh, yes. One thing at a time.
Ms. Denbow. So I believe that the biggest challenge really
is--and I speak from experience at the American Gas
Association. We worked effortlessly to try to pull together a
harmonization of all the different cyber assessments out there,
from all the different agencies: Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security, TSA. We were able to do
something like that. But then when you take it back to those
different offices, they believe that their system is the one
system that works best.
So I believe that is where--the challenge is actually going
to be on Congress to convince the different agencies that there
is one system as opposed to all the different systems, or how
the--all the different systems that are out there are not going
to be overly burdensome to the operator.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate those answers. Thank you so
much. We will definitely take that into consideration.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back, but thank you again for
having this great hearing today.
Ms. Clarke. I thank you very much, Mr. Ranking Member.
I want to thank our witnesses for their valuable testimony,
and the Members of the subcommittee for their questions.
The Members of the subcommittee may have additional
questions for our witnesses, and we ask that you respond
expeditiously in writing to those questions.
The Chair reminds Members that the subcommittee will--
record will remain open for 10 days--10 business days.
Without objection, the subcommittee now stands adjourned.
Thank you for joining us today.
[Whereupon, at 1:47 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
