- MOBILIZING OUR CYBER DEFENSES: MATURING PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS TO SECURE U.S. CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MOBILIZING OUR CYBER DEFENSES: MATURING
PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS TO SECURE
U.S. CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION, AND INNOVATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 6, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-51

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-050 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            John Katko, New York
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island      Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Clay Higgins, Louisiana
J. Luis Correa, California           Michael Guest, Mississippi
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri            Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Al Green, Texas                      Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Yvette D. Clarke, New York           Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
Eric Swalwell, California            Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Dina Titus, Nevada                   Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey    Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Val Butler Demings, Florida          Peter Meijer, Michigan
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California    Kat Cammack, Florida
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          August Pfluger, Texas
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey
Ritchie Torres, New York
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Daniel Kroese, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, AND
INNOVATION

Yvette D. Clarke, New York, Chairwoman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York,
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island          Ranking Member
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Ritchie Torres, New York             Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex  Jake LaTurner, Kansas
officio)                         John Katko, New York (ex officio)
Moira Bergin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Austin Agrella, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
Mariah Harding, Subcommittee Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Yvette D. Clarke, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York, and Chairwoman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Andrew R. Garbarino, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable John Katko, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    30
Prepared Statement.............................................    31
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................     6

Witnesses

Mr. Eric Goldstein, Executive Assistant Director for
Cybersecurity, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency, U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    11
Mr. Robert K. Knake, Deputy National Cyber Director for Strategy
and Budget, Principal Deputy National Cyber Director (Acting),
Office of the National Cyber Director, The White House:
Oral Statement.................................................    16
Prepared Statement.............................................    17
Ms. Tina Won Sherman, Director, Homeland Security and Justice,
U.S. Government Accountability Office:
Oral Statement.................................................    20
Prepared Statement.............................................    21

For the Record

The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Article, crn.in, April 5, 2022.................................    46
Article, TechCrunch, December 10, 2021.........................    48
Article, New York Times, July 29, 2021.........................    49
Article, Washington Post, March 22, 2022.......................    50

Appendix

Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Eric Goldstein....    55
Questions From Chairwoman Yvette D. Clarke for Eric Goldstein....    56
Questions From Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for Eric Goldstein...    57
Questions From Ranking Member John Katko for Eric Goldstein......    58
Questions From Honorable Ralph Norman for Eric Goldstein.........    58
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Robert K. Knake...    59
Questions From Chairwoman Yvette D. Clarke for Robert K. Knake...    60
Questions From Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for Robert K. Knake..    60
Question From Honorable James R. Langevin for Robert K. Knake....    60
Question From Ranking Member John Katko for Robert K. Knake......    61
Questions From Chairwoman Yvette D. Clarke for Tina Won Sherman..    61
Questions From Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for Tina Won Sherman.    62

MOBILIZING OUR CYBER DEFENSES: MATURING PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS TO
SECURE U.S. CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

----------

Wednesday, April 6, 2022

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Infrastructure Protection,
and Innovation,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 310 Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Yvette D. Clarke,
[Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Clarke, Jackson Lee, Langevin,
Slotkin, Garbarino, and Harshbarger.
Also present: Representative Katko.
Chairwoman Clarke. The Subcommittee on Cybersecurity
Infrastructure Protection and Innovation will be in order. The
subcommittee is meeting today to receive testimony on
mobilizing our cyber defenses, maturing public-private
partnerships to secure U.S. critical infrastructure. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare the committee in
recess at any point.
Good morning, everyone. I would like to thank the witnesses
for participating in today's hearing on how we can build a
better, more robust framework for protecting our Nation's most
critical infrastructure.
As some of you may know, this is not my first time serving
as Chair of this subcommittee. The last time I presided over
this panel was in 2011 during the 111th Congress. At that time,
the Obama administration was working to develop and strengthen
many of the policy frameworks we know today, which place DHS at
the center of a voluntary, public-private partnership to
promote strong cybersecurity across sectors. I have also served
as Ranking Member of this subcommittee, working across the
aisle to codify many of the those voluntary frameworks and
information-sharing regimes. With that backdrop in mind, and
with all due respect to the hard work that has been done, I
think it is time to be candid about the limits of these
voluntary partnerships and authorities.
When I rejoined the subcommittee last year, we were reeling
from a massive supply chain attack that gave Russia months of
access to some of the most critical networks. We have had to
watch from the sidelines as our critical infrastructure, from
hospitals and meatpackers to manufacturers and pipelines, have
been crippled by ransomware attacks.
For the past few months, Federal officials, like the ones
on our panel today, have been working around the clock to help
private-sector owners and operators understand that they may
soon be the target of retaliatory Russian cyber attacks. But we
have no way of knowing if these operators are hearing those
warnings and taking action to shore up their defenses. From
where I am sitting, one thing is clear: The United States
desperately needs to revamp the playbook it uses for critical
infrastructure cybersecurity.
We know that our Nation's critical infrastructure is
vulnerable to cyber attacks and the Federal Government has
resources it can bring to bear in closing security gaps, but we
have been reluctant to make the private sector come to the
table. The Federal Government also has the bird's-eye view
vantage point to track cyber threats in one sector, then use
that information to connect the dots on other malicious
activities across sectors. But until recently, we haven't been
willing to require critical infrastructure operators to provide
that information to CISA.
While the Biden administration has taken some aggressive
steps to partner with the private sector in new, innovative
ways, we have a long way to go and some big challenges ahead.
Fortunately, we know that Congress can still come together to
tackle big challenges. Most recently, enacted cyber incident
reporting legislation is proof of that.
To get this legislation across the finish line, we had to
work across the aisle and with our partners in industry to find
a solution that would give CISA the visibility it needs without
needlessly burdening victims of a cyber attack. We found a
smart, compromise solution there and I have faith that we can
do it again here.
My goal today is to get testimony that will help us answer
the question what is next? How do we continue to mature the way
the Government engages with critical infrastructure,
particularly those entities that are the most critical of the
critical or, as the Cyber Solarium Commission put it, our
systemically important critical infrastructure, or SICI? Do we
have a good sense of where these SICI assets are, who is
operating them, and how they are being secured?
Once we know who and what they are, what benefits should
the Federal Government provide for these entities to help them
protect themselves? Importantly, what burdens should they be
asked to shoulder in light of their importance to our National
security?
This latter part is key. It is not enough to simply
identify these most critical entities nor is it consistent with
what the Solarium Commission proposed. We need to be able to
answer the question what do these companies need to do as a
result of their designation? What does the Federal Government
need to do for them, whether that is better access to threat
intelligence, enhanced operational collaboration, or other
priority access to resources and support?
It is not enough to simply make a list of our most vital
assets. We need to know how we are going to operationalize it.
We have tried this exercise in list-making before, from the
National Asset Database to the designation of Section 9
companies. Some of these efforts were costly and labor-
intensive, and none of them ever really lived up to the
security gains originally envisioned. The through line for all
these efforts is that at some point, Congress or the
administration, or both, decided to punt on the question of
benefits and burdens. That will not happen on my watch.
I would like to recognize Representative Langevin and
Ranking Member Katko for championing this issue and I look
forward to continuing to work with them to craft this
legislation in a way that avoids the pitfalls of the past. This
hearing is an opportunity to help move the ball forward and
hear how the administration is thinking about these challenges
and working to upgrade its cybersecurity playbook.
I thank the witnesses for participating today and I look
forward to a robust discussion.
[The statement of Chairwoman Clarke follows:]
Statement of Chairwoman Yvette D. Clarke
April 6, 2022
I would like to thank the witnesses for participating in today's
hearing on how we can build a better, more robust framework for
protecting our Nation's most critical infrastructure. As some of you
may know, this is not my first time serving as Chair of this
subcommittee. The last time I presided over this panel was in 2011,
during the 111th Congress.
At the time, the Obama administration was working to develop, and
strengthen, many of the policy frameworks we know today--which place
DHS at the center of a voluntary, public-private partnership to promote
strong cybersecurity across sectors. I've also served as Ranking Member
of this subcommittee, working across the aisle to codify many of those
voluntary frameworks and information-sharing regimes.
With that backdrop in mind--and with all due respect to the hard
work that's been done--I think it's time to be candid about the limits
of these voluntary partnerships and authorities.
When I rejoined the subcommittee last year, we were reeling from a
massive supply chain attack that gave Russia months of access to some
of our most critical networks. We've had to watch from the sidelines as
our critical infrastructure--from hospitals and meatpackers to
manufacturers and pipelines--have been crippled by ransomware attacks.
For the past few months, Federal officials--like the ones on our
panel today--have been working around the clock to help private-sector
owners and operators understand that they may soon be the target of
retaliatory Russian cyber attacks. But we have no way of knowing if
these operators are hearing those warnings and taking action to shore
up their defenses. From where I'm sitting, one thing is clear, the
United States desperately needs to revamp the playbook it uses for
critical infrastructure cybersecurity.
We know that our Nation's critical infrastructure is vulnerable to
cyber attacks--and the Federal Government has resources it can bring to
bear in closing security gaps. But we've been reluctant to make the
private sector to come to the table. The Federal Government also has
the bird's-eye view vantage point to track cyber threats in one sector,
then use that information to connect the dots on other malicious
activity across sectors. But until recently, we haven't been willing to
require critical infrastructure operators to provide that information
to CISA.
While the Biden administration has taken some aggressive steps to
partner with the private sector in new, innovative ways--we have a long
way to go, and some big challenges ahead. Fortunately, we know that
Congress can still come together to tackle big challenges. My recently-
enacted cyber incident reporting legislation is proof of that.
To get this legislation across the finish line, we had to work
across the aisle, and with our partners in industry, to find a solution
that would give CISA the visibility it needs without needlessly
burdening victims of a cyber attack. We found a smart, compromise
solution there--and I have faith we can do it again here. My goal today
is to get testimony that will help us answer the question--what's next?
How do we continue to mature the way the Government engages with
critical infrastructure--particularly those entities that are the
``most critical of the critical''? Or, as the Cyber Solarium Commission
put it, our ``Systemically Important Critical Infrastructure,'' or
SICI? Do we have a good sense of where these SICI assets are, who's
operating them, and how they're being secured?
And, once we know who and what they are--what benefits should the
Federal Government provide for these entities to help them protect
themselves? Importantly, what burdens should they be asked to shoulder,
in light of their importance to our National security?
This latter part is key. It is not enough to simply identify these
``most critical'' entities--nor is it consistent with what the Solarium
Commission proposed. We need to be able to answer the question: What do
these companies need to do as a result of their designation? What does
the Federal Government need to do for them--whether that's better
access to threat intelligence, enhanced operational collaboration, or
other priority access to resources and support?
It's not enough to simply make a list of our most vital assets--we
need to know how we're going to operationalize it. We've tried this
exercise in `list-making' before--from the National Asset Database, to
the designation of ``Section 9'' companies. Some of these efforts were
costly and labor-intensive, and none of them ever really lived up to
the security gains originally envisioned. The through line for all
these efforts is that at some point, Congress, or the administration,
or both, decided to punt on the question of benefits and burdens. That
will not happen on my watch.
I would like to recognize Representative Langevin and Ranking
Member Katko for championing this issue, and I look forward to
continuing to work with them to craft this legislation in a way that
avoids the pitfalls of the past. This hearing is an opportunity to help
move the ball forward and hear how the
Administration is thinking about these challenges and working to
upgrade its cybersecurity playbook.

Chairwoman Clarke. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking
Member of the subcommittee, the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Garbarino, for an opening statement.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke, for calling
this hearing today and thank you to the witnesses. I appreciate
you being here to discuss how we can bridge the gap between
public and private stakeholders and to discuss on-going efforts
to identify and secure systemically important critical
infrastructure.
It is no secret that we are facing an unprecedented level
of cyber attacks against our Nation's critical infrastructure.
Recent breaches, like Colonial Pipeline and SolarWinds, among
others, are sobering reminders of the devastation attacks can
cause to our economic and National security.
Additionally, yesterday's full committee hearing provided
us with a stern reminder that cyber threats posed by foreign
adversaries are only becoming more potent. Potential for
malicious Russian cyber activity as well as attacks by other
adversarial nations, like China, Iran, and North Korea, is only
increasing. Congress must continue to facilitate public and
private partnerships that are able to meet and repel these
threats.
Cyber space is seemingly endless and the Federal
Government's visibility to monitor incidents is limited. While
Congress recently took an important step by codifying our
subcommittee's incident reporting framework at CISA, there is
more that can be done.
The vast majority of our Nation's critical infrastructure
is owned and operated by the private sector. Therefore,
information sharing between these stakeholders and the Federal
Government is necessary to effectuate meaningful change. We
need a process for the Federal Government to identify which
infrastructure is systematically important and we need a plan
for the private sector to protect those assets.
Earlier in this Congress, I joined with my colleagues Mr.
Katko and Ms. Spanberger in introducing bipartisan legislation,
Securing Systemically Important Critical infrastructure Act.
The bill authorizes CISA to designate certain entities of
critical infrastructure as systemically important. By
designating key elements, the Federal Government will signal to
the private sector the assets that they should specifically
prioritize in order to secure our Nation's critical sectors. As
an original cosponsor of this effort I am confident that this
is the best path forward.
I am pleased to have an expert panel of witnesses here
today to hear their perspectives on this initiative. We must
create the foundation for strong public-private collaboration
without adding additional regulatory burdens for the industry.
I would like to say a quick note of thanks to CISA's Region
2 team for joining me last week for a successful cybersecurity
webinar for critical infrastructure partners in my district. It
is information sharing like this, coupled with cyber incident
reporting and systemically important critical infrastructure
designation, that will be instrumental in hardening our cyber
defenses.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on how we can
best move forward. Thank you again, Chairwoman.
[The statement of Ranking Member Garbarino follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Andrew R. Garbarino
Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke, for calling this hearing today. I
appreciate our witnesses being here to discuss how we can bridge the
gap between public and private stakeholders, and to discuss on-going
efforts to identify and secure systemically important critical
infrastructure.
It is no secret that we are facing an unprecedented level of cyber
attacks against our Nation's critical infrastructure. Recent breaches
like Colonial Pipeline and SolarWinds, among others, are sobering
reminders of the devastation that attacks can cause to our economic and
National security.
Additionally, yesterday's full committee hearing provided us with a
stern reminder that the cyber threats posed by foreign adversaries are
only becoming more potent. The potential for malicious Russian cyber
activity, as well as attacks by other adversarial nations like China,
Iran, and North Korea, is only increasing. Congress must continue to
facilitate public and private partnerships that are able to meet and
repel these threats.
Cyber space is seemingly endless, and the Federal Government's
visibility to monitor cyber incidents is limited. While Congress
recently took an important step by codifying our subcommittee's
incident reporting framework at CISA, there is more that can be done.
The vast majority of our Nation's critical infrastructure is owned and
operated by the private sector. Therefore, information sharing between
these stakeholders and the Federal Government is necessary to
effectuate meaningful change.
We need a process for the Federal Government to identify which
infrastructure is systemically important and we need a plan for the
private sector to protect those assets.
Earlier this Congress, I joined my colleagues Mr. Katko and Mrs.
Spanberger in introducing bipartisan legislation, the Securing
Systematically Important Critical Infrastructure Act. The bill
authorizes CISA to designate certain entities of critical
infrastructure as systemically important. By designating key elements,
the Federal Government will signal to the private sector the assets
that they should specifically prioritize in order to secure our
Nation's critical sectors. As an original co-sponsor of this effort, I
am confident that this is the best path forward.
I'm pleased to have an expert panel of witnesses here today to hear
their perspectives on this initiative. We must create the foundation
for strong public-private collaboration without adding additional
regulatory burdens for industry.
I'd like to say a quick note of thanks to CISA's Region II team for
joining me last week for a successful cybersecurity webinar for
critical infrastructure partners in my district. It's information
sharing like this, coupled with cyber incident reporting, and
systemically important critical infrastructure designation, that will
be instrumental in hardening our cyber defenses.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on how we can best
move forward.
Thank you again, Chairwoman.

Chairwoman Clarke. I thank the Ranking Member, Mr.
Garbarino.
Members are also reminded that the subcommittee will
operate according to the guidelines laid out by the Chairman
and Ranking Member in their February 3, 2021, colloquy
regarding remote procedures. Additional Member statements may
be submitted for the record.
[The statements of Chairman Thompson and Honorable Jackson
Lee follow:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
April 6, 2022
This Congress has been marked by a series of high-profile cyber
incidents, from SolarWinds to Colonial Pipeline to JBS. We have been
forced to evaluate our current approach to critical infrastructure
security and how the Federal Government and private sector collaborate.
Our oversight revealed that we spend too much time examining challenges
to effective public-private partnerships and are too slow to take bold
action to address them--that is, unless Chairwoman Clarke is leading
the charge.
I want to applaud Chairwoman Clarke for the recent passage of the
Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act. This critical
legislation will position CISA to help its private-sector partners
detect and disrupt malicious cyber campaigns sooner and provide
enhanced situational awareness to inform strategic security
investments. A mandatory cyber incident reporting framework is long
overdue.
I want to thank the Chairwoman for working with private-sector
stakeholders, the administration, and our colleagues in the Senate to
get it right. I would also like to thank Ranking Member Katko and
Subcommittee Ranking Member Garbarino for their efforts to get this
important legislation across the finish line. Despite this progress, we
must do more to maximize the cybersecurity benefits of public-private
collaboration.
Yesterday, we heard from representatives from critical
infrastructure sectors--including financial services and water--
regarding how they are working with the Federal Government to
strengthen cyber defenses and build resilience. Although there were
similarities in the witnesses' testimonies--both stressed the value of
continuous two-way engagement between the Federal Government and the
private sector--there were notable differences.
The financial services sector is well-resourced, regulated, and
capable of actioning both Classified and un-Classified information. In
contrast, the water sector is under-resourced, largely unregulated, and
would benefit from concise, properly contextualized security guidance.
In short, while the financial services sector has the resources and
capacity to engage in operational collaboration with the Federal
Government, the water sector is still working to establish a stronger
security baseline. Similar disparities exist across the 16 critical
infrastructure sectors, and the Federal Government must tailor its
approach to partnership accordingly.
In doing so, it must prioritize collaboration with the private
sector with the understanding that not all critical infrastructure is
equally critical. Efforts to identify the most ``critical of the
critical'' infrastructure are nothing new. But previous efforts--from
the Section 9 designation to the National Asset Database--have fallen
short.
As we work to identify the most significant critical infrastructure
and define the associated benefits and burdens, we must leverage
lessons learned. Before I close, I want to thank Congressman Jim
Langevin and Ranking Member Katko for their commitment to modernizing
how the Federal Government engages with critical infrastructure. I look
forward to working with them to refine and advance their approaches.
______

Statement of Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee
April 6, 2022
Chairwoman Clarke, and Ranking Member Garbarino, thank you for
holding today's hearing on ``Mobilizing our Cyber Defenses: Maturing
Public-Private Partnerships to Secure U.S. Critical Infrastructure.''
I thank today's witnesses:

Mr. Eric Goldstein, executive assistant director for
cybersecurity, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency;

Mr. Robert K. Knake, deputy national cyber director for
strategy and budget & principal deputy national cyber director
(acting), Office of the National Cyber Director; and

Ms. Tina Won Sherman, director, Homeland Security and
Justice, Government Accountability Office (Republican Witness).
I thank each of you for bringing your expert view of the cyber
threats against our Nation's critical infrastructure.
The USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 defines CI as ``systems and assets,
whether physical or virtual, so vital to the United States that the
incapacity or destruction of such systems and assets would have a
debilitating impact on security, National economic security, National
public health or safety, or any combination of those matters.
This hearing allows Members the opportunity to assess Federal
efforts to mature collaboration with critical infrastructure owners and
operators as they work to defend their networks and build resilience.
The hearing is an opportunity to learn about existing partnerships
between the public and private sectors regarding critical
infrastructure protection, and what can be done to encourage greater
collaboration to protect the most critical infrastructure from cyber
threats.
To address the current threat landscape, the Federal Government
needs to rethink the way that it engages with key critical
infrastructure partners--the ``most critical of the critical.''
That starts by developing a clear understanding of critical
functions and points of failure across the country--but that is not
where it ends.
The most important aspect of critical infrastructure is that it is
essential to modern American life and strong link to economic
competitiveness.
Electricity, clean drinking water, functioning dams, spillways,
levies, transportation, and food production are all under the heading
critical infrastructure.
The House Committee on Homeland Security has the responsibility of
providing for the cybersecurity of Federal civilian agencies as well as
the to secure the Nation's 16 critical infrastructure sectors from
cyber and other threats.
The list of critical infrastructure has expanded to include
election systems following cyber incidents targeting election systems
leading up to the 2016 National Elections.
We know the threats that computing devices and systems face, which
are almost too numerous to count:

Bot-nets;

Ransom-ware;

Zero-Day Events;

Mal-ware;

Denial-of-Service Attacks;

Distributed Denial-of-Service Attacks;

Pharming;

Phishing;

Data Theft;

Data Breaches;

SQL Injection;

Man-in-the-middle attack.
This list is not exhaustive, but it does make clear the scope of
the threat and why the United States can no longer rely solely on the
resources of critical infrastructure owners and operators to secure
assets absent Federal guidance and resources.
This is why I introduced the Cybersecurity Vulnerability
Remediation Act was introduced and passed the House during the 115th
and 116th Congresses and has been updated again in the 117th Congress
to meet the ever-evolving nature of cyber threats faced by Federal and
private-sector information systems and our Nation's critical
infrastructure.
This bill, which was included in the National Defense Authorization
Act for fiscal year 2022, goes significantly further than the first
Cybersecurity Vulnerability bill that I introduced in the 115th
Congress, to address the instance of Zero-Day Events that can lead to
catastrophic cybersecurity failures of information and computing
systems.
H.R. 2980, the Cybersecurity Vulnerability Remediation Act:

Changes the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) definition
of security vulnerability to include cybersecurity
vulnerability,

Provides the plan to fix known cybersecurity
vulnerabilities,

Gives the Department of Homeland Security the tools to know
more about ransomware attacks and ransom payments, and

Creates greater transparency on how DHS will defend against
and mitigate cybersecurity vulnerabilities and lays the road
map for preparing the private sector to better prepare for and
mitigate cyber attacks.
The bill requires a report that can include a Classified annex,
which I strongly recommend to the Secretary of DHS so that it can be
available should the agency elect to engage private-sector entities in
a discussion on cyber attacks and breaches targeting critical
infrastructure.
This bill is needed because the Nation's dependence on networked
computing makes us vulnerable to cyber threats.
Soon I will be introducing 3 cybersecurity critical infrastructure
bills to address many of the issues associated with cyber
vulnerabilities found in the infrastructure our communities and that
our Nation depends on.
The focus I have had on cybersecurity and critical infrastructure
is to protect against a crippling ``Zero-Day Event.''
A Zero-Day Event describes the situation that network security
professionals may find themselves when a previously unknown error or
flaw in computing code is exploited by a cyber criminal or terrorist.
The term ``Zero-Day Event'' simply means that there is zero time to
prepare a defense against a cyber attack.
When a defect in software is discovered then network engineers and
software companies can work to develop a ``patch'' to fix the problem
before it can be exploited by those who may seek to do harm.
Because vulnerabilities can be used by adversaries it is important
that this sensitive information be managed securely so details are not
routinely made available neither to the public nor to Congress.
Congress must do its job by providing the necessary leadership that
moves the Nation from an unrealistic moat-and-drawbridge cybersecurity
posture to one that is agile.
Vulnerabilities of computing systems are not limited to intentional
attacks, but can include acts of nature, human error, or technology
failing to perform as intended.
I am particularly concerned that so many jurisdictions rely on
critical infrastructure that is inadequately maintained for physical
and cybersecurity threats.
Cybersecurity threats to critical infrastructure (CI) have
accelerated rapidly in recent years.
The U.S. framework for securing CI, set forth in Presidential
Policy Directive 21 (PPD-21) and reinforced in statute, designates the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS), through the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), to lead Federal efforts to
secure critical CI across 16 diverse sectors, in coordination with
designated Sector Risk Management Agencies (SRMAs) for each sector.
However, these partnerships are largely voluntary, and most CI in
the United States is privately-owned.
High-profile cyber attacks such as SolarWinds and Colonial Pipeline
have renewed questions about whether the voluntary partnership model is
sufficient to address the current threat landscape.
This is particularly true in light of recent elevated threats from
Russia, which may seek to use malicious cyber attacks to retaliate for
U.S. sanctions following their invasion of Ukraine.
Because the majority of critical infrastructure is owned and
operated by the private sector, CISA has limited visibility into
malicious cyber activity on their networks, absent voluntary reporting
and information sharing.
Moreover, although in the past the Federal Government has attempted
to establish a mechanism to identify and track those assets and
entities most critical to regional and National security, it has failed
to define its relationship with those entities in a way that would
yield meaningful security benefits.
The Biden administration has shown a willingness to move away from
voluntary partnerships and toward a more regulatory model, but there
are challenges in understanding how such a regime might work, and the
entities to which it would apply.
This step is long overdue because of the nature of critical
infrastructure.
A failure in critical infrastructure would have wide-spread
consequences far beyond the scope of the critical infrastructure
service delivery area.
For this reason, there must be more accountability on the part of
owners and operators and greater Federal agency engagement regarding
the cybersecurity of these entities.
I look forward to the testimony of today's witnesses.
Thank you.

Chairwoman Clarke. I now welcome our panel of witnesses.
First, I would like to welcome Mr. Eric Goldstein, the
executive assistant director for cybersecurity at the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency. Previously,
Mr. Goldstein was the head of cybersecurity policy, strategy,
and regulation at Goldman Sachs. Mr. Goldstein also served at
CISA's precursor agency, the National Protection and Programs
Directorate, for several years.
Second, I would like to welcome Mr. Robert Knake. Mr. Knake
is currently the deputy national cyber director of strategy and
budget and the acting principal deputy national cyber director
in the Office of the National Cyber Directorate. During the
Obama administration Mr. Knake served as the director of
cybersecurity policy at the National Security Council.
Finally, I would like to welcome Dr. Tina Won Sherman, who
is the director of homeland security and justice at the U.S.
Government Accountability Office, GAO. Dr. Sherman manages work
on the protection of the Nation's critical infrastructure
assets and the security of the United States transportation
system. During her tenure, Dr. Sherman has led reviews on a
range of critical issues, including telecommunications,
transportation, and defense.
Without objection, the witnesses' full statements will be
inserted into the record. I now ask that our witnesses will
summarize their statements for 5 minutes, beginning with Mr.
Goldstein.

STATEMENT OF ERIC GOLDSTEIN, EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR
CYBERSECURITY, CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY
AGENCY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Goldstein. Thank you so much. Chairwoman Clarke,
Ranking Member Garbarino, it is really a privilege to be here
today testifying on behalf of CISA, the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency.
This hearing occurs, of course, in the backdrop of Russia's
unjust and tragic invasion of Ukraine and the on-going risk of
malicious cyber activity. This subcommittee is to be commended
on taking the time to examine CISA's role as our Nation's cyber
defense agency and the manner in which we catalyze operational
collaboration between Government and the private sector. This
operational collaboration is foundational to our success as an
agency and our shared goals of rapidly advancing cybersecurity
across the country. We recognize at CISA that no individual
organization, public or private, has the visibility or the
ability alone to manage cybersecurity risk. So our goal is to
change the traditional models of public-private collaboration
and move to a new paradigm of public and private operational
collaboration where we can scale more effectively to meet the
risks that we are facing both today and into the future.
Even as we evolve toward this model, we have already shown
the benefits of true operational collaboration where Government
partners and the private sector are working side-by-side. I
look forward to speaking a bit more about our successes in this
area and our work yet to come.
The core of our operational collaboration efforts at CISA
are through our Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative, or the JCDC,
which was established by Congress to serve as the focal point
for proactive planning and domestic cyber defense across
Government and the private sector. In its short history, the
JCDC has already pioneered several real innovations.
The first is bringing together representatives from the
core cyber operational agencies--CISA, FBI, NSA, U.S. Cyber
Command--with partners across critical sectors--the Nation's
largest technology companies, energy companies, financial
institutions--to sit side-by-side in a virtual environment,
exchanging information, developing mitigations, and then
sharing information to protect the broader cybersecurity
community. We initiated this sort of work with the
vulnerability in the Log4j software library and we are now
scaling it as part of our broader shields of effort in response
to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, where our goal is to bring
together the best and most effective capabilities across
Government and the private sector so we can quickly learn about
threat activity and mitigations, and then share it more broadly
to protect the country.
We are also deeply focused on the JCDC as a locus of
proactive planning. Looking briefly at our work around the
Russian invasion of Ukraine, in December we developed a joint
public-private cyber defense plan. We exercised this plan in
January. When the invasion occurred, we moved into execution,
bringing together our partners across Government and the
private sector to exchange information and collaborate at
scale. We are showing through this work the value of the JCDC
and operational collaboration in taking information into
insights into action, all underpinned by proactive planning
that brings together Government and the private sector as
coequal partners through this work. We were gratified to hear
in the subcommittee's hearing yesterday many of our partners in
the private sector reflect the value of this partnership and
the work that we have done, even as we mature going forward.
But, of course, while our core goal is ensuring that every
American organization has the information and tools needed to
protect their enterprises and customers against cyber risks,
our core goal is ensuring the continuity and resilience of
National critical functions. For this reason, at CISA we are
focused on identifying the systemically important entities, or
SIEs as we call them, which, if degraded, would cause
debilitating systemic or cascading impacts to National critical
functions. We are engaged today in a rigorous effort to
identify these entities, understand how they support National
critical functions, and think creatively about how we can work
collaboratively to build our operational collaboration and
support these entities to reasonably assure the continuity of
National critical functions under all conditions.
We are grateful for the support of the subcommittee,
including Mr. Katko and Mr. Langevin, at helping us advance
these efforts. I am looking forward to conversation yet to come
as we evolve this critical and essential work.
It goes without saying that our Nation is facing
unprecedented cybersecurity risk, but we are deepening our
relationships, we are deepening the effectiveness of our
collaboration and our services, and working across Government,
our allies, and the private sector. With the support of
Congress we are confident that we will make the difference we
need to manage risk to our country.
Thank you again for the privilege of appearing today. Very
much looking forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goldstein follows:]
Prepared Statement of Eric Goldstein
April 6, 2022
Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on behalf
of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA)
regarding our efforts to evolve our partnerships with the private
sector to enable true operational collaboration.
In our globally interconnected world, our critical infrastructure
and American ways of life face a wide array of serious risks with
significant real-world consequences. Today, the critical functions
within our society are built as ``systems of systems,'' complex designs
with numerous interdependencies and systemic risks that can have
cascading effects. This trend has yielded significant gains in
efficiency and productivity, but also provides the opportunity for
nation-state actors and criminals to potentially undermine our National
security, economic prosperity, and public health or safety.
The risks we face today are complex and dispersed, both
geographically and across a variety of stakeholders. They are
challenging to assess and difficult to address. Consequently, we must
recognize that threats to our digital infrastructure are not bound by
National borders. Rather, our critical infrastructure is integrated
into a larger global cyber ecosystem requiring us to be at the constant
ready.
This committee is well aware of CISA's broader domestic role as the
operational lead for Federal cybersecurity, and as the National
coordinator for critical infrastructure security and resilience. The
importance of CISA's mission and role has been clearly reflected during
the war in Ukraine, as we have led the Nation's efforts across
Government and the private sector to prepare for potential malicious
cyber activity by Russian actors.
Critical to our success, and at the heart of CISA's mission, is
partnership and collaboration. Securing our Nation's cyber and critical
infrastructure is a shared responsibility and has never been more
important than it is today. Neither Government nor the private sector
have the knowledge or resources to do it alone. At CISA, we are
challenging traditional ways of doing business and are actively working
with our Government, industry, academic, and international partners to
change the paradigm from traditional public-private partnerships to
public-private operational collaboration at scale. Operational
collaboration is foundational for effective critical infrastructure
security and resilience. Timely, trusted information fusion among
stakeholders is essential.
In the past year, CISA has made significant strides in this
respect, particularly through the establishment of the Joint Cyber
Defense Collaborative (JCDC) and our CISA Cybersecurity Advisory
Committee (CSAC). These groups are examples of CISA's agency-wide
dedication to operational collaboration and deep partnership, which is
imbued across our mission divisions. By leveraging the expertise and
unique authorities of Government and the private sector, CISA is
better-positioned to connect with our stakeholders in industry and
Government to share resources, analyses, and tools. This in turn helps
our stakeholders build their own cyber, communications, and physical
security and resilience. The net effect is a stronger Nation, better
positioned to contend with the myriad threats we face to our
cybersecurity and critical infrastructure.
As we strive to make progress in the security of our Nation's
critical infrastructure through our various partnership initiatives, we
are not looking to duplicate the efforts of the private sector.
Instead, CISA is looking for ways we can add value, such as bringing
experts from Government and industry together, compiling a broader
holistic view of the cyber landscape, and sharing information across
sectors to ultimately make our Nation's critical infrastructure
resilient against malicious cyber activity.
Our work has taken on increased urgency subsequent to Russia's
unprovoked invasion of Ukraine. CISA has been working closely with our
critical infrastructure partners over the past several months to ensure
awareness of potential threats. We have been providing additional
resources, guidance, and support for months, and reiterated this call
for critical infrastructure to adopt a heightened security posture in
light of President Biden's statement that intelligence shows Russia may
be exploring options for potential cyber attacks. As part of our
broader ``Shields Up'' effort, we developed and published a variety of
resources, including guidance for organizations, corporate leaders and
CEOs, individuals, ransomware response, and a list of additional
resources, multiple joint Cybersecurity Advisories (CSAs), mitigation
guidance, including recent products on securing satellite
communications and uninterruptible power supply devices, and a
dedicated Technical Guidance web page with mitigation guidance and
resources from CISA, the JCDC and other partners. Our goal with all of
these efforts is to serve as a comprehensive resource for information
about mitigations for the Russian cyber threat.
joint cyber defense collaborative (jcdc)
Given that the vast majority of our Nation's critical
infrastructure is owned and operated by the private sector, the early
warnings of a cyber attack affecting U.S. organizations are more likely
to be identified by a private company rather than the Government. The
private sector plays a vital role in working with CISA to improve our
Nation's cybersecurity by helping to ensure that we are aware of new
campaigns or intrusions so we can protect other possible victims.
Critical to CISA's effort to build better operational collaborative
channels is the JCDC, which leverages authorities granted in the fiscal
year 2021 NDAA, among other authorities, and was launched by CISA in
August 2021 to lead collaborative, public, and private-sector cyber
defense planning, cybersecurity information fusion and analysis, and
the purposeful dissemination of cyber defense guidance to reduce cyber
risks to the Nation's critical infrastructure and the impact to our
National Critical Functions (NCF).
Today, the JCDC is a collection of more than 25 private-sector
companies working with CISA and other Federal Government cybersecurity
partner agencies--including DHS Office of Intelligence and Analysis,
FBI, NSA, U.S. Cyber Command, the U.S. Secret Service, and relevant
Sector Risk Management Agencies (SRMA)--to understand and respond to
cyber threats. The diversity and unique capabilities of JCDC partners
provides increased visibility and insight into the threat landscape and
enables JCDC to develop plans and exercises against the most serious
threats.
The JCDC model reflects the reality that no one entity can secure
cyber space alone. Collaboration across JCDC partners results in action
across an expansive set of cybersecurity stakeholders throughout the
Nation and the globe.
By leveraging and unifying the respective capabilities,
authorities, and expertise of the JCDC's partners, CISA is creating a
proactive, rather than reactive, capability for the Government and
private sector to work together to drive down risk even before an
incident occurs. Should another incident like the compromises affecting
SolarWinds Orion, Microsoft Exchange Server, or Colonial Pipeline
occur, the strengthened connective tissue among our partners will allow
for a more unified response.
The JCDC operating model relies on regular analytic and data
exchanges to enable common situational awareness and equip public and
private-sector partners to take risk-informed coordinated action for
our collective defense. Simply put, the work of the JCDC is about
seeing the dots, connecting the dots, and collectively driving down
risk to the Nation at scale. This alignment strengthens our mutual
resilience and ability to address immediate and impending cyber
incidents. Collaborative insights gleaned from the JCDC are then
rapidly shared across the broader cybersecurity community, including
through our Cybersecurity Information Sharing and Collaboration Program
and through a broad ecosystem of Information Sharing and Analysis
Centers (ISACs) and Organizations (ISAOs).
In its short history, the JCDC has strengthened the lines of
communication between industry and the Federal Government to improve
real-time information sharing, planning, and exercising. For example,
when CISA issued its emergency directive in response to the Log4j
vulnerability, CISA leveraged the JCDC, establishing a senior
leadership group within the the organization to coordinate collective
action and ensure shared visibility into both the prevalence of the
Log4j vulnerability and threat activity. By bringing together key
Government and private-sector partners via the JCDC, including the
agency's partners at the FBI and the NSA, CISA was able to ensure that
the country's strongest capabilities were brought to bear in an
integrated manner against the threat.
Having built trust and strengthened relationships with our partners
during our response to the Log4j incident, the JCDC was well-prepared
to respond to the current dynamic threat environment amidst rising
geopolitical tensions related to the Russia-Ukraine war.
To ensure domestic resilience against potential cyber attacks in
response to the Russia-Ukraine war, the President designated the
Department of Homeland Security as the Lead Federal Agency (LFA) for
domestic preparedness and response related to the current crisis.
Secretary Mayorkas then established a Unified Coordination Group (UCG)
and appointed CISA's executive director to serve as the senior response
official to ensure Federal unity of effort across the U.S. Government.
The stand-up of the UCG formalized the work CISA had been doing for
months with Sector Risk Management Agencies (SRMAs) to inform
stakeholders of the heightened threat environment, and conduct
intelligence-based threat briefs for SRMA partner agencies, Sector and
Government Coordinating Councils, and participants from the private
sector and State and local community. In addition, CISA is working with
FEMA, SRMAs, and other Federal partners to manage downstream physical
consequences of potential cyber attacks. The Russia-Ukraine crisis has
brought on a whole-of-Government and whole-of-Nation preparedness
effort
More broadly with the private sector though, the JCDC has served as
a critical forum to implement standing operational collaboration
channels.
For example, CISA developed a Russia-Ukraine crisis plan with our
JCDC partners that lays out phases and objectives of operational
coordination between the U.S. Government and our private-sector
partners amidst escalating geopolitical tensions. In mid-February, we
conducted a tabletop exercise of this plan with our interagency and
private-sector partners. We are using the plan as tensions escalate to
guide and align our collective operational posture and support our
ability to esynchronize defensive actions to mitigate harmful impacts
to U.S. critical infrastructure from Russian cyber operations. In the
wake of distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) and destructive malware
attacks affecting Ukraine and other countries in the region, we are
working very closely with JCDC and international cyber defense partners
to understand and rapidly share information on these on-going malicious
cyber activities.
Moreover, JCDC's collaborative channels have allowed CISA to
exchange technical information about recent incidents in Ukraine and
conduct real-time analysis with interagency and industry partners.
Further still, the JCDC established additional information-sharing
mechanisms with the Nation's largest energy and financial companies, in
coordination with the appropriate SRMAs, allowing CISA to provide
additional early warning about Russian activity against U.S.
institutions and exchange-related threat information and defensive
measures.
We recognize that many critical infrastructure partners or SLTT
governments find it challenging to identify resources for urgent
security improvements. In response, JCDC has worked with our partners
to compile a list of free cybersecurity tools and services to help
organizations further advance their security capabilities. This catalog
includes CISA's own services, open-source tools, and free offerings
from private-sector entities, including our JCDC partners. The catalog
includes resources like malware and antivirus protection systems,
vulnerability assessment solutions, tools that test password strength,
distributed denial-of-service protection services and intelligence from
several leading cybersecurity companies. This is particularly impactful
for small businesses and SLTT organizations who are target-rich and
resource-poor.
Going forward, we continue to build and mature the JCDC construct.
We are particularly focused on advancing our capability to create,
exercise, and execute joint cyber defense plans. Upcoming planning
efforts focus on the energy sector and collaboratively supporting
defense of the Nation's election infrastructure. The JCDC has
demonstrated the promise of a new model for public-private operational
collaboration: Joint cyber planning--including deliberate and crisis
action plans--through collaboration across the public and private
sectors to prepare for and address the Nation's most pressing cyber
risks, combined with integrated and institutionalized testing and
assessments to continuously measure and improve the effectiveness of
cyber defense planning and capabilities.
Through these collaborative efforts, we will enable common
situational awareness, information fusion, and analysis that equips
public and private partners to take risk-informed coordinated action.
This journey is not CISA's alone. Rather, we are embarking on a rapid
evolution in concert with our partners across the inter-agency and
private sector, with a shared goal of advancing our Nation's security
and resilience at scale.
systemically important entities (sie)
Through our operational collaboration efforts, we have learned that
prioritization is essential. By focusing on systemic risks, growing
interdependencies within and across sectors and our evolving reliance
on information and communications technology (ICT), we will more
effectively reduce the potential of cascading impacts associated with
the failure of these technologies that could threaten our National and
economic security.
In March 2020, the Cyberspace Solarium Commission proposed a
``designation of critical infrastructure entities that manage systems
and assets whose disruption could have cascading, destabilizing effects
on U.S. National security, economic security, and public health and
safety.''\1\ At CISA, we are operationalizing this concept by
developing approaches to identify Systemically Important Entities
(SIE). These are entities that own, operate, or otherwise control
critical infrastructure, prioritized based on indicators of systemic
importance and the potential impact that their disrupted or corrupted
functions will have a debilitating, systemic or cascading impact on our
country's critical infrastructure and related NCFs, National security,
National economic security, public health, public safety, or some
combination thereof.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ United States of America. (2020). Cyberspace Solarium
Commission, Final Report. p. 138. Retrieved from https://
www.cybersolarium.org/reports-and-white-papers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As the private sector owns and operates a vast majority of the
Nation's critical infrastructure, partnerships like JCDC, CSAC, and
others that foster integrated, collaborative engagement and interaction
are essential to maintaining critical infrastructure security and
resilience. Therefore, identifying systemically important private-
sector firms, in addition to SLTT and other public entities, is
paramount to prioritizing the partnerships CISA establishes and
maintains to reduce risk to critical infrastructure.
To aid in this identification, CISA established an SIE effort
within the National Risk Management Center (NRMC) to develop the SIE
concept in order to prioritize CISA's delivery of services to those
entities. CISA's SIE effort, which seeks to support and respond to
partners and stakeholders across the Federal Government, private
industry, and SLTT governments, will be the central body responsible
for coordinating across CISA, DHS, and the interagency to manage
stakeholder engagement with systemically important entities.
Additionally, CISA is sponsoring work by the Homeland Security
Operations Analysis Center (HSOAC) to develop a prototype analytic
capability to identify SIEs at scale. By using advanced data-analytic
techniques that evaluate entities based on their network centrality and
sector revenue, we will be better able to identify and assess an SIE's
importance across the NCFs and close gaps in their risk profiles.
Identifying SIEs is more than just a naming and mapping exercise.
By identifying SIEs we will be better positioned to understand the true
landscape of institutions and systems whose disruption could have
cascading and systemic effects to our critical infrastructure and
related NCFs. This knowledge will better position us to prioritize
these entities for CISA services and capabilities and identify mature
entities whose partnership can help the Nation reduce systemic risk to
our cyber and critical infrastructure.
While we are committed to growing our capacity to collaborate and
share information, CISA and our Federal partners are limited in our
ability to influence private-sector functions, such as complex supply
chains, that are an increasing source of cyber risk. Fortunately, SIEs
can help set expectations for acceptable activities and behavior by
employing effective supply chain security risk management practices.
CISA will prioritize partnership and engagement with the SIE
community and provide recommendations for addressing the emerging
challenges of systemic risk. We particularly would benefit from
specific input from partners regarding our efforts to improve our
understanding of systemic risk.
The SIE program is of critical importance. While we are committed
to protecting all of the Nation's critical infrastructure, not all
infrastructure is created equal. Assets and systems that are of such
vital importance to our security require prioritized protection in
collaboration with the private sector. In some cases, individual
companies can reduce risk because they own or operate a significant
portion of the assets and systems. CISA's efforts to begin the
identification process of systemically important entities represents a
vital, and necessary, first step in that process.
cisa cybersecurity advisory committee (csac)
Even as we work through the JCDC to collaborate around urgent risks
of today and develop cyber defense plans to address those risks still
ahead, we must also learn from diverse minds across the cybersecurity
community to advance CISA's strategic maturation. To achieve this goal,
we recently launched the CISA Cybersecurity Advisory Committee (CSAC),
a key authority granted in the National Defense Authorization Act
(NDAA) for fiscal year 2021.
The CSAC was established with the purpose of bringing together
strategic thinkers with diverse expertise and insights to examine
issues and create recommendations related to the development,
refinement, and implementation of policies and programs that will help
to advance the cybersecurity mission of CISA as well as strengthen the
cybersecurity of the United States. In December 2021, Director Easterly
appointed 23 leading experts on cybersecurity, technology, risk
management, privacy, and resilience from across industry, academia, and
Government to serve as the CSAC's initial members. The diversity of the
committee's members emphasizes the need for an ``all hands on deck''
approach to secure our digital networks.
CSAC members advise, consult with, report to and make
recommendations to the Director on the development, refinement, and
implementation of policies, programs, planning, and training pertaining
to CISA's cybersecurity mission. The committee will examine and make
recommendations on a variety of topics collectively aimed at
strengthening CISA and more broadly reshaping the cyber ecosystem to
favor defense. These topics include growing the cyber workforce;
reducing systemic risk to National critical functions; combating
misinformation and disinformation impacting the security of critical
infrastructure; and turning the corner on cyber hygiene by raising the
baseline of security throughout the cyber ecosystem to advance an
environment that favors the defender by better aligning Government and
private-sector efforts to build resilience and improve cyber hygiene at
scale. In addition, the CSAC recently established a new Technical
Advisory Council, a subcommittee of the CSAC, with some of the most
accomplished individuals in the cybersecurity community to provide CISA
with expert insights into advancing our collaboration with the research
community and ensuring that our programs reflect leading technology
practices.
Building on the momentum from the committee's inaugural meeting in
December, the CSAC convened again just this past week on March 31.
Protecting the Nation's critical infrastructure depends on a unified
effort and we remain committed to ensuring that we have the right
strategy in place to prepare for, respond to, and mitigate
cybersecurity threats to our Nation's critical systems. CISA looks
forward to the recommendations made by the committee Members and the
subsequent subcommittees.
cyber safety review board (csrb)
A continuous learning culture is critical to staying ahead of the
increasingly sophisticated cyber threats we face in today's complex
technology landscape. Recognizing this need, President Biden's
Executive Order 14028 on Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity directed
DHS to establish a Cyber Safety Review Board (CSRB) to review
significant cyber incidents to ensure that the Nation fully understands
and learns from significant cyber events that may threaten us all.
The CSRB serves a deliberate function to review major cyber events
and make concrete recommendations that would drive improvements within
the private and public sectors. As a uniquely constituted advisory
body, the CSRB will focus on learning lessons and sharing findings with
the President, and with others who can benefit from them, as
appropriate.
The private sector has a significant role to play in providing
visibility, validation, and insight into how cyber events emerge and
which short and long-term improvements can stave off future, similar
events, and incidents. The CSRB--composed of 15 highly-esteemed
cybersecurity leaders from the Federal Government and the private
sector--provides a unique forum for collaboration between Government
and private-sector leaders who will deliver strategic recommendations
to the President and the Secretary of Homeland Security.
conclusion
Our Nation is at a turning point in cybersecurity. We must continue
to work together, by deepening our operational collaboration and
ensuring we have the plans and policies in place now, to defend against
new and changing cyber threats going forward. Recent incidents and the
on-going threat of malicious Russian cyber activity provide a stark
reminder about the vulnerability of our country's critical
infrastructure. The need for increased risk sharing and distribution
between the Government and private sector is clear.
The cyber ecosystem is a shared space with shared responsibilities
and shared benefits, with every organization gaining from the
interoperability, scale, and resilience of the internet and networked
technologies. As a result, every organization must invest in protecting
it. Together we can address the risks we all face. CISA's public and
private-sector programs provide novel collaborative venues for diverse
entities to evolve their relationships.
Now is the time to act--and CISA is helping to lead our National
call to action. We will deepen our partnerships with critical
infrastructure partners, enhance our visibility into National
cybersecurity, and drive targeted action to reduce vulnerabilities and
detect our adversaries. In collaboration with our Government partners,
critical infrastructure entities, our international allies, and with
the support of Congress, we will make progress in addressing this risk
and maintain the availability of critical services to the American
people under all conditions.

Chairwoman Clarke. Thank you for your testimony, Mr.
Goldstein. I now recognize Mr. Knake to summarize his statement
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT K. KNAKE, DEPUTY NATIONAL CYBER DIRECTOR
FOR STRATEGY AND BUDGET, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY NATIONAL CYBER
DIRECTOR (ACTING), OFFICE OF THE NATIONAL CYBER DIRECTOR, THE
WHITE HOUSE

Mr. Knake. Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke. Thank you, Mr.
Garbarino, and thank you, Mr. Katko, for being here today. I
very much appreciate the opportunity. It is very good to be
back before this committee in my new role as deputy national
cyber director in the Office of the National Cyber Directorate.
So, we are the new kids in school and we are working
closely with our colleagues at CISA. We are working very
closely with our colleagues throughout the interagency and with
our colleagues at the National Security Council in order to
bring together a more cohesive effort on the part of the
Federal Government when we are working with the private sector.
So, that is what we are here for.
So, today you will hear me say a lot of things that sound
almost like what you might hear from Ms. Sherman. We are
reviewing, we are evaluating, we are supporting rather than we
are directing or we are operationalizing some activity. That is
the role of CISA, that is the role of Eric Goldstein, and the
SRMAs, Sector Risk Management Agencies.
So, with that said, what I would like to talk about is in
terms of the maturing public-private partnership, first, I
think we really need to recognize how far we have actually
come, particularly in the last few years. We have gone from a
partnership that was fundamentally about having meetings
between public policy officials and companies, and public
policy officials and organizations, to one in which we have
operational collaboration that, in some cases, is side-by-side,
shoulder-to-shoulder, but, even more importantly, has been
virtualized so that people at large companies can engage with
the private sector, with the Government, and can do it in real
time from where they were. This is a massive lead that the JCDC
has really enabled over the last year. We are really seeing the
benefits of that maturation as we confront the Russia threat.
So, as we look to mature, we first need to recognize that
we really have come a significant way. My hat is off to this
Congress for giving the resources, the authorities, and looking
at the organization of CISA and the SRMAs in order to make sure
that we have got the right players on the field and they have
got the right resources to do their jobs.
So, where do we go from here I think is the big question?
The Russia threat I think, as Eric has said, is really
providing a focus. It is making sure that every single day we
are improving our connectivity with the private sector, that
when problems happen they are getting resolved. That if, for
instance, somebody calls our office and says we have an issue,
we can't find the right place to plug into the Government, we
don't say, great, we will take that, we will stand up a new
body at the White House to do it. No, we say, OK, I am going to
get on the phone with Eric or, better yet, our engagement team
is going to get on board with the JCDC and say how do we plug
these guys in? That is happening every single day. So that
improvement is something that we very much want to see continue
as we face this Russia threat.
I think Eric has given a very good encapsulation of what
the JCDC does. Let me talk a little bit more about what we are
doing with the Sector Risk Management Agencies, which we see as
a vital partner in this effort.
Many people have used the football analogy and I will use
it here. If you have got the quarterback at CISA, you got to
make sure you have strong players on the rest of the field, and
that is where the SRMAs come in. Our office is evaluating, in
partnership with those SRMAs, what are their capabilities? What
are the resources they need? What are the gaps and how can we
help fill them?
Crucial to that we have heard from every private sector
company we talked to is to make sure that we can provide the
one thing that private companies can't do on their own, which
is intelligence. Only the U.S. Government can collect
intelligence and only the U.S. Government can provide it back.
So, that is a major focus of our efforts.
There is a great model here that the defense industrial
base is engaged in with DOD. We think we can replicate it. The
key is to build some connectivity between CISA and the SRMAs
and the private sector, so we can really scale these great
efforts. I think we are well on our way to that.
Finally, as I think we look at the concept of the
systemically important entities, it is fairly clear to us that
DHS has the authorities to do the work they have done today. We
are working with them to see are there other things you would
like to do? Are there authorities you don't have in order to
either identify, but, more importantly, provide support to or
set performance goals with, tailored performance goals with
those entities? So that is the last piece of what we are
looking at in the very near term.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I am looking
forward to the discussion.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Knake follows:]
Prepared Statement of Robert K. Knake
April 6, 2022
Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, distinguished Members
of the subcommittee, thank you for the privilege to appear before you
today. It's an honor to appear alongside CISA's executive assistant
director for cybersecurity Eric Goldstein. I am eager to share with you
what the Office of the National Cyber Director (ONCD) is doing to
mature the public-private partnership with industry to better secure
critical infrastructure from cyber intrusions, including destructive
cyber attacks. The Biden-Harris administration continues to strengthen
our cybersecurity defenses and prepare our Nation with unprecedented
focus, and the ONCD is proud to work alongside our interagency partners
in these efforts.
The President has taken aggressive action to secure the Nation's
critical infrastructure and is prepared to use every tool to deter,
disrupt, and when appropriate, respond to cyber attacks against our
homeland. In May 2021, the President issued Executive Order 14028,
mandating extensive cybersecurity measures for the Federal Government
to ensure we are leading by example. The ONCD, working with our
partners at the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and the National
Security Council, is conducting implementation oversight of Executive
Order 14028, to ensure continued progress on fulfilling the Order's
requirements.
Since the fall 2021, as Russian President Vladimir Putin escalated
his aggression against Ukraine, the Biden-Harris administration has
worked to provide extensive briefings and advisories to U.S. businesses
and individuals regarding potential threats and the cybersecurity
measures they can put in place to protect themselves. CISA, the FBI,
the National Security Agency's Cybersecurity Directorate--and, in many
cases, our international partners--have issued numerous threat
advisories outlining Russia's malicious intent and activities in cyber
space and outing their tools and infrastructure. The professionals in
our intelligence community have done outstanding work in exposing
Putin's nefarious plots, while our cyber defenders continue to ensure
strategic warnings are paired with actionable steps for companies and
the American public to defend themselves.
Recognizing the unique risks presented in cyber space for the
conflict to spill out of Ukraine and onto our shores, the Federal
Government has also partnered with industry on tabletop exercises,
bringing important critical infrastructure stakeholders--including
CEOs--together to operationalize collaboration and prepare for various
scenarios. Paired with Classified intelligence read-ins and aggressive
declassification efforts, these exercises help enhance resilience and
coherence among our private-sector partners, Federal departments, and
agencies. The administration has also been able to leverage
relationships developed through public-private action plans under the
President's Industrial Control Systems Cybersecurity Initiative to
enhance the cybersecurity posture of the electricity, pipeline, and
water sectors.
On March 21, 2022, the President reiterated his warning about
potential cyber attacks from Russia against critical infrastructure and
urged companies to harden cyber defenses immediately and deploy best
practices. The Government and private sectors must also continue to
work together to build National resilience and productively
collaborative to address and defeat the evolving cyber threats we face.
The administration has prioritized stronger cybersecurity controls for
critical infrastructure sectors where we have authority to do so and is
creating innovative public-private partnerships and initiatives to
enhance cybersecurity across all our critical infrastructure. Congress
has partnered with us on these efforts, and we appreciate the
bipartisan work of this committee to require companies to report cyber
incidents to the U.S. Government. These efforts have become even more
critical as we assess evolving intelligence that Russia may be
exploring options for potential cyber attacks on U.S. critical
infrastructure.
The ONCD is helping to execute the Biden-Harris administration's
cyber agenda by, among other things, working to improve public-private
collaboration in cybersecurity. Through strategic engagements with
stakeholders, the ONCD is establishing and maintaining relationships to
enhance knowledge sharing and strategic coordination and collaboration.
ONCD is working with the NSC, other White House components, and
relevant agencies to harness the once-in-a-generation scope and scale
of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act to build infrastructure
that is future-proofed and resilient to cyber threats, with standards
and policy frameworks necessary for a durable cyber foundation.
As we work with industry to invest in the resiliency of our
infrastructure, we remain committed to rapidly improving our
collaboration with industry to address today's cyber threats.
We work closely with our Federal partners, including CISA, OMB, the
Department of Justice, including the FBI, the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST), and Sector Risk Management Agencies
(SRMAs) to expand engagement and partnership opportunities across
sectoral lines and increase collaboration.
CISA has a central role to play in building our capacity for
collaboration with the private sector. I expect that EAD Goldstein will
highlight CISA's on-going efforts in this area to mature collaboration
and improve cybersecurity, but let me highlight one critical success.
CISA leveraged the authority entrusted to it by Congress to establish
the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative (JCDC), an organization that
brings together representatives from Government and industry
collaborating to identify threats, develop crisis response plans, and
foster the relationships needed to quickly share information and
respond to malicious cyber incidents. The JCDC has already had some
early successes, most notably by bringing Government and the private
sector together to respond to the Log4j vulnerability. Building
resilience to potentially catastrophic cyber incidents will require an
unprecedented level of planning, information sharing, and operational
collaboration. Efforts to connect Government and industry experts, such
as the JCDC, can identify and address threats far more effectively than
can any single organization operating alone.
Equally important, however, is the role of SRMAs, each a vital
component of the Federal Government's capacity to assist private-sector
entities in improving cybersecurity. SRMAs have statutory
responsibilities to work with their sectors on a day-to-day basis and
help surface information relevant to other sectors and are vital for
managing National risk. Agencies like the Department of Energy, the
Department of the Treasury, and others are partnering closely with
industry to share information, drive risk management activities, and
collaborate to reduce risk.
Sector Coordinating Councils and organizations like ISACs and ISAOs
have been proven to be useful mechanisms for information sharing, but
we need to mature the policies and procedures for strengthening
collaboration. NSA's Cybersecurity Collaboration Center, in partnership
with the Defense Industrial Base Sector, is an example of the power of
bringing together cyber threat experts and network defenders to enable
more secure Department of Defense (DoD) and defense industry platforms
and systems.
Resourcing SRMA functions, including those resident at CISA, is key
to achieving the Federal coherence that is central to the strategic
intent of the ONCD. ONCD is beginning an initiative to review the cyber
capabilities and resources of SRMAs and understand the requirements to
operationalize SRMAs so that they can better collaborate in cyber
defense.
As part of this review, ONCD is examining current authorities and a
pilot program that can be used to mature these efforts. We are also
examining how we can improve internal Government capacity to collect
and share threat intelligence with these entities.
We also need to strengthen our efforts to coordinate law
enforcement capabilities with private-sector entities to combat
botnets, ransomware, and other malicious activity. The Department of
Justice, including the FBI, has enjoyed a string of successes in
disrupting ransomware operations. ONCD is reviewing opportunities to
create linkages to further mature the ability to coordinate these
efforts with private-sector entities that may be targeted by threat
actors or have information or capabilities that can support Government
action.
Congress, Presidential policy, the Department of Homeland Security,
and SRMAs have long recognized the need to identify critical
infrastructure that if successfully targeted by adversaries could cause
disproportionate harm to the American people and the U.S. economy.
Section 9 of Executive Order 13636 requires the Secretary of Homeland
Security to identify critical infrastructure where a cybersecurity
incident could reasonably result in catastrophic effects on public
health or safety, economic security, or National security. In March
2020, the Cyberspace Solarium Commission proposed a ``designation of
critical infrastructure entities that manage systems and assets whose
disruption could have cascading, destabilizing effects on U.S. National
security, economic security, and public health and safety.'' These
entities support National Critical Functions and are of heightened
interest to nation-state adversaries. Given the potential consequences
of a cyber incident impacting a Section 9 entity, there is a vested
interest of both the Federal Government and the private sector to
improve the security and resilience of these entities.
The administration supports the general concept of identifying
systemically important entities that own, operate, or otherwise control
critical infrastructure. ONCD is evaluating how to enhance the Federal
Government's capacity to reduce the risk to National Critical Functions
posed by adversaries against the entities that own and operate our most
important systems and assets and to understand and improve their
resiliency to cyber attacks. Specifically, we are examining authority
and capacity to provide prioritized support to, and opportunities to
collaborate with, these entities, as well as the possibility for
tailored obligations required on designated entities. Additionally,
CISA is currently developing a plan and time line for the rulemaking
required under the Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure
Act, or ``CIRA''. We look forward to working with Congress to ensure
that any potential framework for systemically important entities is
complementary to CIRA and other on-going efforts across the
administration.
Finally, one of the most important things that we can do to mature
the public-private partnership to secure U.S. critical infrastructure
is to make sure we are extracting lessons learned from cyber incidents
and implementing those lessons as rapidly as possible. The Biden-Harris
administration created the Cyber Safety Review Board (CSRB) modeled
after the National Transportation Safety Board with the goal of
reviewing significant cyber incidents with this purpose in mind.
Established in accordance with Section 5 of Executive Order 14028, the
Board brings together Government and private-sector leaders to analyze
significant cybersecurity incidents, generate lessons learned, and
produce concrete recommendations to avoid future crises. Director
Inglis proudly serves on the Board, which is currently undertaking a
review of the vulnerabilities in the Log4j library that came to light
last December. I am also actively engaged in the review. Importantly,
following this first review, the CSRB will review its own processes and
develop plans for improving future reviews.
With the continued support of the President and the Congress, the
Office of the National Cyber Director is committed to building robust
relationships with industry and our interagency partners to enhance the
security and resilience of our Nation's cyber ecosystem. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify before you today, and I look forward to your
questions.

Chairwoman Clarke. Thank you for your testimony, Mr. Knake.
I now recognize Dr. Sherman to summarize her statement for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF TINA WON SHERMAN, DIRECTOR, HOMELAND SECURITY AND
JUSTICE, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Ms. Sherman. Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino,
Ranking Member Katko, Members of the subcommittee, I am pleased
to be here today to discuss our Nation's critical
infrastructure alongside witnesses from two key Federal
entities in this space.
As evidenced by yesterday's testimonies on Russian cyber
threats and in the Comptroller General of the United States'
comments in front of the House Appropriations Committee
protecting the assets, systems, and networks that underpin our
daily lives is a pressing and monumental task. We must
safeguard not only our oil and gas pipelines, our water, and
food manufacturing facilities, but also our cell towers and
satellites, our financial and health institutions, and more
from cyber and other attacks that occur almost daily.
The owners and operators of this infrastructure, many of
whom are in the private sector, work closely with the Federal
Government to implement measures that help prevent those
attacks not only from foreign adversaries, but from domestic
actors and insider threats. Regardless of their origins, the
threats are real and require urgent action.
The agency I represent, GAO, has reported on critical
infrastructure protection in response to Congressional interest
for many years. In 1997, GAO first designated information
security as a Government-wide high-risk area and, in 2003,
expanded that area to include critical infrastructure
protection. Since 2021, we have issued reports on several areas
where urgent action is needed. This includes CISA's
transformation initiative following its 2020 reorganization,
its prioritization efforts and role in supporting the 16
critical infrastructure sectors, and Sector Risk Management
Agencies' implementation of NIST's cybersecurity framework, to
name a few.
One of the repeated themes that cuts across this work is
the continued need to improve collaboration between the
Government and the private sector. The diffuse and voluntary
nature of the critical infrastructure landscape continues to
pose a range of challenges to this community, from implementing
security standards and effectively analyzing risks to sharing
threat-related information and providing timely support and
guidance to stakeholders.
The relatively new Federal entities, both CISA and ONCD,
are uniquely positioned to play a significant role in
protecting our Nation's critical infrastructure. Collaboration
is essential and we have recommended to the Department of
Homeland Security that it strengthen efforts between public and
private partners. While the Department has communicated to us
that they are taking steps to implement our recommendations, we
urge them to do so even more expeditiously to protect our
economy, public health and safety, and National security from
any future attacks.
Thank you for holding this hearing and for inviting me to
participate in this conversation this morning.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sherman follows:]
Prepared Statement of Tina Won Sherman
Wednesday, April 6, 2022
gao highlights
Highlights of GAO-22-105973, a testimony before the Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation, Committee on
Homeland Security, House of Representatives
Why GAO Did This Study
The Nation's critical infrastructure consists of physical and cyber
assets and systems that are vital to the United States. Their
incapacity or destruction could have a debilitating impact on security,
National public health and safety, or National economic security.
Critical infrastructure provides the essential functions--such as
supplying water, generating energy, and producing food--that underpin
American society. Protecting this infrastructure is a National security
priority.
GAO first designated information security as a Government-wide
high-risk area in 1997. This was expanded to include protecting: (1)
Cyber critical infrastructure in 2003 and (2) the privacy of personally
identifiable information in 2015.
This statement discusses DHS's efforts to address critical
infrastructure security. For this testimony, GAO relied on selected
products it issued from September 2018 to March 2022, including GAO-21-
236 and GAO-22-104279.
What GAO Recommends
GAO has made various recommendations to strengthen critical
infrastructure security efforts, with which DHS has agreed. DHS has
implemented or described planned actions to address these
recommendations.
critical infrastructure protection.--dhs actions urgently needed to
better protect the nation's critical infrastructure
What GAO Found
To improve critical infrastructure security, key actions Department
of Homeland Security (DHS) needs to take include: (1) Strengthening the
Federal role in protecting the cybersecurity of critical infrastructure
and (2) improving priority-setting efforts.
Strengthen the Federal role in protecting the cybersecurity of
critical infrastructure.--Pursuant to legislation enacted in 2018, the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) within DHS was
charged with responsibility for enhancing the security of the Nation's
critical infrastructure in the face of both physical and cyber threats.
In March 2021, GAO reported that DHS needed to complete key activities
related to the transformation of CISA. This includes finalizing the
agency's mission-essential functions and completing workforce planning
activities. GAO also reported that DHS needed to address challenges
identified by selected critical infrastructure stakeholders, including
having consistent stakeholder involvement in the development of related
guidance. Accordingly, GAO made 11 recommendations to DHS, which the
Department intends to implement by end of 2022.
Improve priority-setting efforts.--Through the National Critical
Infrastructure Prioritization Program, CISA is to identify a list of
systems and assets that, if destroyed or disrupted, would cause
National or regional catastrophic effects. Consistent with the
Implementing Recommendations of the 9/11 Commission Act of 2007, CISA
annually updates and prioritizes the list. The program's list is used
to inform the awarding of preparedness grants to States. However, in
March 2022, GAO reported that 9 of 12 CISA officials and all 10 of the
infrastructure stakeholders GAO interviewed questioned the relevance
and usefulness of the program. For example, stakeholders questioned the
current relevance of the criteria used to add critical infrastructure
to the Prioritization Program list. In 2019, CISA published a set of 55
National critical functions of the Government and private sector
considered vital to the security, economy, and public health and safety
of the Nation (see figure). However, most of the Federal and non-
Federal critical infrastructure stakeholders that GAO interviewed
reported being generally uninvolved with, unaware of, or without an
understanding of the goals of the framework for its critical functions.
GAO made recommendations to DHS in its March 2022 report to address
these concerns, such as ensuring stakeholders are fully engaged in the
framework's implementation, and DHS agreed with the recommendations.

Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and Members of the
subcommittee: Thank you for the opportunity to contribute to today's
discussion on Federal perspectives to secure the Nation's critical
infrastructure.\1\ As you know, the Nation's critical infrastructure
consists of physical and cyber assets and systems that are vital to the
United States. Their incapacity or destruction could have a
debilitating impact on security, National economic security, or
National public health and safety.\2\ Critical infrastructure provides
the essential functions--such as supplying water, generating energy,
and producing food--that underpin American society. Protecting this
infrastructure is a National security priority.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The term ``critical infrastructure,'' as defined in the Uniting
and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to
Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001, refers to systems and
assets, whether physical or virtual, so vital to the United States that
their incapacity or destruction would have a debilitating impact on
security, National economic security, National public health or safety,
or any combination of these. 42 U.S.C.  5195c(e).
\2\ 242 U.S.C.  5195c(e).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We have long stressed the urgent need for effective cybersecurity
to protect critical infrastructure, as underscored by increasingly
sophisticated threats and frequent cyber incidents.\3\ Recent events--
including the ransomware attack that led to a shutdown of a major U.S.
fuel pipeline, cyber threat actors who obtained unauthorized access to
a U.S. water treatment facility in an attempt to increase the amount of
a caustic chemical that is used as part of the water treatment process,
and a cyber attack campaign again U.S. Government agencies and other
entities--have illustrated that the Nation's critical infrastructure
continues to face growing cyber threats.\4\ Because the majority of
critical infrastructure is owned and operated by the private sector, it
is vital that the public and private sectors work together to protect
these assets and systems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See, for example, GAO, Cybersecurity and Information
Technology: Federal Agencies Need to Strengthen Efforts to Address
High-Risk Areas, GAO-21-105325 (Washington, DC: July 28, 2021) and
High-Risk Series: Federal Government Needs to Urgently Pursue Critical
Actions to Address Major Cybersecurity Challenges, GAO-21-288
(Washington, DC: Mar. 24, 2021).
\4\ For more information regarding such recent events, see GAO,
Cybersecurity: Federal Agencies Need to Implement Recommendations to
Manage Supply Chain Risks, GAO-21-594T (Washington, DC: May 25, 2021).
Ransomware is a type of malware used to deny access to IT systems or
data and hold the systems or data hostage until a ransom is paid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
My remarks today will focus on DHS's efforts to strengthen the
Federal role in protecting the cybersecurity of critical infrastructure
and improving its priority-setting efforts. This statement is based on
the results of our prior work, which includes the reports and
testimonies that we cite throughout this statement, issued from
September 2018 to March 2022. Detailed information about the scope and
methodology for our prior work can be found in the products cited
throughout this statement.
We conducted the work on which this statement is based in
accordance with generally accepted Government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
background
Information systems supporting Federal agencies and our Nation's
critical infrastructure--such as transportation systems,
communications, education, energy, and financial services--are
inherently at risk. Compounding the risk, systems and networks used by
Federal agencies and our Nation's critical infrastructure are also
often interconnected with other internal and external systems and
networks, including the internet. Examples of critical infrastructure
are shown in figure 1.
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) coordinates the overall
Federal effort for National critical infrastructure protection.\5\ This
effort spans across the 16 Federally-designated sectors and
prioritizing available resources to the most critical infrastructure
can enhance our Nation's security, increase resiliency, and reduce
risk.\6\ Our prior work has cited DHS actions to identify and assess
risk to critical infrastructure. For example, we reported in March 2022
on DHS's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency's (CISA)
programs to prioritize assets and systems for protection efforts.\7\
Specifically, we evaluated the National Critical Infrastructure
Prioritization Program (NCIPP), which, consistent with the Implementing
Recommendations of the 9/11 Commission Act of 2007, annually
prioritizes critical infrastructure based on the consequences
associated with the disruption or destruction of those assets.\8\ The
program's list is used to inform the awarding of preparedness grants to
States. We also examined CISA's National Critical Functions framework,
which consists of 55 National Critical Functions, which are the
functions of Government and non-Governmental entities so vital to the
United States that their disruption, corruption, or dysfunction would
have a debilitating effect on security, National economic security,
National public health or safety, or any combination thereof. Our prior
findings on both the NCIPP and National Critical Functions framework
are discussed later in this statement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ The Homeland Security Act of 2002 created DHS and gave the
agency responsibilities for coordinating National critical
infrastructure protection efforts. See generally Pub. L. No. 107-296,
tit. II, 115 Stat. 2135, 2145.
\6\ Federal policies identify 16 critical infrastructure sectors:
Chemical; commercial facilities; communications; critical
manufacturing; dams; defense industrial base; emergency services;
energy; financial services; food and agriculture; Government
facilities; health care and public health; information technology;
nuclear reactors, materials, and waste; transportation systems; and
water and wastewater systems.
\7\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: CISA Should Improve
Priority Setting, Stakeholder Involvement, and Threat Information
Sharing, GAO-22-104279 (Washington, DC: Mar. 1, 2022)
\8\ Originally developed in 2006, the NCIPP identifies critical
infrastructure that would result in National-level consequences if
disrupted or destroyed, resulting in Classified lists of specific
assets, clusters, and systems. The NCIPP annually prioritizes critical
infrastructure based on the consequences associated with the disruption
or destruction of those assets. To conduct this work, CISA coordinates
a voluntary effort with States and other partners to identify,
prioritize, and categorize high-priority critical infrastructure.

GAO Has Previously Identified Four Major Cybersecurity Challenges
Facing the Nation
To underscore the importance of this issue, we have designated
information security as a Government-wide high-risk area since 1997.\9\
In 2003, we added the protection of critical infrastructure to the
information security high-risk area, and, in 2015, we further expanded
this area to include protecting the privacy of personally identifiable
information.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ GAO, High-Risk Series: Information Management and Technology,
HR-97-9 (Washington, DC: Feb. 1997). GAO maintains a high-risk program
to focus attention on Government operations that it identifies as high-
risk due to their greater vulnerabilities to fraud, waste, abuse, and
mismanagement or the need for transformation to address economy,
efficiency, or effectiveness challenges.
\10\ GAO, High-Risk Series: An Update, GAO-15-290 (Washington, DC:
Feb. 11, 2015) and High-Risk Series: An Update, GAO-03-119 (Washington,
DC: Jan. 2003).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In our high-risk updates from September 2018 and March 2021, we
emphasized the critical need for the Federal Government to take 10
specific actions to address 4 major cybersecurity challenges that the
Federal Government faces.\11\ These challenges are: (1) Establishing a
comprehensive cybersecurity strategy and performing effective
oversight, (2) securing Federal systems and information, (3) protecting
cyber critical infrastructure, and (4) protecting privacy and sensitive
data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ GAO-21-288 and GAO, High-Risk Series: Urgent Actions Are
Needed to Address Cybersecurity Challenges Facing the Nation, GAO-18-
622 (Washington, DC: Sept. 6, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Federal Law and Policy Establish Requirements for Critical
Infrastructure
Federal law and policy establish roles and responsibilities for the
protection of critical infrastructure, discussed below in chronological
order.

Presidential Policy Directive 21.--In February 2013, the
White House-issued Presidential Policy Directive 21, Critical
Infrastructure Security and Resilience, to specify critical
infrastructure responsibilities.\12\ Among other things, the
order designated 9 Federal sector-specific agencies with lead
roles in protecting critical infrastructure sectors. The lead
agencies coordinate Federally-sponsored activities within their
respective sectors. The policy also directed DHS to coordinate
with lead agencies to develop a description of functional
relationships across the Federal Government related to critical
infrastructure security and resilience. The policy further
provided that DHS, in coordination with lead agencies, to
conduct an analysis and recommend options for improving public-
private partnership effectiveness.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ The White House, Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-21:
Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience, (Washington, DC: Feb.
12, 2013).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Executive Order 13636.--In February 2013, the White House-
issued Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity,
Executive Order 13636, which called for a partnership with the
owners and operators of critical infrastructure to improve
cybersecurity-related information sharing.\13\ To do so, the
order established mechanisms for promoting engagement between
Federal and private organizations. Further, the order directed
DHS, with help from the lead agencies, to identify, annually
review, and update a list of critical infrastructure sectors
for which a cybersecurity incident could reasonably result in
catastrophic effects on public health or safety, economic
security, or National security.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Exec. Order No. 13,636, 78 Fed. Reg. 11,737 (Feb. 19, 2013).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
Cybersecurity Framework.--Executive Order 13636 directed NIST
to lead the development of a flexible performance-based
cybersecurity framework that was to include a set of standards,
procedures, and processes.\14\ Further, the order directed the
lead agencies, in consultation with DHS and other interested
agencies, to coordinate with critical infrastructure partners
to review the cybersecurity framework. The agencies, if
necessary, should develop implementation guidance or
supplemental materials to address sector-specific risks and
operating environments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ The Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2014 authorized NIST to
facilitate and support the development of a voluntary set of standards
to reduce cyber risks to critical infrastructure. 15 U.S.C. 
272(c)(15). The Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure
Cybersecurity represents that voluntary set of standards.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In response to the order, in February 2014, NIST first published
its framework--a voluntary, flexible, performance-based
framework of cybersecurity standards and procedures. The
framework, which was updated in April 2018, outlines a risk-
based approach to managing cybersecurity that is composed of
three major parts: A framework core, profiles, and
implementation tiers.\15\ The framework core provides a set of
activities to achieve specific cybersecurity outcomes and
references examples of guidance to achieve those outcomes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ National Institute of Standards and Technology, Framework for
Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, Version 1.1
(Washington, DC: April 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency Act of
2018.--The November 2018 act established CISA,\16\ within DHS,
and gave it responsibility to coordinate a National effort to
secure and protect against critical infrastructure risks. To
implement this legislation, CISA undertook a three-phase
organizational transformation initiative aimed at unifying the
agency, improving mission effectiveness, and enhancing the
workplace experience for CISA employees.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency Act of 2018,
Pub. L. No. 115-278, 132 Stat. 4168, 4169, (Nov. 16, 2018) (codified at
6 U.S.C.  652). The act renamed the DHS National Protection and
Programs Directorate as CISA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization
Act for Fiscal Year 2021.--The act established roles and
responsibilities for lead agencies, known as sector risk
management agencies, in protecting the 16 critical
infrastructure agencies.\17\ According to the act, among other
things, the lead agencies are required to: (1) Coordinate with
DHS and collaborate with critical infrastructure owners and
operators, regulatory agencies, and others; (2) support sector
risk management, in coordination with CISA; (3) assess sector
risk, in coordination with CISA; (4) coordinate the sector,
including by serving as a day-to-day Federal interface for the
prioritization and coordination of sector-specific activities;
and (5) support incident management, including supporting CISA,
upon request, in asset response activities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ The William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization
Act for Fiscal Year 2021 states that the term ``sector risk management
agency'' replaces the term ``sector-specific agency'' in the Homeland
Security Act of 2002. The act amends the Homeland Security Act of 2002
and sets out sector risk management agency responsibilities within this
critical infrastructure framework. Pub. L. No. 116-283,  9002, 134
Stat. 3388, 4768.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The act also established the Office of the National Cyber Director
within the Executive Office of the President.\18\ Among other
responsibilities, the Director is to serve as the principal
advisor to the White House on cybersecurity policy and
strategy, including coordination of implementation of National
cyber policy and strategy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Pub. L. No. 116-283,  1752, 134 Stat. at 4144 (codified at 6
U.S.C.  1500).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In June 2021, the Senate confirmed a director to lead this new
office. In October 2021, the National Cyber Director issued a
strategic intent statement, outlining a vision for the
Director's office and the high-level lines of efforts it
intends to focus on, including National and Federal
cybersecurity; budget review and assessment; and planning and
incident response, among others.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ The White House, A Strategic Intent Statement for the Office
of the National Cyber Director (Washington, DC: Oct. 28, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Executive Order 14028.--In May 2021, the President issued,
Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity, Executive Order 14028,
that was prompted, in part, by malicious cyber campaigns that
threaten the public and private sectors.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Exec. Order No. 14,028, 86 Fed. Reg. 26,633 (May 17, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
dhs actions urgently needed to protect critical infrastructure
Over the last several decades, we have emphasized the urgent need
for the Federal Government to improve its ability to protect against
cyber and other threats to our Nation's critical infrastructure. In our
recent work, we emphasized the need for the Federal Government to
address major cybersecurity challenges through critical actions. These
actions include the need for DHS to strengthen its role in protecting
the cybersecurity of critical infrastructure. In addition, as we
reported in March 2022, DHS's CISA should take actions to improve its
priority-setting efforts for the protection of critical
infrastructure.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ GAO-22-104279.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
DHS Needs to Strengthen Its Role in Protecting the Cybersecurity of
Critical Infrastructure
The Federal Government has been challenged in working with the
private sector to protect critical infrastructure. We have made
recommendations aimed at strengthening DHS's role in critical
infrastructure cybersecurity, including by: (1) Enhancing the
capabilities and services of CISA and (2) ensuring that Federal
agencies with sector-specific responsibilities are providing their
sector partners with effective guidance and support.
DHS Needs to Complete CISA Transformation Activities
The importance of clear cybersecurity leadership extends beyond the
White House to other key Executive branch agencies, including DHS.
Federal legislation enacted in November 2018 established CISA within
the Department to advance the mission of protecting Federal civilian
agencies' networks from cyber threats and to enhance the security of
the Nation's critical infrastructure in the face of both physical and
cyber threats. The act elevated CISA to agency status; prescribed
changes to its structure, including mandating that it have separate
divisions on cybersecurity, infrastructure security, and emergency
communications; and assigned specific responsibilities to the
agency.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency Act of 2018,
Pub. L. No. 115-278,  2,132 Stat. 4168, 4169, (codified at 6 U.S.C. 
652). The act renamed the DHS National Protection and Programs
Directorate as CISA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To implement the statutory requirements, CISA leadership launched
an organizational transformation initiative. In March 2021, we reported
that CISA had completed the first two of the three phases of its
organizational transformation initiative.\23\ Specifically, we noted
DHS had not fully implemented its phase three transformation, which
included finalizing the agency's mission-essential functions and
completing workforce-planning activities by December 2020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ GAO, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency: Actions
Needed to Ensure Organizational Changes Result in More Effective
Cybersecurity for Our Nation, GAO-21-236 (Washington, DC: Mar. 10,
2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We also found that of 10 selected key practices for effective
agency reforms we previously identified, CISA's organizational
transformation generally addressed 4, partially addressed 5, and did
not address 1. Further, we reported on a number of challenges that
selected Government and private-sector stakeholders had noted when
coordinating with CISA, including a lack of clarity surrounding its
organizational changes and the lack of stakeholder involvement in
developing guidance. Although CISA had activities under way to mitigate
some of these challenges, it had not developed strategies to, among
other things, clarify changes to its organizational structure. Figure 2
below describes the coordination challenges identified by private-
sector stakeholders.

To address these weaknesses, we made 11 recommendations to DHS. The
Department concurred with our recommendations and, as of September
2021, reported that it intends to fully implement them by the end of
calendar year 2022. Implementing these recommendations will better
position CISA to ensure the success of its reorganization efforts and
carry out its mission to lead National efforts to identify and respond
to cyber and other risks to our Nation's infrastructure.
Sector Risk Management Agencies Need to Ensure Effective
Guidance and Support
Since 2010, we have made about 80 recommendations for various
Federal agencies to enhance infrastructure cybersecurity. For example,
in February 2020, we recommended that agencies better measure the
adoption of the NIST framework of voluntary cyber standards and correct
sector-specific weaknesses. Specifically, we found that most sector
risk management agencies were not collecting and reporting on
improvements in the protection of critical infrastructure as a result
of using the framework across the sectors.\24\ We concluded that
collecting and reporting on these improvements would help the sectors
understand the extent to which sectors are better protecting their
critical infrastructure from cyber threats.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: Additional Actions
Needed to Identify Framework Adoption and Resulting Improvements, GAO-
20-299 (Washington, DC: Apr. 9, 2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To address these issues, we made 10 recommendations--one to NIST on
establishing time frames for completing selected programs--and 9 to the
lead agencies, to collect and report on improvements gained from using
the framework. Eight agencies agreed with the recommendations, while
one neither agreed nor disagreed and one partially agreed. However, as
of November 2021, none of the recommendations had been implemented.
Until the lead agencies collect and report on improvements gained from
adopting the framework, the extent to which the 16 critical
infrastructure sectors are better protecting their critical
infrastructure from threats will be largely unknown. We reiterated
these recommendations in a February 2022 report.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: Agencies Need to
Assess Adoption of Cybersecurity Guidance, GAO-22-105103 (Washington,
DC: Feb. 9, 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We have also frequently reported on the need for lead agencies to
enhance the cybersecurity of their related critical infrastructure
sectors and subsectors--such as transportation systems, communications,
energy, education, and financial services.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ GAO-21-288. See also GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection:
TSA Is Taking Steps to Address Some Pipeline Security Program
Weaknesses, GAO-21-105263 (Washington, DC: July 27, 2021); GAO,
Passenger Rail Security: TSA Engages with Stakeholders but Could Better
Identify and Share Standards and Key Practices, GAO-20-404 (Washington,
DC: Apr. 3, 2020); GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: CISA Should
Assess the Effectiveness of its Actions to Support the Communications
Sector, GAO-20-104462 (Washington, DC: Nov. 23, 2021); GAO, Critical
Infrastructure Protection: Actions Needed to Address Significant
Cybersecurity Risks Facing the Electric Grid, GAO-19-332 (Washington,
DC: Aug. 26, 2019); GAO, Electric Grid Cybersecurity: DOE Needs to
Ensure Its Plans Fully Address Risks to Distribution Systems, GAO-21-81
(Washington, DC: Mar. 18, 2021); GAO, Critical Infrastructure
Protection: Education Should Take Additional Steps to Help Protect K-12
Schools from Cyber Threats, GAO-22-105024 (Washington, DC: Oct. 13,
2021); and GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: Treasury Needs to
Improve Tracking of Financial Sector Cybersecurity Risk Mitigation
Efforts, GAO-20-631 (Washington, DC: Sept. 17, 2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CISA Should Improve its Priority-Setting Efforts
CISA and Critical Infrastructure Stakeholders Do Not Find
the NCIPP Useful
In our March 2022 report, CISA and other critical infrastructure
stakeholders we spoke with told us that the NCIPP's results were of
little use. In addition, the stakeholders raised concerns with the
program, which included the relevance of the program's criteria given
the current threat environment, limited State participation, and lack
of use among critical infrastructure stakeholders.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ GAO-22-104279.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Relevance of NCIPP criteria, given current threat environment.--We
reported in March 2022 that CISA and other stakeholders questioned the
present-day relevance of the criteria for adding critical
infrastructure to the NCIPP list. To be included on the NCIPP's Level 1
list (its highest consequence list), an asset's destruction or
disruption must meet minimum specified consequence thresholds for at
least two of the following four categories: Economic loss, fatalities,
mass evacuation length, and degradation of National security.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ CISA coordinates a voluntary effort with States and other
partners to identify, prioritize, and categorize high-priority critical
infrastructure as either Level 1 or Level 2 based on the possible
consequences to the Nation in terms of our factors--fatalities,
economic loss, mass evacuation length, and degradation of National
security. According to DHS, the overwhelming majority of the assets and
systems identified through the NCIPP are categorized as Level 2. Only a
small subset of assets meet the Level 1 consequence threshold--those
whose loss or damage could result in major National or regional impacts
similar to the impacts of Hurricane Katrina or the September 11, 2001,
attacks. The precise consequence thresholds for inclusion on the NCIPP
list are information that DHS has designated as ``for official use
only.'' We did not include the specific thresholds in this report so
that we could publically present the results of our work.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Senior officials with CISA, as well as other Federal, State, and
private-sector officials we spoke with said that the consequence
thresholds for these criteria did not reflect the current threat
environment, which focuses more on cyber attacks and extreme weather
events. The threat environment also focuses on vulnerabilities or
attacks that can affect multiple entities within a short period. In
this scenario, the consequences related to a single asset, entity,
system, or cluster may not reach NCIPP thresholds, but the aggregate
impacts may be Nationally significant, according to CISA officials.
Limited State participation.--As part of the NCIPP process, we
found in our March 2022 report that State homeland security agencies
identify relevant critical infrastructure--both public and private--and
nominate those assets for inclusion on the NCIPP list.\29\ However,
CISA data showed that since fiscal year 2017, no more than 14 States
(of 56 States and territories) provided new nominations or updates to
the program in any given fiscal year.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ GAO-22-104279.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lack of use among critical infrastructure stakeholders.--Critical
infrastructure stakeholders, including Protective Security Advisors
(PSAs) and Cybersecurity Advisor (CSAs),\30\ we interviewed for our
March 2022 report also questioned the NCIPP's usefulness.\31\ These
stakeholders noted that the data were not accurate, relevant,
consistent, or reflective of infrastructure risk. For example:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ CISA offers government (Federal, State, local, Tribal, and
territorial), private sector, and other critical infrastructure
stakeholders a suite of programs and services to identify and mitigate
risks to infrastructure security. These include infrastructure and
cybersecurity services, some of which are carried out by CISA's PSAs
and CSAs. PSAs are operators with expertise in physical security
protection, and CSAs are cybersecurity specialists responsible for
helping to bolster owners' and operators' cybersecurity capabilities.
Both types of advisors use their respective assessment tools to work
with critical infrastructure stakeholders to help make critical
infrastructure more resilient. CSAs and PSAs operate across CISA's 10
regions. CSAs and PSAs we interviewed were from Regions 2, 3, 4, 5, 7,
and 8. We also interviewed the CISA Regional Coordinator from Region 10
for contextual information on the regional coordinator role; however,
this interview is not included in our overall total number of regional
stakeholder interviews, which include only the PSAs and CSAs.
\31\ GAO-22-104279.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

PSAs and CSAs.--Three of the 12 PSAs and CSAs we spoke with
reported using the NCIPP list to a limited degree when planning
annual outreach to some facilities. However, these same
officials (as well as the other 9 we spoke with) all questioned
the list's accuracy and relevance. For example, one CSA said
that the current NCIPP list was missing key assets that needed
protection because the current criteria to be included on the
list were outdated.

Sector Risk Management Agencies.--None of the 4 Sector Risk
Management Agency officials we contacted reported regularly
using the NCIPP list.\32\ Sector Risk Management Agency
officials raised a number of issues with the results, leading
them to not rely on the list for risk management purposes. For
example, officials from one Sector Risk Management Agency said
their department had a copy of the list, but it was generally
not something they referred to regularly or used in their
efforts. Officials felt that the types of infrastructure on the
list were not consistent across regions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ Sector Risk Management Agencies we interviewed were the
Department of Energy (energy sector), Environmental Protection Agency
(water sector), and CISA (both the critical manufacturing and IT
sectors).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

State homeland security agencies.--Only 1 of the 6 State
homeland security agencies we contacted reported regularly
using the NCIPP list.\33\ State homeland security agency
officials questioned the list's accuracy, and most said that
they did not use the list to inform risk communication or
influence decisions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ One State homeland security official said that while data on
the NCIPP was problematic, his State did refer to the NCIPP each year
to inform the State's grant allocation methodology.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given the evolving risk landscape and CISA and the critical
infrastructure community's recognition of the NCIPP's limitations, we
made two recommendations to CISA regarding NCIPP: (1) That the agency
improve its NCIPP process to better reflect current threats and (2) the
agency should seek input from States that have not provided recent
updates on identifying critical infrastructure. DHS concurred with the
recommendations and described initial actions under way or planned in
response to our report, with completion expected by September 2023.
Limited Understanding of National Critical Functions
Framework May Pose Challenges
We reported in March 2022 that CISA's National Risk Management
Center published a set of 55 critical functions in spring 2019 as part
of its new National Critical Functions framework.\34\ According to CISA
officials, since 9/11, the complexity and interdependency of critical
infrastructure has expanded significantly. While the NCIPP has
historically focused on protecting physical assets within the context
of the 16 critical infrastructure sectors, primarily from acts of
terrorism, the framework reflects a shift in risk management. The shift
emphasizes resilience--maintaining and restoring the Nation's essential
services and customary conveniences--along with hazards and threats
that are increasingly cross-cutting in nature, particularly around
cybersecurity and natural disasters. The complete list of functions is
shown in figure 3.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ GAO-22-104279.

Seven of 25 critical infrastructure stakeholders we met with were
aware of and supportive of CISA's new direction and had positive
feedback on the National Critical Functions; however, most of the
Federal and non-Federal critical infrastructure stakeholders we
interviewed reported being generally uninvolved with, unaware of, or
not understanding the goals of the framework. Specifically,
stakeholders did not understand how the framework related to
prioritizing infrastructure, how it affected planning and operations,
or where their particular organizations fell within the framework.
For example, 8 of the 25 officials we interviewed said that
communication from CISA headquarters regarding the National Critical
Functions framework needed improvement. Industry officials from 1 of
the 4 sectors we met with said that their sector's members were trying
to cooperate with CISA and provide data when CISA requested it but said
that the requests were often broad or their goals unclear. Officials
from one State homeland security agency said that CISA often shares
complex and academic presentations about sophisticated risk modeling
and visualizations; however, officials said they felt those
presentations were too complicated and, therefore, they did not know
how they were supposed to use the information.
Five of 6 CISA regional CSAs--who are responsible for reducing
cybersecurity risks to the Nation's critical infrastructure--were also
not using or did not understand how the National Critical Functions
would affect their stakeholders, despite some of the functions having a
cyber and IT focus. For example, one advisor said that they and their
stakeholders--organizations for which he provides cybersecurity
assessments--are bombarded with information. The advisor stated that
they have not had time to understand the National Critical Functions
framework, which they believed was more focused on physical security,
rather than cybersecurity. The PSA and CSA in one region said that
there was no prioritization within the 55 critical functions, making
everything equally critical. Accordingly, the officials said they did
not have a clear sense of what they--or DHS broadly--should prioritize.
In response, CISA officials stated that stakeholders with local
operational responsibilities were the least likely to be familiar with
the National Critical Functions. These functions were conceived to
improve the analysis and management of cross-sector and National risks.
Still, CISA officials acknowledged the need to improve connection
between the National Critical Functions framework and local and
operational risk management activities and communications.
As we stated in our March 2022 report, helping to ensure that
stakeholders understand the goals of the framework and are involved in
its implementation could aid CISA in its future infrastructure
protection efforts.\35\ We therefore recommended that CISA ensure that
stakeholders are fully engaged in the implementation of the National
Critical Functions framework. DHS concurred with the recommendation and
described initial actions under way or planned in response to our
report, with estimated completion by October 2022.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ GAO-22-104279.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In summary, cyber attacks, physical attacks, and other threats
facing the Nation's critical infrastructure require an effective and
coordinated public-private response. CISA has undertaken a wide range
of efforts to identify and prioritize nationally significant critical
infrastructure. However, as our previously-reported findings and
recommendations indicate, urgent action is needed and CISA should take
steps to improve and further these efforts. By taking steps to ensure
that is process for identifying and prioritizing critical
infrastructure accounts for current threats and meets the needs of all
States, CISA and its partners could have a more relevant and useful
understanding of critical infrastructure risk.
Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and Members of the
subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement. I would be pleased
to respond to any questions that you may have.

Chairwoman Clarke. Thank you, Dr. Sherman, for your
testimony this morning. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking
Member of the full committee, the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Katko, for an opening statement.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Madam Chair, for giving me the time
to speak today, and thank you all for being here. It is a most
important topic. I thank you, Mr. Garbarino, for holding this
important hearing, as well.
The public-private partnership that CISA maintains are
integral to its ability to protect the Nation from
cybersecurity threats. Yesterday's full committee hearing which
we had in this room showed us that CISA's work in this space is
excelling, but there is always room for improvement. We must
work to ensure that CISA maintains the tools, resources, and
relationships that it needs to protect our Nation's critical
infrastructure.
I have worked diligently, as well as my colleagues have, to
ensure that CISA's adequately resourced in terms of funding,
authorities, and work force, but we can't overlook the
importance of the close and trusted relationships that CISA has
developed with the private sector. It is just outstanding what
you have done and we have got to keep that going. Those
relationships is what allows the agency to collect and
disseminate timely and valuable threat information in a trusted
manner.
Despite the passage of the cyber incident reporting
legislation this year, which I think is a critical piece of
legislation, which Madam Chair was a lead on, we can't lose
sight of the value of those voluntary relationships. For
example, last year, CISA took an important step forward by
leveraging the authorities provided in the fiscal year 2021
NDAA to establish the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative, or
JCDC. As the committee discussed yesterday, the JCDC has served
as a force multiplier for our Nation's cybersecurity and it is
wholly dependent on the voluntary relationship framework.
Last year, I introduced the Securing Systemically Important
Critical Infrastructure Act to allow CISA to efficiently
allocate its resources by establishing a thoughtful,
transparent, stakeholder-engaged process to identify what truly
constitutes critical infrastructure. This methodical
identification process would be accompanied by a prioritization
of benefits for those entities deemed SICI. For the first time
this effort would move CISA away from the current first-come
first-served approach model by establishing a true risk-based
approach to Federal cyber assistance.
While there are conflicting opinions between my colleagues
and myself on the right direction for SICI, I think we can all
agree that allowing CISA to maintain its close partnerships
with the private sector is the keystone to its long-term
success and the cybersecurity of our Nation.
I look forward to exploring these issues further with our
witnesses today and I thank you again for being here. I thank,
again, Chairwoman Clarke and Ranking Member Garbarino for your
work on these issues. With that, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Katko follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member John Katko
Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke and Ranking Member Garbarino for
holding this important hearing today.
The public-private partnerships that CISA maintains are integral to
its ability to protect the Nation from cybersecurity threats.
Yesterday's full committee hearing showed us that CISA's work in
this space is excelling, but there is always room for improvement.
We must work to ensure that CISA maintains the tools, resources,
and relationships it needs to protect our Nation's critical
infrastructure.
I've worked diligently to ensure that CISA is adequately resourced
in terms of funding, authorities, and workforce, but we can't overlook
the importance of the close and trusted relationships that CISA
maintains.
Those relationships are what allows the agency to collect and
disseminate timely and valuable threat information.
Despite the passage of Cyber Incident Reporting legislation this
year, we can't lose sight of the value of those voluntary
relationships.
For example, last year, CISA took an important step forward by
leveraging the authorities provided in the fiscal year 2021 NDAA to
establish the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative, or ``JCDC.''
As the committee discussed yesterday, the JCDC has served as a
force multiplier for our Nation's cybersecurity, and it is wholly
dependent on the voluntary relationship framework.
Last year, I introduced the Securing Systemically Important
Critical Infrastructure Act to allow CISA to more efficiently allocate
its resources by establishing a thoughtful, transparent, stakeholder-
engaged process to identify what truly constitutes critical
infrastructure.
This methodical identification process would be accompanied by
prioritization of benefits for those entities deemed SICI. For the
first time, this effort would move CISA away from the current first-
come, first-served model by establishing a true risk-based approach to
Federal cyber assistance.
While there are conflicting opinions on the right direction for
SICI, I think we can all agree that allowing CISA to maintain its close
partnerships with the private sector is the keystone to its long-term
success, and the cybersecurity of our Nation.
I look forward to exploring these issues further with our
witnesses. Thank you again for being here, and thank you, Chairwoman
Clarke and Ranking Member Garbarino, for your work on these issues.

Chairwoman Clarke. I thank our Ranking Member, Mr. Katko,
for his opening statement. I want to thank our witnesses for
their testimony.
I will remind the subcommittee that we will each have 5
minutes to question the panel. I now recognize myself for
questions.
As I mentioned in my opening, with cyber incident reporting
legislation behind us, I want to use this hearing to talk about
what is next. The Solarium Commission recommended a new
designation for entities that are the most critical of the
critical or systemically important to our National security,
which would come with benefits, such as threat intelligence,
and burdens, like security requirements.
Mr. Goldstein, broadly speaking, does CISA support the
concept of codifying this designation as the Solarium
Commission described it with benefits and burdens for designees
or is CISA envisioning a different approach?
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, ma'am. Prioritization is
foundational to our ability to protect the country against both
cyber and physical threats. Within CISA today we are focused on
developing a list of what we call systemically important
entities that are critical to National critical function, these
sorts of services upon which Americans depend every day to go
about their daily lives. Based upon this prioritization effort,
we will be more effectively able to drive operational
collaboration with those organizations that have the ability,
the scale, the visibility to drive down risk for the Nation and
prioritize our provision of services and develop new services
that are most effectively tailored to support those entities
that are most critical to our country.
Our work in developing this systemically important entity
list aligns closely to the definition and the approach proposed
by the Solarium Commission. Our focus importantly here is on
entities, who are the organizations with whom we need to
partner. But the underlying philosophy of prioritization as an
enabler of collaboration and an enabler of risk reduction is
one in which we are wholeheartedly focused.
Our priority today is ensuring that we understand these
prioritized entities and we can work within our current
voluntary model to ensure that we are driving operational
collaboration and provision of services to drive down risk to
these entities and the National critical functions that they
support. We very much look forward to updating the subcommittee
and your staff on our progress in developing this list and
working with you going forward to ensure we have the
authorities and resources to make the best use of this
prioritization.
Chairwoman Clarke. Mr. Knake, as Congress considers this
new designation, what are some of the competing priorities and
tradeoffs? For instance, is the goal to cement long-term
operational partnerships with key partners or is it more about
developing a dynamic methodology that can be used as threats
evolve, whether that is a pandemic, a hurricane, or a war in
Eastern Europe?
Mr. Knake. Thank you for the question. I think we want to
look at, and I think this aligns very well with where CISA is
and the National Risk Management Center is, on the ability to
both have a dynamic list based on current threats as well as an
understanding of what are the entities that are on a
consequence base the most essential and the most important? So,
what we have seen as we work through the pandemic, what we have
seen as we work through the threat from Russia, is CISA and the
NRMC have been able to move quite rapidly to say here are the
organizations that are most affected by this emerging threat,
who are most at risk.
At the same time, a much smaller list is needed and exists
of those systemically important entities that are really just
consequence-driven, that no matter what the vulnerabilities are
or the threats are, we need to make sure that they have got the
protections in place so the American people can be assured that
the services and the functions they provide will continue. So,
I don't think it is necessarily an either/or.
Chairwoman Clarke. Dr. Sherman, this is not the first time
we have tried to identify our most significant infrastructure.
Can you talk about some of the challenges GAO has uncovered
with respect to maintaining these lists and making sure they
are relevant and useful? How important is it that we go into
this with a clear sense of the goals and security outcomes we
are trying to achieve?
Ms. Sherman. Ensuring that the list is valued or perceived
as valued, relevant, and useful by stakeholders, both within
Government and the private sector, is critical. Yes, goals and
strategies are also key.
Based on our work, actually both in 2013 and the work that
we recently carried out in 2022, there were similar themes that
we identified with respect to the list that emerges from the
National Asset Database. The first one is concerns not only
from external private-sector stakeholders, but within the
Federal Government, as well, that the assets on the list are
not reflective of current threats, most importantly cyber
attacks. Therefore, again, to be able to demonstrate the value
of that list, it is important to make sure that it is current,
relevant, and useful.
Then finally, with respect to goals and strategies, it is
absolutely important to make sure that it is transparent and
clear in terms of what the endpoint is for having a list. Let
us prioritize how it will be used and working backward to make
sure those goals and strategies are met.
Chairwoman Clarke. Thank you. Before I yield back I want to
know how critical it is that as you begin rolling up your
sleeves on cyber incident reporting, we do everything you can
to expedite this rulemaking, recognizing, of course, that we
also need to allow for ample stakeholder consultation and
regulatory harmonization.
With that, I now recognize the Ranking Member of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from New York, Mr. Garbarino, for
his questions.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Chairwoman. Mr. Goldstein, you
were just talking about the voluntary relationship model and
JCDC, I think, is a great example of what has been going on.
Have you run into any hurdles in building this out? If so, how
can we help?
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, sir. The collaboration that we
have seen through the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative has
been nothing short of remarkable. In the course of our Nation's
response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, we have
operational collaboration virtual environment through the JCDC
with our Nation's largest and most important technology
companies, energy firms, financial entities, and those
organizations were identified based upon their criticality,
really a leading example of the sort of operational
collaboration that we can drive through efforts like the
identification of systemically important entities.
What we have seen, and this was reflected in yesterday's
hearing in the full committee, is the best way of incentivizing
voluntary collaboration is for the Government to show value,
the Government to be at the table cohesively as a co-equal
partner across all of the different agencies that have
different equities in this space, with CISA serving as the
convening platform, as the lead for domestic cyber defense.
Then providing our partners in the private sector with both the
platform and the opportunity to exchange information and get
real value in return.
We have seen remarkable improvements even in the last 6
months in this kind of effort and we are excited for the
maturation to come.
Mr. Garbarino. That is great to hear. Do you think that
these partnerships with the companies, the private sector being
so willing to work with us and have this partnership, should we
be concerned that these relationships might change if CISA
takes more of a regulator role, if we turn it into a regulator?
Is that a concern that you have heard from the private sector?
Mr. Goldstein. Certainly CISA's role in the current space
as a trusted partner in cybersecurity, where our goal is solely
to catalyze and improve cybersecurity as a voluntary partner,
is one that is invaluable. That is a relationship that we work
very hard to preserve and advance with partners across sectors.
Mr. Garbarino. The Chairwoman mentioned it. The Chairwoman
mentioned when she talked about the importance for rulemaking,
especially with the new cyber incident reporting bill, but
systemically critical infrastructures, you know, making sure
that list up to date, as Dr. Sherman said, do you have the
resources to be able to do both right now? Do you need more?
Can you tell us what CISA needs?
Mr. Goldstein. So, we are deeply grateful for the work of
Congress and this committee for providing CISA with additional
resources in the recently-passed omnibus and working with us to
ensure that we have a growth trajectory that aligns with the
breadth of our National mission. Certainly we know that the
cyber and physical security risks facing our country continue
to get more grave and we look forward to working with the
committee to ensure that in future years our growth continues
on the appropriate pace so that we can effectively address the
threats we are facing.
Mr. Garbarino. But you feel like you will be able to get
both done?
Mr. Goldstein. Today we are able to execute the mission
ahead of us in the immediate future, but certainly we will want
to continue to work together to ensure that we continue to meet
the risk.
Mr. Garbarino. Great. Dr. Sherman, you mentioned in your
opening statement that you have a list of items that you want
the agency and DHS to take up and you are hoping to implement
them quickly. What is on the list? What recommendations do you
have?
Ms. Sherman. Sure. So, based on the recent report and the
comments I made in response to Chairwoman Clarke, it is
important to ensure that the list that is prioritized as a
function of the National Asset Database reflects current
threats. We also believe that stakeholder input is increased.
We feel like it is important to make sure that State and local
governments, as well as the private sector, are able to more
proactively share their perspective in terms of nominations and
removals as part of the list, the prioritization list.
One of the things that we had found actually over the past
5 fiscal years is that in any given fiscal year there were no
more than 14 States that provided input to CISA related to the
prioritized list. We think that is for several reasons, one of
which is that they don't find value in the list because it is
not reflective of what they think is truly important. They
don't believe that the different types of infrastructure that
are included on the list are consistent across States. They
have raised concerns that--with respect to how the list is
actually used and how meaningful it really is for them.
So, we definitely believe that increased stakeholder is
important, as well.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that and I am out of time, so I
yield back. Thank you, Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Clarke. I now recognize the Ranking Member of
the full committee, the other gentleman from New York, Mr.
Katko, for his questions at this time.
Mr. Katko. The other gentleman. Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you all for your testimony.
I must say at the outset, Mr. Knake, I was thinking when
you were talking about how good it is to have a National cyber
director finally in place again and someone that can be the
coach of the whole field here. I am very pleased with what is
going on there and the relationship Inglis has with the various
subsets, one of which is CISA.
Mr. Goldstein, I can't say enough how encouraging it is to
see that CISA is developing those really trusted and treasured
partnerships with the private sector. It is so critical to
their mission. The more we can develop that trust and the
trusted exchange of information, by far we are going to make
this whole cyber landscape safer. So, it is in that vein that I
have a couple of questions for you.
Obviously, we are all concerned about infrastructure in
general and systemically important critical infrastructure in
particular given the threat that Russia now poses, an increased
threat. So, I wonder if you can give us an update on the
current State of the effort to define SICI, as you will, which
is not the best acronym, by the way. I know that is why CISA
came up with the PISCES acronym and I want to figure out what
the two are. So, why don't you explain to us what the two are
and how they work together? Maybe give us, after that, give us
a little bit of the private-sector input, if you would.
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, sir. Of course. At CISA, through
our National Risk Management Center, we are currently focused
on developing our list of systemically-important entities, and
these are organizations that own, operate, or otherwise control
critical infrastructure that, if degraded, would have
debilitating systemic or cascading impact on our National
security or----
Mr. Katko. So, just to interrupt you just for a second, I
think that is so important because if all critical
infrastructure is systemically important than nothing is,
right? So, we have to take the most critical of the critical.
Is that basically the effort we are trying to do here?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir.
Mr. Katko. OK. Well, go ahead.
Mr. Goldstein. Importantly, sir, there are a few important
nuances with the definition that we are utilizing at CISA. The
first, as I mentioned at the outset, is our focus on entities
because we need to figure out the organizations with whom we
are partnering. So focusing on entities allows us to use this
prioritization to actually drive collaboration and drive
provision of services to those organizations we need to help.
The second important aspect is this idea of cascading
effects or systemic impact, which means that we can look at
some of these smaller organizations, organizations in the
supply chain that are deeply critical, but actually might not
be--might not have as much revenue or market share as others in
a given sector.
The third piece, which really is critical, is the tie to
National critical functions, the services upon which the
American people and businesses rely every day to go about our
daily lives. By tying the entity list to National critical
functions, that then lets us do the rigorous analysis to figure
out how do we keep these functions at the end of the day
available and resilient? Which really is why we are all here.
Today, our National Risk Management Center has developed a
rigorous methodology to decompose our National critical
functions into a list of systemically important entities. That
work is on-going and our goal here is for this to be both a
rigorous and strongly methodological approach, but also one
that is transparent and gets input from our partners in
Government and the private sector to ensure, to Ms. Sherman's
very well-taken point, that we have--that the list is
understood and credible by those organizations who are so
designated on the list.
Mr. Katko. Yes, so if you could just drill down a little
bit more on the private sector input. What is the nature and
quality of the input you are getting from them right now or
asking for?
Mr. Goldstein. So, thus far, we are still at the fairly
early stages of that process. We are beginning to reach out
through our sector fora to get input on the methodology and the
process. As this work evolves and we generate the underlying
lists for National critical functions, we do intend to do
robust engagement with our sector partners with whom we work so
closely to ensure that both the methodology is understood and
the outputs therefrom.
Mr. Katko. OK, great. Thank you very much and I appreciate
that. I really strongly encourage you to continue your
collaborative effort with the private sector.
Mr. Knake, is there anything you want to add to that? Your
microphone, please.
Mr. Knake. I am sorry, sir. Just that we are working very
closely with CISA as we try and understand what additional
authorities they may need in order to further this work. I
think we have a good sense of where they are today and what
they have been able to do under current authority. We need to
work with them to identify are there additional authorities
that would help them do that kind-of deeper level
identification you are discussing?
Mr. Katko. Thank you very much. I know I am out of time,
but I just want to say, Ms. Sherman, the work that your office
does. Please keep it up because your input is very valued and I
wanted to let you know that even though I didn't have time to
ask you a question.
I yield back. Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Clarke. The Chair will now recognize other
Members for questions they may wish to ask the witnesses. In
accordance with the guidelines laid out by the Chairman and
Ranking Member in their February 3 colloquy, I will recognize
Members in order of seniority, alternating between the Majority
and the Minority. Members are also reminded to unmute
themselves when recognized for questioning.
The Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes the gentlewoman from
Texas, Ms. Sheila Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me thank the Chair very much for this
hearing and the Ranking Member, as well, and the committee. Let
me pose questions.
As I listened to Ranking Member Katko's question, let me
ask all three, starting with Mr. Goldstein and then following
Mr. Knake and Ms. Won Sherman. I would appreciate it if they
were brief because I have a series of questions, but I really
would like to know the gaps in the authorities that have
impeded previous efforts to identify and boost the security of
critical infrastructure.
We have been on a long journey on this and we certainly
have been on a long journey as it relates to finding out about
critical infrastructure. I remember doing this in the early
2000's and looking at water and other forms of the electric
grid, but really looking at it from probably a very naive
perspective.
What is happening now? What impedes you from having the
fullest comprehensive review on this vast critical
infrastructure subjected now to dangerous operators, such as
those housed in Russia?
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, ma'am. Congress, led by this
committee, has done an extraordinary job over the past few
years of providing CISA with new and robust authorities for us
to conduct our mission as the Nation's lead for domestic cyber
defense, whether that is establishing the Joint Cyber Defense
Collaborative last year, whether it is providing the authority
to establish mandatory incident reporting requirements this
year, or even, going a few years back, providing us the ability
to issue subpoenas to identify the operators of vulnerable
devices or protect information shared with us.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me interject to say that I want to
go--I thank you for recognizing that I would like to ensure
that we know what else we need to do.
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am. At this point today, we are
focused on fully implementing the authorities that we have been
provided, including those that were just recently provided this
year through the Congress and good work of this committee. Very
much looking forward to working with this committee and your
staffs to ensure that any gaps or impediments as they emerge
are rapidly identified and we can work with Congress to address
them.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. Does anyone have any specifics
that have not answered, Mr. Knake or Ms. Won Sherman?
Mr. Knake. Thank you. Thank you, Congresswoman. What I
would add is it is a gap, but we don't necessarily know at this
point whether it needs to be filled, so I want to be careful in
making this point.
Right now, DHS wouldn't have the capacity to do what might
be called a census. They wouldn't have the capacity to go out
to critical infrastructures, say provide us this information
back, and then we will evaluate it. Now, whether they need that
authority, whether they need that information is an open
question. They have got a lot of other data sources that they
can pull on to identify critical infrastructure at this point.
So I think it is an open question as to whether or not that
kind of census-like activity would really actually be
important.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I think that is an important point you
made.
Let me just change the question for you, Ms. Won Sherman,
and ask about the narrative dealing with Russia and the example
of Colonial Pipeline. They were housed in Russia, obviously.
The Russian government at that time indicated that they as a
government were not involved. But in light of the horrors in
Ukraine and the seemingly ramping up on the Russian
government's sort-of negative operations that may include cyber
attacks that they have done in other countries, what do we need
to do here in the United States domestically?
Ms. Sherman. One area I would like to speak to has to do
with CISA's role as the National coordinator for the Sector
Risk Management Agencies. This is a space that we are starting
to look more into at GAO. You know, at this stage we believe
that CISA has several opportunities to be able to more
proactively engage with those Sector Risk Management Agencies.
As a Sector Risk Management Agency itself for multiple sectors,
to be able to bring them along in terms of implementing and
carrying out their responsibilities from the fiscal year 2021
NDAA, and to be able to improve the information sharing as well
as coordination within the sector and across all of the sectors
to ensure that there is a more informed understanding of the
key issues in the various sectors, especially in the lifeline
sectors and those specific to the concerns that you are raising
here with respect to Russia.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I yield back.
Chairwoman Clarke. The Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes
the gentlewoman from Tennessee, Mrs. Harshbarger.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you, Chairwoman. Thank you,
witnesses, for being here today. I do have a question for Mr.
Knake.
As we are all aware, there is a new incident reporting law
on the books, but that doesn't mean we can lose sight of the
importance of the voluntary relationships between CISA and the
private sector. I guess my question is, should Congress be
considering any additional incentives that could be used to
enhance the two-way dialog between the Federal Government and
owners and operators of critical infrastructure?
The reason I ask that is I have multiple companies within
my district, when I go visit, they tell me they have been--had
cyber attacks and been hacked multiple times. They just go
ahead and pay the ransomware and don't report that to the FBI.
So, there is probably reasons that they don't report that. Of
course, they don't want their customer base to think they can't
protect their information or stockholder--you know, the stocks
go down and they don't want to be hauled in front of Congress.
But tell me what you are doing to make that a better
private partnership with these Government entities, sir.
Mr. Knake. Thank you for the question. It is a really
important one.
I believe as part of that bill one of the things that CISA
was instructed to do that we are part of is to establish a new
ransomware task force that is going to look at these issues. So
I believe we are on a fairly tight time line to get that stood
up and to start figuring out how we can make sure that
ransomware is treated as the National security priority that it
is and that our Government, which is often very focused on
these large systemically important entities that affect the
entire Nation is providing support, is providing services, and
is providing incentives to those smaller businesses that are
really the backbone of the economy.
So that ransomware task force, which Congress has mandated
that we will play a large role in and that CISA will lead, is
absolutely essentially to that activity.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well, it absolutely is. We were in the
SCIF talking about the cyber threats from Russia and one of my
colleagues asked how will we know when we are hit? They said,
well, we will know when it--when we are hit. So, is there
anything we can do to preemptively stop it?
You know, I think about and I talk about TBA in my district
and how they--you know, I talked to their CEO and how they
protect the TBA system basically from attacks as far as the
grid or EMP and things like that. But cyber is a very big
threat and they said they had--they were protected. So, you
know, it is a little bit worrisome that you won't know until it
happens.
In the first hearing I was ever in, you remember that we
had 9 different Government agencies hacked and they didn't even
know it. We had Microsoft and FireEye and SolarWinds, and I am
like what can we do to protect these private companies and our
own Government? It is worrisome. Anybody have a response?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am. I will offer a few points on
that great question about it.
The first is we really collectively need to push a cultural
change in how we think as a country about cyber incident
reporting. It is terrific and Congress has provided CISA with
the authority to mandate reporting. But even in lieu of that
requirement or while that requirement is being executed, the
rulemaking organizations need to understand the value of
reporting incidents to the Federal Government, which is, of
course, first so that the U.S. Government can offer assistance
if needed, but it is also so that we can help understand the
breadth of campaigns and contain them before other
organizations are victimized.
That is why at CISA we have had our Shields Up campaign for
months now, really evangelizing this perspective that if you
see anything unusual in your networks, tell the U.S.
Government, tell CISA, so that we can help understand is this
actually a leading indicator of a foreign adversary campaign?
Also why at CISA--it was wonderful to hear Mr. Garbarino talk
about his meeting with our Region 2 colleagues. Because we have
regional representatives throughout the country who every day
are knocking on doors, physically and virtually, and explaining
the value of proactively voluntary reporting. Again, CISA is
not a regulator in this space and so our goal exclusively is to
ensure that organizations know how to protect themselves and to
help identify intrusions, so we can help safeguard others.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. Well, thank you for that answer. With
that, I will yield back.
Chairwoman Clarke. The Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes
the gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Good morning. Madam Chair, can you hear me
OK?
Chairwoman Clarke. Yes, we can.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Well, I want to thank you, Madam
Chair, for hosting this very important hearing. I want to thank
our witnesses for their testimony today and the exceptional
work you are doing in protecting our Nation's cybersecurity.
Let me just associate myself with the remarks from the
Ranking Member in complimenting CISA and how closely you are
working with private-sector entities to make sure that they are
secure. Also I applaud you for the work you have done under
Director Easterly's leadership and Director Goldstein in
standing up the Shields Up Program to make sure that we are
prepared for any blowback and threats from Russia.
So, let me start with Mr. Knake. So, I believe that, you
know, one important factor in considering SICI or other public-
private cybersecurity partnerships is the degree to which those
partnerships need to be shaped by the cybersecurity maturity of
the entities that are involved. So, a critical infrastructure
entity's in-house cybersecurity capability will affect really
the utility of different kinds of assistance the Government can
provide.
You know, for many resource-constrained critical
infrastructure entities, technical assistance and other CISA
services can be extremely valuable. But other critical
infrastructure entities have a much higher degree of
cybersecurity maturity, including many of those that I would
construe as systemically important critical infrastructure. For
those entities, the return on investment of technical
assistance would be lower whereas access to more actionable
cyber threat intelligence to inform their own defenses would be
more helpful.
So, Mr. Knake, how is ONCD thinking about this issue in the
context of promoting operational collaboration with
systemically important critical infrastructure?
Mr. Knake. Thank you, Congressman. That is a great
question.
I think you are right. If you look at a lot of the
systemically important entities, these are very well-resourced
organizations for cybersecurity. They purchase many of the
services that CISA could provide to them. That is not where
they are looking for support. They have got their own red-
teaming capability. They have got their threat hunting
capability. It is probably more important for CISA to deploy
those resources strategically to the organizations that are
important or systemically important, but don't have the kind of
budget, let us say, some of these larger entities do.
When we talk to these large systemically important entities
the thing that they really do emphasize is that intelligence
piece. What is the one thing that they are not allowed to do,
right? They cannot go out and collect foreign intelligence in
the way that the U.S. intelligence community can. That would be
illegal for them to do. They understand that, but yet they see
the need to collect that kind of threat intelligence, have it
shared with them, have it operationalized by them. So, I think
that is the critical important piece here.
What we are looking at is what are the opportunities to
really move that into real time? How can we move from
situations in which we are saying come down to the SCIF at the
FBI office wherever you are located and we will give you a
brief, to how can we get this out to you in a secure form that
you can use to protect your network? There is a lot that we can
do, there is a lot that we have done to declassify data, to
push it out broadly, push it out widely on the internet. I
applaud what CISA's done in that regard.
But we are really trying to look at how could we actually,
with these systemically important entities, really bring them
into some kind of collaborative environment where we could
trust that that environment is secure and this kind of
information can be shared?
Mr. Langevin. Yes. That is why I think the joint
collaborative environment which the Solarium Commission has
recommended and which is a top priority for me this year was to
create that common tool set for sharing information in real
time and understanding context.
But for both of you, based on testimony we have heard
today, it is clear that CISA's systemically important entities
effort is engaged in a rigorous identification process, but the
next steps of what to do with the list appear less clear to me
than the Solarium Commission's vision of SICI, which recalls
for specific benefits and obligations to SICI entities. So,
while an accurate identification process is important, we must
also have a clear picture of the policies and strategies that
will govern and strengthen the partnership between Federal
Government and our most critical infrastructure entities.
So, for Mr. Knake and Mr. Goldstein, if CISA develops a
list of systemically important entities, what does the
administration plan to do with it? How would those factors,
like cyber maturity, as we discussed today, play a role in
where and how the Government would prioritize its efforts to
partner with critical infrastructure owners and operators?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. Thank you for that question. As
ever, thank you for your leadership on this critical issue.
We are focused on utilizing the SIE list for two main
purposes. In the first instance recognizing that on value, such
a list is that its applicability will evolve over time as the
risk environment changes apace. But the first is to use it to
drive operational collaboration and bring together
organizations across sectors, across National critical
functions into the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative to enable
that sort of risk-reduction efforts that we are already doing
with highly critical entities across three sectors in the
context of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. As the SIE effort
expands, we will be able to do that prioritized collaboration
more effectively.
The second piece is focusing on supply chains with these
key SIE entities to ensure, to Rob's very well-taken point, if
an organization doesn't need U.S. Government risk-reduction
services, we can understand their dependencies and their supply
chains to reduce their risk going forward.
Chairwoman Clarke. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Clarke. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank
you, too, Mr. Langevin, for all of your dedication and hard
work in this space.
The Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes the gentlewoman from
Michigan, Ms. Slotkin.
Ms. Slotkin. Thanks very much, Madam Chair. Thanks for
being here. I echo my comments that Representative Langevin,
Representative Katko are two Members who have a ton of in-depth
knowledge on cyber and it is really difficult to think of both
of them not here next term.
I wanted to take kind-of a 40,000-foot view for a second.
You know, I think, unfortunately, what I hear from people in my
district more often than not is they have no idea, you know,
who in the U.S. Government is protecting them from cyber
attack. They feel like they are on the front lines, that they
are being attacked all the time, and their Government--they
just don't know like who is the 9-1-1 call? What does it look
like, these folks who are protecting me or trying to protect
me? They know what a police officer looks like. They know what
someone in the military looks like. So, I would just put a note
in that we need to also communicate to the American public, not
just within Washington circles, kind-of what we do, what you
all do to protect people.
But I want to talk about two sectors that we haven't talked
about very much. One is the agriculture sector and second is K
through 12 schools. In the ag sector, obviously JBS, the
ransomware attack last year, was a really big deal. I come from
a district with a ton of farmers and it was like the first
thing on their mind when I brought the Secretary of Agriculture
last summer.
So, my understanding is there is not an ISAC or like a
community of folks that are focused on cybersecurity in the ag
world. Can you tell me briefly, first and foremost, what you
are doing and what reassurance we can give farmers that our
food security systems are protected and being looked at?
Then second, K though 12, it is just amazing. You get 10
superintendents from my district together. Every single one of
them has been the victim of a ransomware attack. Every single
one of them is desperate for tools to protect our kids' data.
So, tell me what we are doing in those two sectors, please,
if you could.
Mr. Goldstein. Certainly. Both great questions. Regarding
the food and ag sector, you know, certainly the ransomware
intrusion affecting JBS put in stark relief the impacts that a
cyber intrusion on the food and ag sector could have on the
availability of the food supply to the American people. You
know, I actually personally met this week with a number of the
largest meat producers in the country and this sector is one
that is of paramount importance to our collaborative efforts.
Our goal with the food and ag sectors, as with other
sectors, is to work really closely with those organizations and
their security leadership that accounts for the preponderance
of food production, food distribution, and food supply in this
country understand areas of needed improvement or areas where
we can help advance their cybersecurity programs and then
ensure that they are getting the specific services, tools, and
information from CISA and our partners, including USDA, as
applicable, to meet them where they are. So our goal with this
sector is to really partner with the organizations that
contribute to the related National critical functions to ensure
that we are providing them with everything we can to shore up
their security.
K-12 cybersecurity, ma'am, as you note, is an absolute
urgent issue. We know that many K-12 school districts lack the
resources and maturity to secure their networks in many cases
against sophisticated threats. Congress thoughtfully
anticipated this issue in passing the K-12 Cybersecurity Act,
which directed CISA to conduct a study on this very issue and
assess how we can provide more effective services and tools and
information to the K-12 cybersecurity community. That work is
on-going. I am very much looking forward to briefing this
subcommittee on our conclusions, but this is an area where our
regional team members at CISA have so much value because we
know----
Ms. Slotkin. Yes, I am a cosponsor of that legislation. I
think I would offer that our cybersecurity community, which is
doing yeoman's work in trying to, you know, gain all these
connections with these different sectors, it is one thing to
come and testify, it is one thing to kind-of have conversations
about what you are doing in a forum like this. I would offer
that part of the responsibilities of your agencies is to also
communicate out to normal people who have no idea how to keep
themselves safe. I would just ask that you maybe look at your
budget on this matter and redouble your efforts to communicate
to real people who don't understand what you all do and how it
protects them and how that should be--how their
responsibilities fit into that. Right? Making sure they are
doing everything they can on cyber hygiene.
So, thank you for that. Thank you for your work. I yield
back.
Chairwoman Clarke. I thank the gentlewoman for her line of
questioning. I wanted to recognize the Ranking Member for a
follow-up question. I myself have a few follow-up questions, so
I yield to the gentleman from New York, Mr. Garbarino.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Chairwoman. Are you sure you
don't want to go first? Whatever, I can go. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Goldstein, you started answering this question before
and Ms. Sherman brought up when she talked about sector risk
management coordination and how you are going to work together
with these other agencies. I know you have already started,
CISA has already started some programs through the Section 9
list and the U.S. Department of Energy has begun initiatives to
strengthen resilience in the energy sector. What is CISA's plan
to make sure that all the Sector Risk Management Agencies have
a say in determining what is systemically critical
infrastructure and to make sure everybody is kept up-to-date
and, you know, everybody is reading from the same sheet of
music?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, thank you, sir. The SRMAs are critical
partners in really everything we do at CISA. But particularly
when we are identifying systemically important entities, SIEs,
the SRMAs fill two essential roles.
The first is helping us make sure that the methodology that
we are using for identification in the first instance
incorporates the relevant expertise from each SRMA, so that we
are not underweighting or overweighting different variables
that might contribute to getting a suboptimal list for a given
National critical function, but then essentially, when we have
a list established for a given National critical function, the
SRMAs are critical partners in figuring out how do we as a U.S.
Government bring together everything that we can offer to
improve the security and resilience of entities that are
supporting a given NCF.
Critically in this phase, you know, in CISA's as the
National coordinator for critical infrastructure's security and
resilience and the lead for National cyber defense, that does
not mean that we are the sole actor in providing these services
and information. The SRMAs, in many cases, have unique sectoral
risk management expertise, particularly regarding understanding
how a cyber intrusion or physical event could impact the
continuity of a National critical function. So by partnering
with the SRMAs, we can combined CISA's generally applicable
expertise in both cyber and physical security with the sector
knowledge of an SRMA. That is the combination that we believe
adds real value to set directives.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that. Just to question Ms.
Sherman, do you have any ideas or suggestions on how to make
sure that there is no confusion?
Ms. Sherman. Sure. Well, maybe two quick points related to
the SRMAs. The first, as discussed yesterday during the
hearing, there is a range of maturity levels when it comes to
Sector Risk Management Agencies, you know, spanning from, for
example, you talked about the financial services sector all the
way to the water sector and everything in between. So, I think
it is important for CISA to be able to work to bring along
those less mature sectors and to work with the relevant SRMA in
those instances to make sure they have the support and
resources and coordination needed.
The other point I wanted to raise actually is around the
update to the National plan and the sector-specific plans. The
National plan has been in place since 2013 and CISA is actively
undertaking an update effort. I think by the end of this year
is the goal.
One of the things, some of the conversations that we have
had with Sector Risk Management Agencies is that they are
holding still and updating their sector-specific plan until the
National plan update occurs. So we do think that this is
something timely and important for CISA to continue to act on
so that those updates and, again, the relevancy and the value
of the guidance that's being provided to the sectors and the
steps that they need to take will be laid out in those plans
and is something that they can act on.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Clarke. Thank you, Ranking Member. Mr.
Goldstein, I have a couple of clarifying questions before we
close.
First, CISA's working to identify systemically important
entities. Right now, does CISA have the authority to compel any
SIE to share information about security measures they have in
place?
Mr. Goldstein. No, ma'am. At this point, we do not have the
authority to compel organizations to share cybersecurity
information. Our focus is on building these trusted
partnerships in which organizations voluntarily work with us to
share information that we need to understand and manage
cybersecurity risk.
Chairwoman Clarke. Does CISA have the authority to compel
information about their vendors or supply chains?
Mr. Goldstein. Currently, we do no have the authority to
compel private organizations to provide CISA with information
about the vendors or supply chains.
Chairwoman Clarke. Does CISA have the authority to compel
any other information it may need to fully assess an SIE's
relative security risk or vulnerability?
Mr. Goldstein. Today CISA does not have such authority as
to compel private organizations. We have narrow authorities,
ma'am, as you are aware, for our subpoena authority to compel
disclosure of voluntary devices being used by an organization,
but certainly not specific to the security controls in place by
an SIE. Certainly, those authorities may exist elsewhere in
Government, but not within CISA.
Chairwoman Clarke. So, what kind of information enhance
CISA's understanding of National systemic risk?
Mr. Goldstein. Our approach today is understanding the
entities that contribute to the continuity of National critical
functions, bringing those organizations in.
I think it is relevant to note here that in our view, the
U.S. Government and the private sector has a shared interest in
ensuring the continuity and resilience of National critical
functions. Thus far, we have shown great success in building
trusted partnerships in which we have a shared goal with the
private sector to ensure continuity and resilience of NCFs. By
building that trust, we are able to catalyze information
sharing to the degree needed to execute our mission.
Chairwoman Clarke. Second, do you anticipate that the
concept of SICI or systemically important entities will replace
the list of Section 9 entities?
Mr. Goldstein. We certainly envision the SIE process as an
evolution or maturation of the Section 9. We're tying the list
to National critical functions and focusing on cascading and
systemic impact will be improvement over the Section 9 process
and allow us to drive operational collaboration more
effectively.
Chairwoman Clarke. So, do you anticipate a replacement or
just sort-of archiving what--how do you sort-of manage all that
information?
Mr. Goldstein. Our goal would be that if we achieve our
intended outcomes with the SIE list, that the SIE list would
resolve the need for a separate Section 9 list. Ideally, the
SIE list will meet the intent of Section 9 of E.O. 13636 and
allow us to do even more with the critical prioritization of
entities across the country.
Chairwoman Clarke. If Congress were to codify the concept
of SICI or SIEs without also replacing new requirements on
designated--excuse me, also placing new requirements on
designated entities, how would that list be different from the
existing Section 9 program?
Mr. Goldstein. So, today our work to develop the SIE list
differs in important ways from the Section 9 program, including
tying the SIE list back to National critical functions,
ensuring that we are encompassing the breadth of critical
sector, for example, the IT sector was excluded specifically
from the Section 9 program in the underlying Executive Order as
well as focusing on cascading and systemic risk so that we are
not only identifying the largest entities in the country, but
also ones that, by virtue of their unique dependencies or
relationships, pose a potential risk to the continuity of
National critical functions.
Chairwoman Clarke. Very well. It is my understanding that
we have an additional question or questions from Congresswoman
Sheila Jackson Lee of Texas. You are recognized at this time.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you for this
very good hearing.
I would like to ask unanimous consent to introduce into the
record several articles: ``From SolarWinds to Log4j: The Global
Impact of Today's Cybersecurity Vulnerability,'' April 5, 2022;
Tech Crunch, ``Apple, iCloud, Twitter, and Minecraft Vulnerable
to `Ubiquitous' Zero-Day Flaw''; ``Biden Signs an Executive
Order Aimed at Protecting Critical American Infrastructure from
Cyber Attacks''; and ``Biden Warns U.S. Companies to Gear It Up
Against Russian Hacks.''
Chairwoman Clarke. So ordered.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I ask unanimous consent, Madam Chair, to
include that in the record.
Chairwoman Clarke. So ordered.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much.
Chairwoman Clarke. So ordered.
[The information follows:]
From SolarWinds to Log4j The global impact of today's cybersecurity
vulnerabilities
By CRN Team--April 5, 2022
By Harish Kumar, Head, Enterprise & Government, Check Point Software
Technologies, India & SAARC
http://www.crn.in/columns/from_solarwinds_to_log4j_the_glo-
bal_impact_of_todays_cybersecurity_vulnerabilities
If the past year has taught businesses anything, it's that the
impact of targeted cyber attacks and security vulnerabilities is now,
without doubt, universal. From the fallout of the Solar Winds software
supply chain attack to the exposed Apache Log4j vulnerability, the case
for organizations of all shapes and sizes to have a comprehensive and
robust security infrastructure in place has never been stronger, even
if they themselves aren't necessarily in the crosshairs.
Many regard the now-infamous SolarWinds breach in late 2020 as a
major catalyst for what would become a frenzy of ``Gen V'' or fifth-
generation attacks that persist to this day. Such large-scale, multi-
vector attacks have virtually unlimited reach, with devastating
security consequences for businesses and governments around the world.
A year later, the Apache Log4j vulnerability was exposed, which made it
possible for malicious actors to execute code remotely on almost any
targeted computer to take control, steal data or even hijack a user's
machine to mine cryptocurrency.
The former was an orchestrated attack by an advanced persistent
threat group, the latter was an exposed zero-day vulnerability that
nobody saw coming. One thing both incidents have in common, however,
was that they increased risk and vulnerability for businesses in every
sector, in every corner of the world. As organizations plot their
course through 2022 and beyond, it's never been clearer that
cybersecurity is a global issue rather than a local one, and this
should be reflected in every cybersecurity strategy moving forward.
the rise of ``gen v'' attacks
Gen V attacks are unique in the way that they leverage broad attack
surfaces and multiple infection vectors to infiltrate large numbers of
organizations, and they are increasing at an unprecedented rate. At a
time when businesses and government agencies are expanding their
network footprint, adding more endpoint and connected device into their
technology mix, the risk of being impacted by a Gen V attack has also
never been higher. As outlined in our 2022 Security Report, the
SolarWinds breach, which impacted organizations around the world,
kickstarted a torrent of supply chain attacks that still plague
businesses today. In a year that saw cyber attacks against corporate
networks increase by 50 percent across the board, software vendors like
SolarWinds experienced the largest year-on-year growth in attacks with
an increase of 146 percent. Today's corporate economy is built on an
intricate web of software supply chains, which means that with every
additional attack on a software vendor, the vulnerability of businesses
around the world is further amplified.
fuelling attacks: the sunburst catalyst
The SolarWinds software supply chain attack was facilitated by a
back door knovm as `Sunburst', which was added to the SolarWinds Orion
system before being distributed to customers globally via a routine
update. This gave the APT (advanced persistent threat) group involved
covert access to thousands of SolarWinds customers' networks, from
government agencies to Fortune 500 companies. Unfortunately, this mode
of attack from APT groups is now on the rise. As our report details,
the REvil ransomware group targeted multiple managed service providers
(MSPs) throughout 2021, and in July managed to embed a malicious
software update in IT company Kaseya's patch management and client
monitoring tool. Thousands of unsuspecting businesses were impacted,
with millions of U.S. dollars demanded in ransom.
Sunburst also likely inspired the attack on Colonial Pipeline,
which carries almost half of the fuel consumed by the U.S. East Coast.
The nation-state APT group, DarkSide, was allegedly behind the attack,
employing a Ransomware-as-a-Service model, meaning it relied on third-
party affiliate programs to orchestrate the breach. This is one of the
most striking examples to date of how tools used to carry out such
attacks are becoming democratized and more widely used, again ramping
up the pressure on businesses to guard their perimeters.
While the assets of the REvil ransomware group have since been
seized and its ringleaders arrested, you cannot arrest code. Once one
threat group make headway with a particular attack, it doesn't take
much for an affiliate member to keep that momentum going. Emotet, one
of the most dangerous botnets in history, made a return in November
2021 following its takedown a year earlier. It's a trojan primarily
spread through links, spam emails, malicious scripts and macroenabled
document files, and once it infects a user it can spread like wildfire
without detection, stealing banking credentials and financial data from
individuals, companies, and governments around the world.
ambushed by zero-day vulnerabilities
While targeted attacks like the ones outlined above are presenting
an increased threat to organizations around the world, so are exploits
and vulnerabilities. In December last year, a remote code execution
vulnerability was reported in Apache Log4j, the most popular java
logging library in the world. This library is embedded in almost all of
the services and applications we use in our day-to-day lives, from
Twitter and Amazon to Microsoft and Minecraft. Initially used by some
threat actors to leverage cryptocurrency mining resources at the
expense of their victims, there's no reason an exploit like this
couldn't be used for more sophisticated and nefarious attacks. Check
Point Research detected approximately 40,000 attack attempts just 2
hours after the Log4j vulnerability was revealed, and a further 830,000
attack attempts 72 hours into the event.
These zero-day vulnerabilities earn their name from their ability
to completely blindside businesses, giving them virtually no time to
react before they become potential victims. It then becomes a race
between threat actors and their ability to exploit the vulnerability,
and how quickly businesses can close the gap in their defenses.
global threats require a global solution
The threat climate has changed. The traditional defensive line that
businesses can draw between themselves and the rest of the cyber
landscape has become blurred to the point that it may as well not
exist. Instead of guarding a static perimeter, businesses need to take
a more holistic and real-time view of their security infrastructure.
Security practitioners need to be able to maintain 360-degree
visibility of their entire network, regardless of how far and wide it
has been distributed. They also need access to real-time threat
intelligence on a global scale, so they can pre-empt far-reaching zero-
day vulnerabilities and targeted software supply chain attacks like the
ones outlined above.
Check Point's Infinity platform, for instance, is the only security
platform of its kind that offered pre-emptive protection for customers
against the Log4j exploit. It's the first modern, consolidated security
platform specifically designed to guard against zero-day
vulnerabilities and sophisticated fifth-generation attacks across all
networks, cloud deployments and endpoints. Part of Infinity's success
is its ability to leverage Check Point's ThreatCloud, a real-time
global threat intelligence platform that monitors networks around the
world for emerging threats and vulnerabilities.
If organizations around the world want to operate safely and
securely in 2022 and beyond, they need to start seeing cybersecurity as
a global issue rather than a local one, and evolve their security
strategies accordingly. Only then will they be able to confidently
defend themselves against a threat landscape that knows no bounds and
cannot be contained by borders.
If you have an interesting article/experience/case study to share,
please get in touch with us at
[emailprotected]

______

Apple iCloud, Twitter, and Minecraft vulnerable to ubiquitous zero-day
flaw
TechCrunch, Carly Page@carlypage_/1:24 PM EST--December 10, 2021
A number of popular services, including Apple iCloud, Twitter,
Cloudflare, Minecraft and Steam, are reportedly vulnerable to a zero-
day vulnerability affecting a popular Java logging library.
The vulnerability, dubbed ``Log4Shell'' by researchers at LunaSec
and credited to Chen Zhaojun of Alibaba, has been found in Apache
Log4j, an open source logging utility that's used in a huge number of
apps, websites and services. Log4Shell was first discovered in
Microsoft-owned Minecraft, though LunaSec warns that ``many, many
services'' are vulnerable to this exploit due to Log4j's ``ubiquitous''
presence in almost all major Java-based enterprise apps and servers. In
a blog post, the cybersecurity company warned that anybody using Apache
Struts is ``likely vulnerable.''
Companies with servers confirmed to be vulnerable to Log4Shell
attack so far include Apple, Amazon, Cloudflare, Twitter, Steam, Baidu,
NetEase, Tencent and Elastic, though there are likely hundreds if not
thousands of other organizations affected. In a statement given to
TechCrunch, Cloudflare said it has updated systems to prevent attacks,
adding that it saw no evidence of exploitation.
Robert Joyce, the director of Cybersecurity at the NSA, confirmed
that GHIDRA, a free and open source reverse engineering tool developed
by the agency, is also affected: ``The Log4j vulnerability is a
significant threat for exploitation due to the widespread inclusion in
software frameworks, even NSA's GHIDRA,'' he said.
The Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) for New Zealand,
Deutsche Telekom's CERT, and the Greynoise web monitoring service have
all warned that attackers are actively looking for servers vulnerable
to Log4Shell attacks. According to the latter, around 100 distinct
hosts are scanning the internet for ways to exploit Log4j
vulnerability.
Kayla Underkoffler, a senior security technologist at HackerOne,
tells TechCrunch that this zero-day highlights the ``threat that open
source software presents as a growing portion of the world's critical
supply chain attack surfaces.''
``Open source software is behind nearly all modern digital
infrastructure, with the average application using 528 different open
source components,'' Underkoffler said. ``The majority of high-risk
open source vulnerabilities discovered in 2020 have also existed in
code for more than 2 years and most organizations lack direct control
over open source software within supply chains to easily fix these
weaknesses. Securing this often poorly funded software is imperative
for any organization that relies on it.''
The Apache Software Foundation has released an emergency security
update today to patch the zero-day vulnerability in Log4j, along with
mitigation steps for those unable to update immediately. Game developer
Mojang Studios has also released an emergency Minecraft security update
to address the bug.
Updated with comment from Cloudflare.
https://techcrunch.com/2021/12/10/apple-icloud-twitter-and-
minecraft-vulnerable-to-ubiquitous-zero-day-exploit/
______

Biden signs an executive order aimed at protecting critical American
infrastructure from cyber attacks
New York Times, July 29, 2021
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/07/28/us/politics/cyber-security-biden-
executive-order.html
The effort is a way to get beyond the patchwork of mandates and
voluntary action to protect electric utilities, gas pipelines, water
supplies, and industrial sites that keep the economy running.
A day after President Biden warned that cyber attacks could lead to
a ``real shooting war,'' he signed an executive order on Wednesday
aimed at preventing hackings on America's critical infrastructure.
While the order has been in the works for some time, the need was
driven home by a series of major ransomware attacks, including against
Colonial Pipeline, which provides the East Coast with 45 percent of its
gasoline, jet fuel and diesel.
The order was mostly filled with voluntary measures for companies
to meet a series of on-line security standards, like encrypting data
and requiring two-factor authentication for all users on a system, to
stymie hackers who possess stolen passwords. In a call with reporters
Tuesday night, a senior administration official said the idea was to
develop ``cybersecurity performance goals'' to assess how prepared each
company or utility was.
The effort is a way to get beyond the ``woefully insufficient''
patchwork of mandates and voluntary actions to protect electric
utilities, gas pipelines, water supplies and industrial sites that keep
the economy running, the official said.
Such efforts have been tried before, dating to the presidency of
George W. Bush. But Mr. Biden is the first president to talk about the
issue--almost every week--as a national security imperative. It was the
central topic of his meeting in June with President Vladimir V. Putin
of Russia. And on Tuesday, visiting the Office of the Director of
National Intelligence, Mr. Biden gave a grim assessment of where he
believed the constant, short-of-war attacks on the United States, both
state-sponsored operations and criminal ransomware, are headed.
``If we end up in a war, a real shooting war with a major power,''
he told the intelligence officers there, ``it's going to be as a
consequence of a cyberbreach of great consequence. And it's increasing
exponentially--the capabilities.''
Mr. Biden's chief challenge now is a lack of authority to mandate
changes. He has already imposed security standards on providers of
software to the Federal Government, betting that if a company is banned
from selling to the government it will also suffer in the commercial
marketplace. He has ordered a series of increased protections for
Federal agencies, 10 of which were affected by the SolarWinds hacking
last year, a broad invasion of the software ``supply chain'' used by
18,000 companies and governments.
But key elements of American infrastructure are run by private
companies and in Colonial Pipeline's case, Russian-speaking hackers
brought down the distribution system almost accidentally, after
attacking the company's business systems. That was followed by another
ransomware attack on JBS, the world's largest beef producer, which paid
$11 million to start running again.
For years, many industries have maintained informal organizations
that share cyberthreat information or best practices. But there are so
many holes in the system that it has been relatively easy for Iran,
Russia, China and ransomware groups to find ways to place malicious
software in the systems, or initiate attacks that freeze data and make
it impossible to operate, as happened to Colonial Pipeline and JBS.
The measures outlined in the new national security memorandum,
called ``Improving Cybersecurity for Critical Infrastructure Control
Systems,'' are being coordinated by the Department of Homeland
Security's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency and the
Commerce Department's unit that sets industrial standards.
______

Biden warns U.S. companies to gird up against Russian hacks
Washington Post, March 22, 2022
https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2022/03/22/biden-warns-us-
companies-gird-up-against-russian-hacks/
Welcome to The Cybersecurity 202! I've seen ``The Power of the
Dog,'' ``Licorice Pizza,'' ``Drive My Car,'' and ``Don't Look Up,'' so
far this year, and I'm not rooting for any of them for Best Picture
yet. Is there a better one in the mix?
Below: The online verification firm Okta says there's ``no ongoing
malicious activity'' after hackers claim to access networks connected
to the company, and NSO's old owners are fighting in court with its new
owners.
The White House has issued its starkest warning that Russia may be
planning cyberattacks against critical-sector U.S. companies amid the
Ukraine invasion.
There's ``evolving intelligence'' that the Kremlin is actively
exploring its cyberattack options, President Biden said in a statement,
warning that companies have a ``responsibility to strengthen the
cybersecurity and resilience of the critical services and technologies
on which Americans rely.''
Deputy national security adviser Anne Neuberger described the alert
as a ``call to action'' for companies to raise their cyber defenses,
during a White House press briefing. She tied it to a series of U.S.
intelligence releases in recent months aimed at shining light on
Russian planning.
Biden later warned that he believes a Russian cyberattack ``is
coming'' per CNN's Kaitlan Collins:
Context: The alert comes after Russia has lobbed a series of
digital attacks at the Ukrainian government and critical industry
sectors. But there's been no sign so far of major disruptive hacks
against U.S. targets even as the government has imposed increasingly
harsh sanctions that have battered the Russian economy.
The public alert followed classified briefings government officials
conducted last week for more than 100 companies in sectors at the
highest risk of Russian hacks, Neuberger said. The briefing was
prompted by ``preparatory activity'' by Russian hackers, she aid.
U.S. analysts have detected scanning of some critical sectors'
computers by Russian government actors and other preparatory work, one
U.S. official told my colleague Ellen Nakashima on the condition of
anonymity because of the matter's sensitivity. But whether that is a
signal that there will be a cyberattack on a critical system is not
clear, Neuberger said.
Neuberger declined to name specific industry sectors under threat
but said they're part of critical infrastructure--a government
designation that includes industries deemed vital to the economy and
national security, including energy, finance, transportation and
pipelines. The warning reflects a grave concern that U.S. companies
aren't sufficiently prepared to withstand a Russian cyber assault--even
after years of concerted pressure from government cyber officials that
ramped up even further in the run up to the Ukraine invasion.
Neuberger lamented that foreign hackers continue to regularly crack
into companies using known computer bugs that the companies could have
patched against if they were more diligent.
``This is deeply troubling,'' she said. Neuberger compared the
companies to New Yorkers that were robbed after leaving their doors
unlocked.
The warning also reflects a deep anxiety that companies that have
girded their defenses against Russian hacking will let their guards
down as the Ukraine conflict drags on.
``The White House is running out of ways to keep the alert levels
up for cyber incident responders,'' Tatyana Bolton, a former
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency official who now leads
cyber programs for the R Street Institute, told me. ``It's very
difficult to stay on a high level of alert for a long amount of time
because we're humans and alert levels go down as time passes.''
A second U.S. Government official Ellen spoke with described
``fatigue'' among industry cyber pros who've been working long hours
for weeks on end as part of CISA's ``Shields Up'' initiative to guard
against Russian hacking.
``Since this heightened threat environment started, it's been like
`Shields Up.' So people ask, `When do we put shields down?' '' the
official said.
Some industry officials said the Government's latest alert didn't
tell them anything they didn't already know.
``I don't see anything new there that we haven't already been
informed of,'' Bill Fehrman, CEO of Berkshire Hathaway Energy and co-
chair of the Electricity Subsector Coordinating Council, whose sector
was given a classified briefing last week, told Ellen.
``Our defensive postures remain in `Shields Up' position,'' he
added.
Government only has limited options to make private industry
improve their cyber defenses.
Officials have gone into hyperdrive sharing information about
cyberthreats and best practices, but mostly lack the authority to
compel companies to adopt those practices.
In a handful of industries where government has broader cyber
authorities, such as pipelines, its requirements have received a cool
reception from industry leaders.
Congress recently passed a bill requiring critical infrastructure
firms to alert the government when they're hacked, but even that will
take a year or longer to go into effect.
One hope among cyber analysts is that the focus on improving cyber
defenses will outlast the current conflict.
``My hope is that the Russia crisis will spur long-term investments
in cybersecurity and critical infrastructure resilience,'' Mark
Montgomery, executive director of the congressionally led Cyberspace
Solarium Commission, told me. ``My fear is it will be treated as it has
been [after cyber crises] in the past and forgotten soon thereafter.''
The Keys
Okta says no ongoing malicious activity after `attempt to compromise'
third-party contractor
The online verification company stated in a tweet that screenshot
photos posted to Telegram by the ransomware hacking gang LAPSUS$ seemed
to be related to a January ``attempt to compromise the account of a
third-party customer support engineer working for one of our
subprocessors.''
``There is no evidence of ongoing malicious activity beyond the
activity detected in January,'' Okta CEO Todd McKinnon said.
It wasn't clear from the statement how much access the gang had to
Okta systems. The hacking gang claimed the screenshots showed internal
Okta systems. Okta said in an earlier statement that it was
investigating the breach reports.
Okta is used by thousands of companies to verify employees'
identities before they access company digital systems making it an
especially valuable hacker target.
One of the hacker screenshots purported to be of a dashboard for
the cybersecurity company Cloudflare. Cloudflare CEO Matthew Prince
said the company was resetting Okta credentials for some users out of
an ``abundance of caution.''
Microsoft is also investigating LAPUS$ claims it breached some of
the company's systems. Here's more from CyberScoop's AJ Vicens.
NSO Group's former owners are locked in a court battle with its current
owners
The fund that owns NSO is now run by Berkeley Research Group.
(Sebastian Scheiner/AP)
The fight stems from an effort to assess how much the embattled
spyware company is worth--a valuation that could lead to a big payout
for the former leaders of a fund that bought NSO Group in 2019, Stefan
Kowski and Bastian Lueken of Novalpina Capital, Bloomberg News's
Jonathan Browning reports.
Kowski and Lueken were ousted by the fund's investors in 2021 and
replaced with Berkeley Research Group, which currently runs the fund.
NSO's value has likely dropped since then, largely due to extensive
reporting by The Washington Post and 16 media partners that found NSO
clients used its Pegasus spyware to hack devices belonging to
journalists and activists.
NSO has reportedly mulled shutting down its Pegasus division since
then.
``Lawyers for Kowski allege that BRG reneged on a commitment to get
the Israeli company fairly valued,'' Browning writes. ``According to
emails disclosed in Kowski's filing, BRG responded to say that with NSO
shutting down Pegasus, it was therefore `unfeasible (and was always
unworkable)' to conduct an independent valuation.''
Iran-linked hackers are trolling the head of Israel's Mossad spy agency
A group of purported Iranian hackers released a document that they
said was a stolen 2020 pay stub belonging to Mossad chief David Barnea.
The gang said more sensitive leaks were on the way, Haaretz's Omer
Benjakob reports. It's not clear if the leaked document is authentic,
but it ``was intended to disprove Israel's claim that the hack was of
an old device belonging to his wife'' and therefore not of
significance, Benjakob writes.
The group previously published a video showing personal photos,
tickets, tax documents and a video clip of Barnea. The Israeli prime
minister's office said Barnea's phone wasn't hacked and the ``materials
in question are old,'' the Times of Israel's Emanuel Fabian reported.
``Israel believes the hack was revenge for an airstrike in Iran
last month, which caused heavy damage to the country's drone network,''
Benjakob writes.
Hackers have a history of taunting their victims and enemies
online, as well as making boisterous claims about their exploits. For
example, a hacker taunted top Obama administration officials after he
hacked their accounts. And late last year, a hacker appeared to breach
an FBI email system to vilify a security researcher.
government scan
Ransomware attacks on the supply chain are national security threat,
officials say
U.S. supply chains are struggling even without cyberattacks. (Eric
Risberg/AP)
Hacks targeting the U.S. logistics and shipping industries could
crush the already struggling supply chain, warned a U.S. Customs and
Border Protection intelligence bulletin dated March 7. Much of the
bulletin focused on a cyberattack on Seattle logistics firm Expeditors
International, though it didn't say who was behind the attack, Yahoo
News's Jana Winter reports.
The hacks could also make it tougher to crack down on smuggling.
``Large-scale attacks on the logistics industry pose the risk of
increased illicit activity through ports of entry due to the shutdowns
of computer systems which are essential to CBP processing and security
procedures,'' the bulletin said.

Ms. Jackson Lee. I am going to go again to CISA and reflect
on the testimony that you gave that indicated you made great
strides in establishing joint cyber defense, CISA's
Cybersecurity Advisory Committee, et cetera. Can you give
examples, just point it because I have other questions, of the
significant strides that CISA has made in the establishment of
this Joint Cyber and the CISA Cybersecurity Advisory Committee?
Then if you would answer is this Joint Cyber Defense
Collaborative in authorization language? Would you answer that,
please? Thank you.
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am, of course. Let me answer the
last part first.
So, yes, Congress established a Joint Cyber Planning Office
in the National Defense Authorization Act 2 years ago. The JCDC
is the maturation the Joint Cyber Planning Office using the
same underlying authorization passed by Congress with the
leadership of this committee and, of course, Mr. Langevin.
We have had actually remarkable successes with the Joint
Cyber Defense Collaborative thus far. Ma'am, I will reference
it particularly through the articles you have noted. Around our
response to the Log4j software library vulnerability, we
brought together, frankly, within hours, many of the largest
technology companies in the world to understand what
technologies were impacted by the vulnerability, the cyber
defense measures that were effective in mitigating the risk of
the vulnerability. Then we set up broadly applicable and widely
disseminated websites and products that we share with
stakeholders across the country, and indeed across the world,
driving mitigation of the vulnerability at scale.
We could never have done that work without the insights
that we were able to glean and enrich from our private-sector
partners in the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative. We are now
doing very similar work, but even more at scale, around the
risk of----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Goldstein. Sorry, ma'am?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Ms. Won Sherman, let us go back
to my premise about the bad actor that Russia has become, so
much so that you can't distinguish between Russia's violence
and cyber attacks from the criminals that are lodged in their
town. I want to pursue your line of statements that you made
when I asked you previously and your point about that the
Federal Government needs to take--needs to include
strengthening the Federal role in terms of dealing with the
critical infrastructure, strengthening the Federal role in
protecting the cybersecurity and critical infrastructure, and
improving priority-setting efforts. Having in your mind the
backdrop of Russia's rising threat, could you further enhance
that comment, please? Ms. Won Sherman.
Ms. Sherman. Almost made it through without doing that.
Apologies.
Yes, you know, at this stage some of the other findings
that we had come across in our review highlighted, for example,
some of the challenges with the National critical functions'
framework, which looks to have promise and it is great to hear
all of the perspective and efforts that have been carried out
and are under way as part of that framework.
The concerns that we have identified as part of that
particular framework is making sure that there is a clear
understanding, both within, again, the Federal Government and
all of the levels of Government and the private sector, of
exactly what the priority-setting looks like and how the
priority-setting is going to actually be carried out, what the
goal of the framework is, and what impact there might be on
planning and operations. I tie that back to your question
related to Russia and the Russia cyber threats and thinking
about the various sectors and all of the functions that cut
across those sectors and the importance of making sure that the
private-sector entities and all of the levels of Government
have a clear understanding and awareness of what actions that
they would need to take and where they sit in terms of planning
and operations.
So it is definitely an area that we have made several
recommendations in and we think it is important not only for
the broader framework effort, but for some of these very real-
time incidents that are occurring.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Madam Chair, I intend to
introduce legislation and look forward to working with you
around this zero-day potential that has been moving for so many
years and now may be even more of a threat.
Thank you for yielding and I yield back. Thank you.
Chairwoman Clarke. Thank you very much, Congresswoman.
With that, I thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony and the Members for their questions. The Members of
the subcommittee may have additional questions for the
witnesses and we ask that you respond expeditiously in writing
to those questions.
The Chair reminds Members that the subcommittee record will
remain open for 10 business days. Without objection, the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:27 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Eric Goldstein
Question 1a. In his testimony and responses to Member questions,
Mr. Goldstein described the Systemically Important Entity process as an
``evolution'' or ``maturation'' of the Section 9 [of Executive Order
13636] list, with a goal of driving ``operational collaboration'' and
understanding Systemically Important Entities' ``dependencies and
supply chains to reduce their risk going forward.''
Is it CISA's/ONCD's goal to codify the framework established in
Section 9 of Executive Order 13636?
Question 1b. Section 10 of Executive Order 13636 directed Federal
agencies to engage in a review of ``the preliminary Cybersecurity
Framework and determine if current cybersecurity regulatory
requirements are sufficient given current and projected risks,'' among
other things. Did Section 10 of Executive Order 13636 result in the
imposition of any new security obligations on Section 9 companies? If
so, please describe. If not, why not? In light of the current threat
environment, is the administration revisiting the analysis described by
Section 10?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. At the hearing Mr. Goldstein testified: ``We certainly
envision the Systemically Important Entity (SIE) process as an
evolution or maturation of the Section 9 list. We're tying the list to
National critical functions, and focusing on cascading a systemic
impact will be an improvement over the Section 9 process and allow us
to drive operational collaboration more effectively.''
Please provide a description of the methodology CISA currently uses
to identify SIEs, and describe how it differs from the methodology used
in Section 9 designations.
Question 2b. Do you anticipate that tying the Systemically
Important Entity list to National Critical Functions will result in a
list of entities that differs significantly from the existing list of
Section 9 entities? Or do you anticipate that the National Critical
Functions analysis will drive analysis of interdependencies among SIEs?
Question 2c. Are there Section 9 entities that you do not believe
will identified as Systemically Important Entities because the analysis
is tied to National Critical Functions?
Question 2d. As the SIE process continues to evolve, do you
anticipate identifying ``tiers'' of Systemically Important Entities to
reflect both an entity's systemic importance and the sophistication
with which it can operationally collaborate with the Federal
Government?
Question 2e. How many SIEs has CISA currently identified? Please
provide a breakdown of such list by sector, the number of SIEs
currently enrolled in CISA programs and services, the number of
currently engaged in operational collaboration with CISA, and any other
information that would be helpful to characterize CISA's current
understanding of SIEs.
Question 2f. What information does CISA need in order to fully and
accurately identify and understand systemic risks to SIEs, and where
does that information originate? What data sources is CISA currently
able to leverage to carry out this work, and what data is CISA
currently unable to obtain?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3a. The Cyberspace Solarium Commission (CSC) recommended
Congress codify a new designation for SICI. The concept behind SICI is
that certain entities--those that operate our most vital systems and
assets--should be granted special assistance from the U.S. Government
and should be expected to shoulder additional security and information-
sharing requirements befitting their unique status and importance.
If Congress were to create a regime that aligns as closely as
possible to the CSC's proposal (i.e., a designation that comes with
benefits and burdens), what are the most critical, impactful programs
or partnership models that Congress should consider for purposes of
mandating participation from designates entities? What types of
information should be shared?
Question 3b. Are there authorities CISA currently lacks that it
would need if Congress were to decide to mandate such participation,
collaboration, or sharing?
Question 3c. Assuming there are no changes to CISA's current
funding levels, does CISA have the resources, personnel, and overall
capacity to scale up these services beyond what is being offered now--
and at what point would additional resources be required to meet
heightened demand?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4a. As the conversation about SICI evolves, there
continues to be confusion about the proper terminology and definitions.
The CSC report proposed the term ``SICI,'' but you testified that CISA
is instead using the term ``Systemically Important Entities,'' or SIEs.
Please define Systemically Important Entity.
Question 4b. In your view, does this definition differ from the
concept of SICI recommended by the CSC? If so, how?
Question 4c. What security objectives does CISA hope the SIE effort
will accomplish? Please provide benchmarks and time lines.
Question 4d. Director Easterly has also recently utilized the term
``Primary Systemically Important Entities,'' or PISCES. What
differentiates these terms from one another? How do they work together?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. If Congress were to codify the concept of SICI/SIEs
without adding any additional requirements on designated entities, how
would that list be different from the Section 9 program?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairwoman Yvette D. Clarke for Eric Goldstein
Question 1a. You noted that CISA's understanding of National
systemic risk is rooted in the continuity and resilience of NCFs, and
that the list of SIEs that CISA is currently identifying would be tied
to NCFs. It would seem that, to do this work effectively, CISA would
need a fairly granular understanding of critical assets within each
region, the vendors they use, the security measures they have in place,
and an overall sense of where they sit in the supply chain. However, as
you testified, CISA has no authority to compel any organization to turn
over this information.
How can CISA purport to understand the universe of assets and
entities most critical to regional and National security--and the
systemic cyber risks they face--without reliable access to information
on the security posture and supply chains of SIEs?
Question 1b. Is there any other information that CISA needs in
order to fully assess an SIE's relative security risk or vulnerability?
Question 1c. If Congress were to grant CISA broader compulsory
authorities, how might CISA leverage these data streams to better
understand and reduce systemic risks?
Question 1d. Would this include an understanding of the security
measures critical entities have in place? Their vendors or supply
chains? Or any other critical information that could be needed to fully
assess an SIE's relative security risk or vulnerability?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. We know that CISA currently maintains a National Asset
Database. You noted in your testimony that through your research, you
found that no more than 14 States ever provided input to CISA related
to the National Asset Database.
What does CISA intend to do to ensure that this stakeholder input
from the State and local levels is improved and appreciated?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3a. Earlier this year Congress passed legislation
requiring certain critical infrastructure owners and operators to
report major cyber incidents to CISA pursuant to rules set forth by
CISA in an upcoming rulemaking. However, it may take years for these
rules to go into effect. Recognizing the urgency of the current threat
landscape, Congress also directed CISA to stand up voluntary reporting
mechanisms that organizations can use to report cyber incidents and
other threat information today, in lieu of formal requirements. CISA
has been encouraging entities to report cyber incidents and other
anomalous activity through those voluntary channels--particularly in
response to potential escalation of Russian cyber threats.
How many voluntary reports has CISA received since this legislation
was enacted in March--and from how many entities? Would you
characterize this as an uptick in reporting, or is it on par with the
past reporting levels?
Question 3b. How would you describe the nature and usefulness of
the information CISA is receiving through this voluntary reporting?
Question 3c. How has CISA acted on the information it has received?
For instance, has CISA used technical data to detect malicious cyber
activity across sectors or inform guidance that can be disseminated
broadly?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. In light of the March 21 announcement by the President
on the evolving intelligence concerning a potential cyber threat from
Russia, and the accompanying White House fact sheet encouraging U.S.
critical infrastructure entities, technology and software companies to
increasingly incorporate security by design, automation, a Software
Bill of Materials and undertake other efforts to improve security of
software development, what role do you see for CISA and/or ONCD in
ensuring Infrastructure Investment & Jobs Act funding is implemented
with the greatest attention paid to the cybersecurity standards and
requirements built into it?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. The recent ``Shields Up'' warnings from CISA reinforce
that today's threat landscape demands the most proactive posture
possible. What's a recent example of operational collaboration between
the private sector and the U.S. Government giving us advanced warning
before the Russian military invasion in Ukraine about the nature of
Russian cyber aggression we could reasonably expect and the
sophistication of those actors?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for Eric Goldstein
Question 1a. On page 2 of your testimony, the last paragraph
begins: ``In the past year, CISA has made significant strides in this
respect, particularly through the establishment of the Joint Cyber
Defense Collaborative (JCDC) and our CISA Cybersecurity Advisory
Committee (CSAC). These groups are examples of CISA's agency-wide
dedication to operational collaboration and deep partnership, which is
imbued across our mission divisions. By leveraging the expertise and
unique authorities of Government and the private sector, CISA is
better-positioned to connect with our stakeholders in industry and
Government to share resources, analyses, and tools.''
Can you give examples of the ``significant strides'' that CISA has
made through the establishment of the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative
(JCDC) and our CISA Cybersecurity Advisory Committee (CSAC)?
Question 1b. Is the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative in
authorization language?
Question 1c. What industries, entities, or institutions are part of
the stakeholders who are building their own cyber, communications, and
physical security and resilience efforts?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. On page 3 of your statement, you state that: ``Our
work has taken on increased urgency subsequent to Russia's unprovoked
invasion of Ukraine. CISA has been working closely with our critical
infrastructure partners over the past several months to ensure
awareness of potential threats.''
What are examples of the cause for the increased urgency due to
Russia's unprovoked invasion of Ukraine?
Question 2b. How have critical infrastructure owners and operators
responded to the call ``to adopt a heightened security posture in light
of President Biden's statement that intelligence shows Russia may be
exploring options for potential cyber attacks. As part of our broader
`Shields Up' effort . . . ''?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. In your testimony, on page 3, you say, ``The JCDC
operating model relies on regular analytic and data exchanges to enable
common situational awareness and equip public and private-sector
partners to take risk-informed coordinated action for our collective
defense.'' I am aware that at the onset of the Federal Government's
focus on getting better collaboration and cooperation from private-
sector critical infrastructure owners and operators that there were
rough patches.
How would you characterize the cooperation and engagement of
private-sector partners?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. You mentioned the critical importance of the Log4j
incident in moving stakeholders toward better cooperation. Your
testimony states, ``having built trust and strengthened relationships
with our partners during our response to the Log4j incident . . . ''.
How did this incident make the difference in what the program is
able to accomplish today?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Ranking Member John Katko for Eric Goldstein
Question 1. The administration has identified some sectors, and
specifically the energy sector, as at risk from ``evolving'' Russian
cyber threats. How is CISA, as the Sector Risk Management Agency (SRMA)
for 9 critical infrastructure sectors, leveraging independent and
third-party data, like security ratings, to provide baseline cyber risk
assessments to these sectors?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Does CISA continuously monitor the cyber health of a
given sector, or does CISA rely on a different means of assessing the
cyber health of a sector? How does CISA leverage new tools and
capabilities like security ratings to automate this task, and to see
sector-wide cybersecurity risks in real time?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. Can you describe the process and criteria that CISA is
using to evaluate endpoint detection and response (EDR) products as it
works to fulfill the requirements laid out by EO 14028 for a centrally
located EDR initiative? What are CISA's plans to ensure that a clear
process is in place and what are the time lines for doing so?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. In light of the March 21 announcement by the President
on the evolving intelligence concerning a potential cyber threat from
Russia, and the accompanying White House fact sheet encouraging U.S.
critical infrastructure entities, technology and software companies to
increasingly incorporate security by design, automation, a Software
Bill of Materials and undertake other efforts to improve security of
software development, what role do you see for CISA and/or ONCD in
ensuring Infrastructure Investment & Jobs Act funding is implemented
with the greatest attention paid to the cybersecurity standards and
requirements built into it?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. DoD has recently launched several initiatives to
improve Defense Industrial Base security. DoD is leveraging the same
technology that is used to harden the .mil to provide outside-in
visibility into the resilience of these industry stakeholders that play
equally central roles in our National security.
What are CISA's plans to leverage similar attack surface management
capability for a strategic National snapshot and proactive
vulnerability notification across the entire critical infrastructure
community?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Ralph Norman for Eric Goldstein
Question 1a. This committee has addressed at length the increasing
threat that cyber attacks pose to our National security and the privacy
and security of American workers and families served by businesses
large and small around the country. The concern I'd like to raise is
one of regulatory fragmentation. Congress recently passed the Cyber
Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act as part of the
recent Omnibus to require covered entities to notify CISA of cyber
attacks within 72 hours. The problem is that multiple Federal
regulators can require firms to notify them of the exact same cyber
incident that CISA also requires notification for. For instance, with
CISA notification requirements and similar proposed and final cyber
incident rulemakings by multiple Federal and State regulators, one firm
experiencing a single cybersecurity incident would likely have to
notify several different Federal regulators of that same incident right
in the middle of a tumultuous period in which covered entities should
first and foremost be tending to the interests, privacy, and security
of their customers and consumers. This regulatory fragmentation
undermines Federal efforts and the efforts of covered entities under
the law to respond in real time to and guard against cyber attacks. The
Cyber Incident Reporting Act requires the DHS Secretary to lead a Cyber
Incident Reporting Council to harmonize Federal reporting requirements
and identify opportunities to streamline that reporting process.
How does CISA plan to streamline its cyber incident notification
process to avoid regulatory fragmentation and ensure a single Federal
notification procedure?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1b. How are you going to ensure that covered entities
under the law do not have to notify multiple regulators of the same
cyber incident in the middle of doing what they need to protect their
customers?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Robert K. Knake
Question 1a. In his testimony and responses to Member questions,
Mr. Goldstein described the Systemically Important Entity process as an
``evolution'' or ``maturation'' of the Section 9 [of Executive Order
13636] list, with a goal of driving ``operational collaboration'' and
understanding Systemically Important Entities' ``dependencies and
supply chains to reduce their risk going forward.''
Is it CISA's/ONCD's goal to codify the framework established in
Section 9 of Executive Order 13636?
Question 1b. Section 10 of Executive Order 13636 directed Federal
agencies to engage in a review of ``the preliminary Cybersecurity
Framework and determine if current cybersecurity regulatory
requirements are sufficient given current and projected risks,'' among
other things. Did Section 10 of Executive Order 13636 result in the
imposition of any new security obligations on Section 9 companies? If
so, please describe. If not, why not? In light of the current threat
environment, is the administration revisiting the analysis described by
Section 10?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. At the hearing Mr. Goldstein testified: ``We certainly
envision the Systemically Important Entity (SIE) process as an
evolution or maturation of the Section 9 list. We're tying the list to
National critical functions, and focusing on cascading a systemic
impact will be an improvement over the Section 9 process and allow us
to drive operational collaboration more effectively.''
Please provide a description of the methodology CISA currently uses
to identify SIEs, and describe how it differs from the methodology used
in Section 9 designations.
Question 2b. Do you anticipate that tying the Systemically
Important Entity list to National Critical Functions will result in a
list of entities that differs significantly from the existing list of
Section 9 entities? Or do you anticipate that the National Critical
Functions analysis will drive analysis of interdependencies among SIEs?
Question 2c. Are there Section 9 entities that you do not believe
will identified as Systemically Important Entities because the analysis
is tied to National Critical Functions?
Question 2d. As the SIE process continues to evolve, do you
anticipate identifying ``tiers'' of Systemically Important Entities to
reflect both an entity's systemic importance and the sophistication
with which it can operationally collaborate with the Federal
Government?
Question 2e. How many SIEs has CISA currently identified? Please
provide a breakdown of such list by sector, the number of SIEs
currently enrolled in CISA programs and services, the number of
currently engaged in operational collaboration with CISA, and any other
information that would be helpful to characterize CISA's current
understanding of SIEs.
Question 2f. What information does CISA need in order to fully and
accurately identify and understand systemic risks to SIEs, and where
does that information originate? What data sources is CISA currently
able to leverage to carry out this work, and what data is CISA
currently unable to obtain?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3a. The Cyberspace Solarium Commission (CSC) recommended
Congress codify a new designation for SICI. The concept behind SICI is
that certain entities--those that operate our most vital systems and
assets--should be granted special assistance from the U.S. Government
and should be expected shoulder additional security and information-
sharing requirements befitting their unique status and importance.
If Congress were to create a regime that aligns as closely as
possible to the CSC's proposal (i.e., a designation that comes with
benefits and burdens), what are the most critical, impactful programs
or partnership models that Congress should consider for purposes of
mandating participation from designates entities? What types of
information should be shared?
Question 3b. Are there authorities CISA currently lacks that it
would need if Congress were to decide to mandate such participation,
collaboration, or sharing?
Question 3c. Assuming there are no changes to CISA's current
funding levels, does CISA have the resources, personnel, and overall
capacity to scale up these services beyond what is being offered now--
and at what point would additional resources be required to meet
heightened demand?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. If Congress were to codify the concept of SICI/SIEs
without adding any additional requirements on designated entities, how
would that list be different from the Section 9 program?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairwoman Yvette D. Clarke for Robert K. Knake
Question 1. In response to Member questions, you observed that many
entities that would be classified as SICI/SIEs are very well-resourced
organizations, with their own red teaming and threat-hunting
capabilities. However, a major roadblock for these entities is that
they cannot collect intelligence in the way the U.S. intelligence
community can.
What is the ONCD's stance on the creation of a Joint Collaborative
Environment, which would allow for these entities to participate in a
collaborative environment where it can be trusted that the information
being shared there between the public and private sectors can be
secured?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. How is ONCD working with CISA to develop a greater
understanding of potential additional authorities that could help CISA
conduct its SIE process and its collaboration with key sector partners?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. In light of the March 21 announcement by the President
on the evolving intelligence concerning a potential cyber threat from
Russia, and the accompanying White House fact sheet encouraging U.S.
critical infrastructure entities, technology, and software companies to
increasingly incorporate security by design, automation, a Software
Bill of Materials and undertake other efforts to improve security of
software development, what role do you see for CISA and/or ONCD in
ensuring Infrastructure Investment & Jobs Act funding is implemented
with the greatest attention paid to the cybersecurity standards and
requirements built into it?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for Robert K. Knake
Question 1. In your testimony you speak about how Russia's
unprovoked aggression against Ukraine is causing heightened threats
against U.S. cyber interest.
Has this link between the desire by a Nation that they may
anticipate will be opposed by the United States resulted in cyber
attack in the past?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. Russia interfered in the U.S. Presidential elections
in 2016 and again in 2020. A Russia hacker group is said to have
attacked Colonial Pipeline.
Are we seeing official and unofficial Russia-based attacks without
seeing a link between the two types of threats?
Question 2b. Is it true that the coding style used to construct
cyber attacks can indicate their source?
Question 2c. How reliably can we track and assign attribution for
attacks?
Question 2d. Have we been doing enough to raise the cost of attacks
to make the ransomware less attractive as a tool for theft?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3a. On page 6 you stated in your testimony: ``Recognizing
the unique risks presented in cyber space for the conflict to spill out
of Ukraine and onto our shores, the Federal Government has also
partnered with industry on tabletop exercises, bringing important
critical infrastructure stakeholders''.
Are we at risk of being pulled into a virtual conflict over
Russia's brutal war against Ukraine and if yes, what would that look
like?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question From Honorable James R. Langevin for Robert K. Knake
Question. Based on the testimony we heard, it's clear that the
CISA's Systemically Important Entities effort is engaged in a rigorous
identification process. But the next steps of what to do with its list
appear less clear to me than the Solarium Commission's vision for SICI,
which calls for specific benefits and obligations to SICI entities.
While an accurate identification process is important, we must also
have a clear picture of the policies and strategies that will govern
and strengthen the partnership between the Federal Government and our
most critical of critical infrastructure entities.
If CISA develops a list of systemically important entities, what
does the administration plan to do with it? How would factors like
cyber maturity, as we discussed, play a role in where and how the
Government would prioritize its efforts to partner with critical
infrastructure owners and operators?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question From Ranking Member John Katko for Robert K. Knake
Question. In light of the March 21 announcement by the President on
the evolving intelligence concerning a potential cyber threat from
Russia, and the accompanying White House fact sheet encouraging U.S.
critical infrastructure entities, technology, and software companies to
increasingly incorporate security by design, automation, a Software
Bill of Materials and undertake other efforts to improve security of
software development, what role do you see for CISA and/or ONCD in
ensuring Infrastructure Investment & Jobs Act funding is implemented
with the greatest attention paid to the cybersecurity standards and
requirements built into it?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairwoman Yvette D. Clarke for Tina Won Sherman
Question 1. The National Infrastructure Protection Plan was last
updated in 2013. This hold-up has led to SRMAs not updating their
Sector-Specific Plans until the National Infrastructure Protection Plan
update occurs.
Dr. Sherman, how has this delay in updating the National
Infrastructure Protection Plan hindered SRMA efforts to protect the
critical infrastructure sectors they work with? What has the impact
been on CISA's ability to protect U.S. critical infrastructure?
Answer. The 2013 National Infrastructure Protection Plan's lack of
a recent update has led to limitations for Sector Risk Management
Agencies (SRMAs)--the Federal departments charged with providing
critical infrastructure sector owner/operators with specialized
expertise--in two ways.
First, SRMAs and CISA have no updated guidance for how best to
modify their activities, if needed, in response to requirements for
SRMAs in the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021,
such as supporting National risk assessment efforts and contributing to
critical infrastructure owner/operator emergency preparedness.\1\ As
part of GAO's on-going review evaluating SRMA responsibilities, GAO is
examining whether SRMA's have sufficient guidance from the Department
of Homeland Security on approaches for addressing such
responsibilities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See 6 U.S.C.  665d.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, the 2013 National Infrastructure Protection Plan calls for
SRMAs to update their sector-specific plans on a regular basis.
However, SRMAs were without a recent update of the 2013 plan to help
guide sector-specific plan revisions. CISA reported in November 2021
that most SRMAs updated their respective sector-specific plans
following the publication of the 2013 National Plan and those sector-
specific plans currently serve as the strategic guidance for the
sectors. However, given the passage of time since these plans were
published, they may not reflect the current threat environment. For
example, as GAO reported in November 2021, CISA had not updated the
2015 Communications Sector-Specific Plan.\2\ As a result, the 2015 plan
lacked information on new and emerging threats to the Communications
Sector, such as security threats to the communications technology
supply chain, and disruptions to position, navigation, and timing
services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: CISA Should Assess the
Effectiveness of its Actions to Support the Communications Sector, GAO-
22-104462 (Washington, DC: Nov. 23, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 2. Dr. Sherman, we know that CISA currently maintains a
National Asset Database. You noted in your testimony that through your
research, you found that no more than 14 States ever provided input to
CISA related to the National Asset Database.
Why have so few States provided input to CISA regarding this
database?
Answer. CISA data showed that from fiscal years 2017 through 2021,
no more than 14 States (of 56 States and territories) provided new
nominations or updates to the National Critical Infrastructure
Prioritization Program in any given fiscal year.\3\ State officials GAO
interviewed questioned the program's usefulness, which may lead to less
State participation. Of the 6 State homeland security agencies GAO
contacted, only one reported regularly using the program list.
Officials from these 6 State agencies also questioned the list's
accuracy, and most said that they did not use the list to inform risk
communication or influence decisions. Officials from 3 of 6 State
agencies said that there were assets on the list that were not critical
to their States. Some of the State officials also said that the
infrastructure on the list seemed inconsistent from State to State and
that the criteria for adding assets were highly subjective, making the
list generally unreliable, in their view.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The Implementing Recommendations of the 9/11 Commission Act
required the Secretary of Homeland Security to establish and maintain a
single prioritized list of systems and assets in a National database
that the Secretary determines would, if destroyed or disrupted, cause
National or regional catastrophic effects. See 6 U.S.C.  664.
Consistent with this requirement, DHS developed the National Critical
Infrastructure Prioritization Program.
\4\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: CISA Should Improve
Priority Setting, Stakeholder Involvement, and Threat Information
Sharing, GAO-22-104279, (Washington, DC: Mar. 1, 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, critical infrastructure officials, including State
officials, GAO interviewed questioned the present-day relevance of the
criteria for adding infrastructure to the program list, another reason
for limited State participation. Specifically, to be included on the
program's Level 1 list (its highest consequence list), an asset's
destruction or disruption must meet minimum specified consequence
thresholds for at least 2 of the following 4 categories: Economic loss,
fatalities, mass evacuation length, and degradation of National
security. Senior officials with CISA, as well as other Federal, State,
and private-sector officials GAO spoke with, said that the consequence
thresholds for these criteria did not reflect the threat environment
today, which focuses more on cyber attacks and extreme weather events.
The current day threat environment also focuses on vulnerabilities or
attacks that can affect multiple entities within a short period. In
this scenario, the consequences related to a single asset, entity,
system, or cluster may not reach program thresholds, but the aggregate
impacts may be nationally significant, according to CISA officials.
Questions From Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for Tina Won Sherman
Question 1. You begin your testimony with the statement: ``To
improve critical infrastructure security, key actions Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) needs to take include: (1) Strengthening the
Federal role in protecting the cybersecurity of critical infrastructure
and (2) improving priority-setting efforts.'' Excerpt from your
testimony: ``Strengthen the Federal role in protecting the
cybersecurity of critical infrastructure. Pursuant to legislation
enacted in 2018, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
(CISA) within DHS was charged with responsibility for enhancing the
security of the Nation's critical infrastructure in the face of both
physical and cyber threats. In March 2021, GAO reported that DHS needed
to complete key activities related to the transformation of CISA. This
includes finalizing the agency's mission-essential functions and
completing workforce planning activities. GAO also reported that DHS
needed to address challenges identified by selected critical
infrastructure stakeholders, including having consistent stakeholder
involvement in the development of related guidance. Accordingly, GAO
made 11 recommendations to DHS, which the Department intends to
implement by end of 2022. Improve priority setting efforts. Through the
National Critical Infrastructure Prioritization Program, CISA is to
identify a list of systems and assets that, if destroyed or disrupted,
would cause National or regional catastrophic effects. Consistent with
the Implementing Recommendations of the 9/11 Commission Act of 2007,
CISA annually updates and prioritizes the list. The program's list is
used to inform the awarding of preparedness grants to States. However,
in March 2022, GAO reported that 9 of 12 CISA officials and all 10 of
the infrastructure stakeholders GAO interviewed questioned the
relevance and usefulness of the program. For example, stakeholders
questioned the current relevance of the criteria used to add critical
infrastructure to the Prioritization Program list. In 2019, CISA
published a set of 55 National critical functions of the Government and
private sector considered vital to the security, economy, and public
health and safety of the Nation (see figure). However, most of the
Federal and non-Federal critical infrastructure stakeholders that GAO
interviewed reported being generally uninvolved with, unaware of, or
without an understanding of the goals of the framework for its critical
functions. GAO made recommendations to DHS in its March 2022 report to
address these concerns, such as ensuring stakeholders are fully engaged
in the framework's implementation, and DHS agreed with the
recommendations.''
I have stressed the need for hyper focus on protecting the Nation's
critical infrastructure for well over a decade.
Today, as we watch Russia's total disregard for human life--men,
women, children, and the elderly are being slaughtered before our eyes.
It is clear that there are no rules of engagement, no Geneva Convention
fears that will save any of us should Russia engage in a full onslaught
against domestic critical infrastructure.
Are we at a point where everyone, private sector, public sector,
National security, and law enforcement are on the same page when we
talk about the importance of critical infrastructure cyber defense?
Answer. The John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for
Fiscal Year 2019 created the Cyberspace Solarium Commission to develop
consensus on a strategic approach to defending the United States
against cyber attacks of significant consequences.\5\ The commission's
March 2020 report was based on collaboration with a wide range of
critical infrastructure stakeholders, including private sector, public
sector, National security, and law enforcement officials. The report
highlighted the importance of critical infrastructure cyber defense and
identified approaches for improving the Federal role in leading
collaborative cybersecurity efforts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Pub. L. No. 115-232,  1652, 132 Stat. 1636, 2140 (2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, a recent Executive Order and GAO's work on high-risk
issues facing the Federal Government have identified cybersecurity as a
National priority. The May 2021 Executive Order on Improving the
Nation's Cybersecurity recognized that persistent and increasingly
sophisticated malicious cyber campaigns threaten the public sector, the
private sector, and ultimately the American people's security and
privacy.\6\ The Executive Order called for improvements in the Federal
Government's efforts to identify, deter, protect against, detect, and
respond to these actions and actors. In its March 2021 High-Risk
report, GAO also identified the importance of addressing 4 major
cybersecurity challenges and 10 associated critical actions, shown in
the figure below.\7\ Although the Federal Government has made selected
improvements, it needs to move with a greater sense of urgency
commensurate with the rapidly-evolving and grave threats to the
country.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Exec. Order No. 14,028, 86 Fed. Reg. 26,633 (May 17, 2021).
\7\ GAO, High-Risk Series: Federal Government Needs to Urgently
Pursue Critical Actions to Address Major Cybersecurity Challenges, GAO-
21-288 (Washington, DC: Mar. 24, 2021).

In recent years, GAO has also identified several specific areas of
stakeholder cybersecurity engagement in need of improvement:

National Critical Infrastructure Prioritization Program.--
Through the National Critical Infrastructure Prioritization
Program, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
(CISA) is to identify a list of systems and assets that, if
destroyed or disrupted, would cause National or regional
catastrophic effects. State officials nominate systems and
assets for inclusion on this list. GAO's March 2022 report
found that CISA and other stakeholders questioned the present-
day relevance of NCIPP criteria for adding infrastructure to
the list.\8\ For example, senior officials with CISA, as well
as other Federal, State, and private-sector officials GAO spoke
with, said that the consequence thresholds for the criteria did
not reflect the threat environment today, which focuses more on
cyber attacks and extreme weather events.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ GAO-22-104279.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pipeline security.--DHS oversees pipeline security for the
Federal Government, providing both voluntary guidance and
required cybersecurity measures for pipeline owner/operators.
DHS prioritizes its outreach to pipeline owner/operators based
on a risk assessment. GAO reported in December 2018 that DHS's
pipeline risk assessments were missing key inputs, including a
measure of cybersecurity vulnerabilities.\9\ Pipeline owner/
operators will likely receive more targeted guidance if DHS
collected more information from owner/operators on
cybersecurity vulnerabilities as part of its risk-ranking
effort.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: Actions Needed to
Address Significant Weaknesses in TSA's Pipeline Security Program
Management, GAO-19-48 (Washington, DC: Dec. 18, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chemical security.--The Department of Homeland Security's
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards program reviews
high-risk chemical facilities for adherence to security
standards, including cybersecurity performance standards. GAO
reported in May 2020 that the program had yet to incorporate
identified cybersecurity knowledge, skills, and abilities for
inspectors in its workforce planning processes or track data
related to covered facilities' reliance on information systems
when assessing its workforce needs.\10\ Chemical facility
owner/operators will likely receive higher-quality inspections
if planning for DHS's inspector workforce includes attention to
cybersecurity competencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: Actions Needed to
Enhance DHS Oversight of Cybersecurity at High-Risk Chemical
Facilities, GAO-20-453 (Washington, DC: May 14, 2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 2. Is the GAO tracking how collaborations on the issue of
cybersecurity of critical infrastructure is being translated into
concrete improvements?
Answer. Since 2010, GAO has made about 80 recommendations for
various agencies to enhance infrastructure cybersecurity.\11\ For
example, in February 2020, GAO recommended that agencies better measure
the adoption of the National Institute of Standards and Technology
framework of voluntary cyber standards and correct sector-specific
weaknesses. Specifically, GAO reported that most Sector Risk Management
Agencies were not collecting and reporting on improvements in the
protection of critical infrastructure as a result of using the
framework across the sectors.\12\ Therefore, GAO made 10
recommendations--one to the National Institute of Standards and
Technology on establishing time frames for completing selected
programs--and 9 to the lead agencies, to collect and report on
improvements gained from using the framework. Eight of these agencies
agreed with the recommendations, while one neither agreed nor disagreed
and one partially agreed. However, as of November 2021, none of the
recommendations had been implemented. Until the lead agencies collect
and report on improvements gained from adopting the framework, the
extent to which the 16 critical infrastructure sectors are better
protecting their critical infrastructure from threats will be largely
unknown. GAO reiterated these recommendations in February 2022.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ GAO, High-Risk Series: Federal Government Needs to Urgently
Pursue Critical Actions to Address Major Cybersecurity Challenges, GAO-
21-288 (Washington, DC: Mar. 24, 2021).
\12\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: Additional Actions
Needed to Identify Framework Adoption and Resulting Improvements, GAO-
20-299 (Washington, DC: Apr. 9, 2020).
\13\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: Agencies Need to
Assess Adoption of Cybersecurity Guidance, GAO-22-105103 (Washington,
DC: Feb. 9, 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
GAO has also reported on the need for lead agencies to enhance the
cybersecurity of their critical infrastructure sectors and subsectors--
such as communications, energy, education, financial services, and
transportation systems.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ See, for example, GAO, Cybersecurity: Federal Actions Urgently
Needed to Better Protect the Nation's Critical Infrastructure, GAO-22-
105530 (Washington, DC: Dec. 2, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 3. The GAO is well-suited to collecting data and reporting
on the progress of regulatory and legislative intent for a broad range
of policy issues. Does GAO have the resources needed to keep pace with
the DHS's expanded focus on cybersecurity and cyber defense?
In March 2022, GAO released its strategic plan for fiscal years
2022 through 2027 along with reports on the key efforts GAO expects to
cover during this period, as well as current trends affecting
Government and society.\15\ One of GAO's key goals is to help Congress
respond to changing security threats and the challenges of global
interdependence. Among other things, key efforts related to this goal
focus on assessing cyber risks to the security and resilience of the
Nation's critical infrastructure and assessing DHS's efforts to manage
risks and share information with public and private-sector partners to
protect the Nation's critical infrastructure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ GAO, Strategic Plan 2022-2027, GAO-22-1SP (Washington, DC:
Mar. 15, 2022); GAO, Key Efforts 2022-2027, GAO-22-2SP (Washington, DC:
Mar. 15, 2022); and GAO, Trends Affecting Government and Society, GAO-
22-3SP (Washington, DC: Mar. 15, 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In April 2022, the Comptroller General of the United States
testified on the subject of GAO's budget request of $810.3 million for
fiscal year 2023.\16\ This budget request will enable GAO to increase
capabilities associated with growing cybersecurity developments and
complex National security issues, among other topics. Given the
critical importance of these topics, GAO is continuing to grow its
workforce for cybersecurity and National security. For example, on
April 20, 2022, GAO posted an announcement for multiple senior analyst
positions focusing on National security. Further, GAO's growing cyber
expertise includes its Center for Enhanced Cybersecurity, a dedicated
group of cyber professionals that could delve into the technical
details of agency systems and networks and identify underlying
persistent cybersecurity weaknesses. As networks and information
systems have become more elaborate, diverse, and interconnected, GAO
has recognized the need to cultivate a center of excellence to conduct
in-depth technical audits.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ GAO Budget, Before House Appropriations Committee,
Subcommittee on Legislative Branch, 117th Cong. (2022) (Statement of
Comptroller Gen. of the United States Gene L. Dodaro). Accessed April
28, 2022, https://plus.cq.com/doc/testimony-6503637?2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, GAO has reported that key actions DHS needs to take
include strengthening the Federal role in protecting the cybersecurity
of critical infrastructure and improving priority-setting efforts.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: DHS Actions Urgently
Needed to Better Protect the Nation's Critical Infrastructure, GAO-22-
105973 (Washington, DC: Apr. 6, 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

[all]
