- CURRENT STATUS OF ISIS AND AL-QAEDA

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CURRENT STATUS OF ISIS AND AL-QAEDA

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INTELLIGENCE AND
COUNTERTERRORISM

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 15, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-62

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

48-796     WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            John Katko, New York
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island      Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Clay Higgins, Louisiana
J. Luis Correa, California           Michael Guest, Mississippi
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri            Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Al Green, Texas                      Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
Yvette D. Clarke, New York           Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Eric Swalwell, California            Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
Dina Titus, Nevada                   Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey    Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Peter Meijer, Michigan
Val Butler Demings, Florida          Kat Cammack, Florida
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California    August Pfluger, Texas
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          Andrew R. Garbarino, New York
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Vacancy
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey
Ritchie Torres, New York
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Daniel Kroese, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Committee Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND COUNTERTERRORISM

Elissa Slotkin, Michigan, Chairwoman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            August Pfluger, Texas, Ranking
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island          Member
Eric Swalwell, California            Michael Guest, Mississippi
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey           Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex  Peter Meijer, Michigan
officio)                         John Katko, New York (ex officio)
Brittany Carr, Subcommittee Staff Director
Adrienne Spero, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
Joy Zieh, Subcommittee Clerk
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Elissa Slotkin, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Michigan, and Chairwoman, Subcommittee on
Intelligence and Counterterrorism:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable August Pfluger, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Intelligence and Counterterrorism:
Oral Statement.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

Witnesses

Mr. Damon Stevens, Assistant Director, Strategic Operational
Planning, National Counterterrorism Center, Office of the
Director of National Intelligence:
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Damon Stevens...     9
Ms. Samantha Vinograd, Acting Assistant Secretary,
Counterterrorism and Threat Prevention, Office of Strategy,
Policy, and Plans, U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Samantha
Vinograd.....................................................     9
Mr. Timothy Langan, Assistant Director, Counterterrorism
Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation:
Questions From Ranking Member August Pfluger for Timothy Langan    10

CURRENT STATUS OF ISIS AND AL-QAEDA

----------

Wednesday, June 15, 2022

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Intelligence
and Counterterrorism,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Elissa Slotkin
[Chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Slotkin, Jackson Lee, Langevin,
Malinowski, Pfluger, and Van Drew.
Ms. Slotkin. The Subcommittee on Intelligence will be in
order. The subcommittee is meeting today on the current status
of ISIS and al-Qaeda.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare the
subcommittee in recess at any point. I now recognize myself for
a brief opening statement.
Look, in the midst of addressing emerging threats in the
homeland, including, you know, all the things that are going on
in our own country, our political landscape, our domestic
terrorism concerns, we--the targeting of religious
institutions, hate crimes, those things, cyber attacks, the
role of cryptocurrency and new technologies, new avenues for
bad guys to use new technology, I think it is important that we
not lose sight of the threat posed by foreign terrorist groups
like ISIS and al-Qaeda.
This one is important to me in particular, given my
background at the CIA and at the Pentagon, and at the CIA in
particular, being an Iraq analyst by training and spending a
lot of time looking at these groups and thinking about all the
different ways they were trying to attack the homeland.
We now, you know, have affiliates of these organizations
across the Middle East, in Africa, and South Asia. We know that
ISIS and al-Qaeda continue to plan and plot and fundraise and
recruit.
We know that the withdrawal of Afghanistan has really
changed the threat landscape and made this a bigger concern, I
think, because of the inability to truly have good eyes and
ears on the ground. We have heard from senior officials from
DHS here in this committee, from the FBI, the intelligence
community that currently, the most lethal threat facing the
American public is from domestic violent extremists, you know,
our fellow citizens, as we saw a couple weeks ago in Buffalo.
While that poses a lethal threat, I think it is important
that we not--that we be able to walk and chew gum and also look
at the foreign terrorist threats that are still important for
our security.
We now are 20 years past the attack on 9/11, almost 25
years since our embassies were bombed in East Africa, in Kenya
and Tanzania, and 30 years since the World Trade Center was
bombed for the first time.
Terrorist tactics have really evolved over that time, from
truck bombs and airplanes used as missiles and bombs being
hidden in printer cartridges, and improvised armed drones. I
mean, we have really seen them evolve.
What has not changed is that the United States is an
outsized target, an appetizing target for terrorists. They
still seek to attack us, to attack our allies, to attack our
American citizens and facilities abroad.
While we are going to move this subcommittee hearing to a
closed session so that we can really dig into the details, I
want the American public to be clear-eyed about the persistent
terrorist threat to the United States and that it hasn't gone
away simply because the news isn't covering every day.
In the 2022 Annual Threat Assessment, the Office of the DNI
describes ISIS, al-Qaeda, and other foreign terrorist groups as
likely posing the greatest threat to Americans while they are
outside of our borders, further describes these groups as
having been degraded over time, but still able to carry out--
having a vision of carrying out a strike on the U.S. homeland.
We know that our Armed Forces and our intelligence
community work diligently, quietly every day, in a way that
American citizens have no idea, to put out those flames of
terrorism. Those embers will likely persist into the
foreseeable future, so hence, today's hearing.
We are going to receive a Classified briefing from the
Department of Homeland Security and from the National
Counterterrorism Center, as well as the FBI, and get their
assessment of the threat currently posed by ISIS and al-Qaeda.
I am looking forward to the hearing and how these agencies
are collaborating from the intelligence and information-sharing
angle, but also on securing travel and keeping cyber space safe
from terrorists, and then how they are taking advantage of new
technologies, like cryptocurrencies, as the hearing we had a
few weeks ago.
[The statement of Chairwoman Slotkin follows:]
Statement of Chairwoman Elissa Slotkin
June 15, 2022
In the midst of addressing emerging threats to the homeland,
including the divisiveness from an increased polarization of the
political landscape; domestic terrorist events, particularly targeting
protests and religious institutions; and the seemingly never-ending
spate of cyber attacks; it can be easy to lose sight of more long-
standing threats, like those posed by foreign terrorist groups like
ISIS and al-Qaeda.
But through affiliates in several countries across the Middle East,
Africa, and South Asia, ISIS and al-Qaeda are planning, plotting,
fundraising, recruiting, and carrying out attacks. And the abrupt
withdrawal of the United States from Afghanistan has only made this
threat worse.
In this committee, we have heard from senior officials at DHS, the
FBI, and the intelligence community that currently the most lethal
threat the American public faces is from domestic violent extremists--
our fellow citizens who have resorted to violence in furtherance of
various agendas. Although domestic violent extremists pose the most
lethal threat, it is not the only threat.
As a former CIA officer and Pentagon official, I am keenly aware of
the destruction ISIS and al-Qaeda can leave in their wake. And I know
that we must remain vigilant and stay one step ahead of terrorist
plotting.
We are now more than 20 years past the attack on the World Trade
Center and the Pentagon. It has been almost 25 years since our
embassies were bombed in East Africa, and nearly 30 years since the
World Trade Center was bombed for the first time.
Terrorists' tactics have evolved over this time period--from truck
bombs and then airplanes used as missiles to bombs being hidden in
printer cartridges and improvised armed drones.
But what has not changed is that America is an outsized target.
While the subcommittee will soon move to close the hearing and
today's testimony will be received in a Classified setting so that my
fellow Members can hear a detailed assessment of the threat posed by
ISIS, al-Qaeda, and their affiliates--I want the American public to be
clear-eyed about the persistent terrorist threat to America.
In its 2022 Annual Threat Assessment, the Office of the Director of
National Intelligence describes ISIS, al-Qaeda, and other foreign
terrorist groups as likely posing the greatest threat to Americans
while outside of our borders. It further describes these groups as
having been degraded over time but still having a vision of carrying
out a strike on the U.S. homeland.
While the brave men and women of our Armed Forces and our
intelligence community work diligently, every day, to put out the
flames of terrorism--these embers will likely persist for the
foreseeable future.
Hence, we are having today's hearing--to receive the Department of
Homeland Security's, the National Counterterrorism Center's (NCTC), and
the Federal Bureau of Investigation's assessment of the threat
currently posed by ISIS and al-Qaeda and how they view the trajectory
of the threat.
I am also looking forward to hearing how the agencies are
collaborating, from the intelligence and information-sharing angle as
well as from the perspective of securing international travel and
keeping cyber space safe from terrorist recruitment, training, and
fundraising.
I am concerned that terrorists may also take advantage of new
technologies, such as cryptocurrencies, to help fund their efforts and
further their violent agenda and extremist ideologies, and am
interested in understanding how we are combating the illicit uses of
these technologies.
I hope today's hearing improves our understanding of the threat and
gives us the information we need to support your missions.

Ms. Slotkin. So I hope the hearing today is a good way to
help deepen our understanding on this committee, and I now
recognize the Ranking Member from the subcommittee, the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Pfluger, for an opening statement.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Chairwoman Slotkin, for holding
this, what I would call, most important hearing today, and
thank you to our witnesses for joining.
This is a topic that not only the Chairwoman is familiar
with, but also myself. As an F-22 pilot, somebody who has
served abroad in many different theaters, I have spent
literally my entire professional career looking at threats that
are facing the United States, and have spent an enormous amount
of time specifically focused on foreign terrorists.
You know, as I spent the year of 2016 to 2017 deployed to
the Middle East, fighting directly against ISIS, I have seen
and witnessed with my own eyes the tragedies and the horrific
realities that these terrorist organizations bring, not only to
the region that they were in at that time, to the Middle East,
but also their desire.
As the Chairwoman said, the appetite is there, the desire
and the intent are absolutely there. It is not going away. I
think that this is an important hearing to underscore that
importance and to make sure that all Americans know the
difference between this foreign terrorist threat and what it
poses to our country and what the end-state is versus the
domestic threat that we keep hearing about.
Looking at where we stand today, it has been nearly a year
since the incredibly disastrous withdrawal from Afghanistan.
The Taliban has been able to quickly reassert control over the
country for the first time in 20 years, and our presence on the
ground ended tragically with 13 U.S. service members killed,
and at least 170 Afghans killed in an ISIS-K-orchestrated
terrorist attack on that fateful day in August.
The bombing at Hamid Karzai International Airport is just
one devastating example of how serious the threat is and that
it remains.
While the Taliban, ISIS-K, and others operating in
Afghanistan currently receive most of the public attention, we
must also contend with an international ISIS and al-Qaeda
presence on multiple fronts, emanating from Somalia to Syria,
Pakistan to Libya, and places in between.
As has been repeatedly the case, we see a direct
correlation between the foreign terrorist threat abroad and our
security here at home. Just last month, Shihab Ahmed Shihab was
charged with aiding and abetting a plot to murder former
President George W. Bush. Shihab was linked to ISIS, inspired
by ISIS, and was inspired to action by extremist propaganda
from the groups that I just previously mentioned.
He was able to enter the United States under a visitor's
visa and subsequently claimed asylum, which raises so many
questions and the well-placed concern that others have, that he
and others could infiltrate our country through similar means
and carry out attacks, not just against the homeland, but also
against people like former President George W. Bush.
On top of this, his assassination plot included plans to
obtain Mexican visitor visas for foreign ISIS affiliates, and
once they had arrived in Mexico, smuggle them across the U.S.
border. This is the threat that we are dealing with.
In another case directly affecting my home State of Texas,
last December, British citizen Malik Faisal Akram was able to
enter the United States, using a visa waiver program, despite a
criminal history and having been considered a subject of
interest by British intelligence agencies such as MI5, and as
recently as 2020.
As we now know, Akram would go on to hold members of the
congregation Beth Israel hostage in the synagogue for at least
10 hours just a couple of months ago.
Isnardo Garcia-Amado, an individual present on the
terrorist watch list, was released into the interior by Customs
and Border Protection, and remained free to travel the country
for 2 weeks until apprehension happened.
Shihab, Akram, and Garcia-Amado, highlight the very real
threat that faces this country right this second and poses a
threat to our Homeland Security, the reason that this committee
exists.
In addition to these recent cases, another concern I have
repeatedly raised this Congress is the dramatic spike we have
seen in watch-listed individuals being encountered at the
border, specifically at the Southern Border, and in particular,
the number which are being apprehended in between ports of
entry, meaning that they are not presenting themselves to be
processed, as is the narrative that we repeatedly hear, but
instead they are attempting to evade law enforcement.
This is especially concerning because we now know that
there were almost 400,000 got-aways last fiscal year.
So my question is this: What don't we know? How many watch-
listed individuals actually got away? The number that was
released by the administration took us a year to get that, and
now how many of the people that were on that 400,000 of known
got-aways, still remain inside the interior of the United
States and pose a very significant threat like the three that I
have previously mentioned?
I am looking forward to an in-depth conversation today
about the current threats that we face, and have been sounding
the alarm bells since I entered Congress. I am looking forward
to understanding a detailed understanding of trends in
terrorism.
We must stay ahead of the curve. We must prevent that
hostile intent from actually entering our country and carrying
out attacks.
It only took a handful of people on 9/11. Was that so far
away in our history that we have forgotten those lessons? I
don't think so. It is up to us to have these conversations.
Americans are beyond frustrated at this point in time,
specifically with the lack of focus and the lack of attention
that comes to our Southern Border, not knowing who is entering,
not knowing what their affiliations and their intents are, not
having an understanding of where they are and what they intend
to do.
I fought these terrorists my entire career, and I know very
well, and more than most about the evil that they present and
the desire that they have to hurt Americans and to hurt the
United States of America and our allies.
This is the Committee on Homeland Security. We must
recognize the threats that are capable and willing to hurt the
United States. We must recognize and address these threats, and
also, we must be realistic about what is going on at our
Southern Border.
I am afraid that terrorist groups have taken major strides
in their attempt and their willingness to strike the homeland.
The system is blinking red.
As the 9/11 Commission wrote in the days leading up to 9/
11, they addressed one of the major concerns after the fact by
saying that the system was blinking red and that all indicators
pointed toward an imminent attack.
I hope that I am wrong on this, but we must remain vigilant
and get over other narratives that distract us away from the
real threats that face this country.
It is high time that we have this hearing. I am so glad
that we are going to convene in a Classified setting to
understand what those threats are, whether ISIS, which has been
proven to be incredibly resistant, or al-Qaeda, which has the
freedom to move in a country for the first time in 20 years
like they haven't seen, maybe ever before.
It is a homeland security imperative that we thwart any
effort of these organizations to make--to expand their presence
overseas and subsequently launch an attack against Americans or
against the homeland.
From an international perspective, it is as true today as
it was in the fall of 2001. We must deny them sanctuary. We
must take the fight to them, and from a domestic perspective,
we must secure our homeland at all costs.
Thank you for holding this hearing, and I yield back, Madam
Chair.
[The statement of Ranking Member Pfluger follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member August Pfluger
Thank you, Chairwoman Slotkin, for holding this important hearing
today, and thank you to our witnesses for joining us.
This is a topic that both the Chairwoman and I are personally
familiar with. As an F-22 pilot, I had the privilege to serve first-
hand in the fight against ISIS.
Looking at where we stand today, it has been nearly a year since
the disastrous withdrawal from Afghanistan; the Taliban was quickly
able to reassert control over the country for the first time in 20
years; and our presence on the ground ended with 13 U.S. service
members and at least 170 Afghans killed in an ISIS-K-orchestrated
terrorist attack. The bombing at Hamid Karzai International Airport is
just one devastating example of how serious this threat remains. While
the Taliban, ISIS-K, and others operating in Afghanistan currently
receive most of the public attention, we must contend with an
international ISIS and al-Qaeda presence on multiple fronts--emanating
from Somalia to Syria and Pakistan to Libya.
As has repeatedly been the case, we see a direct correlation
between the foreign terrorist threat abroad and our security here at
home. Just last month, Shihab Ahmed Shihab was charged with aiding and
abetting a plot to murder former President George W. Bush. Shihab was
linked to ISIS and inspired to action by their extremist propaganda. He
was able to enter the United States under a visitor's visa and
subsequently claimed asylum, which raises many questions and the well-
placed concern that others have and will infiltrate our country through
similar means. On top of this, his assassination plot included plans to
obtain Mexican visitor visas for other foreign ISIS affiliates and,
once they had arrived in Mexico, smuggle them across the U.S. border.
In another case directly affecting my home State of Texas, last
December, British citizen Malik Faisal Akram was able to enter the
United States using the Visa Waiver Program, despite a criminal history
and having been considered a ``subject of interest'' by MI5 as recently
as 2020. As we now know, Akram would go on to hold members of
Congregation Beth Israel synagogue hostage at gunpoint for 10 hours.
And just a couple months ago, Isnardo Garcia-Amando, an individual
present on the terrorist watch list, was released by Customs and Border
Protection (CBP) into the United States and remained free to travel the
country for 2 weeks before apprehension. Shihab, Akram, and Garcia-
Amando highlight the very real threat foreign terrorism poses to our
homeland.
In addition to these recent cases, another concern I have
repeatedly raised this Congress is the dramatic spike we've seen in
watch-listed individuals being encountered at the border, in particular
the number which are being apprehended between ports of entry--meaning
that they are not presenting themselves to be processed, but instead
attempting to evade law enforcement. This is especially concerning
because we know that there were almost 400,000 got-aways last fiscal
year. So my question is this: What don't we know--how many watch-listed
individuals got away?
The homeland implication in all of these situations is simple. It
is imperative that DHS properly coordinate with Federal law enforcement
and the intelligence community to track terrorist travel and prevent
those who are intent on causing us harm from entering the United
States.
I am looking forward to an in-depth conversation today about the
current threats we face from ISIS and al-Qaeda, as well as a detailed
understanding of trends in terrorism movements. We must stay ahead of
the curve to prevent those with hostile intent from gaining a foothold
in our country, and the conversation today is an important step in the
right direction to ensure our success.
Whether ISIS--which has again proven to be incredibly resistant--or
al-Qaeda--which has freedom of movement like they haven't seen in
decades--it is a homeland security imperative that we thwart any effort
these organizations make to expand their presence overseas and launch
an attack on U.S. soil. From an international perspective, it is as
true today as it was in the Fall of 2001: We must deny them sanctuary;
we must take the fight to them. And from a domestic perspective, we
must secure the homeland on all fronts--whether it be through air,
land, or sea.
I fought these terrorists my entire career. I know more than most
the evil they are capable of. This is the Committee on Homeland
Security. We must recognize and address these threats. Through our
Southern Border, I'm afraid that terror groups have taken major strides
in their attempt to strike in our homeland. After 9/11, when thousands
of Americans lost their lives, the 9/11 Commission said that the system
was ``blinking red'' in the months leading up to 9/11.
It's blinking red again. We need to act.
Thank you all again for your time. Mrs. Chairwoman, I yield back.

Ms. Slotkin. Other statements may be submitted for the
record.
[The statement of Chairman Thompson follows:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
June 15, 2022
The country faces so many threats from White supremacists and
militia extremists, cyber criminals, pandemic diseases, authoritarian
governments, and extreme weather caused by climate change. But the
reason this committee was formed, and the Department of Homeland
Security was established, is the threat we face from international
terrorists.
Nearly 21 years later, the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001,
remain the worst we have seen on American soil. The fact that was the
last complex foreign terrorist attack on U.S. soil is a testament to
the hard work of our homeland security, intelligence, law enforcement,
and military personnel. Together we have made progress in degrading
groups like ISIS and al-Qaeda--and have even destroyed parts of their
networks.
The Department of Homeland Security, the National Counterterrorism
Center, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation--all of whom the
subcommittee will hear from today--have been essential to this
accomplishment. They have done important work tracking evolving
threats, working with partner nations to build layered defenses,
pursuing a campaign to debilitate the groups' plans and operations, and
collaborating with other Government partners to stem the tide of
fighters joining their ranks.
Yet the work of these agencies continues, because the perverse
ideology espoused by ISIS and al-Qaeda and their commitment to violence
and murder persist.
Al-Qaeda and ISIS affiliates continue to pop up across the globe--
in Yemen and Syria to Somalia, Nigeria, and beyond. Although they
appear to threaten mostly local or regional targets, all of the groups
and their offshoots desire to attack the United States. Today, Members
will hear specifics about this objective, terrorists' ability to meet
it, and how the agencies continue to work to diminish that capacity.
While most of today's hearing will likely take place in a
Classified setting, I assure the American people that this committee
and the agencies testifying are dedicated to keeping these threats far
away from our shores.

Ms. Slotkin. Because of today's testimony--because today's
testimony may endanger National security, pursuant to clause
2(g) of rule 11, I move to hold the remainder of this hearing
in executive session. A recorded vote is mandatory under this
rule.
Ms. Slotkin. If folks could mute, please, until their name
is called. The clerk will call the roll.
The Clerk. Ms. Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. It is difficult to mute when you are
getting ready to say yes or no and someone speaks and you did
not ask them to speak. But my vote is an aye.
The Clerk. Ms. Jackson Lee votes aye. Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Langevin votes aye. Mr. Swalwell.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Gottheimer.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Malinowski.
Mr. Malinowski. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Malinowski votes aye.
Mr. Pfluger.
Mr. Pfluger. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Pfluger votes aye.
Mr. Guest.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Van Drew.
Mr. Van Drew. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Van Drew votes yes.
Mr. LaTurner.
Mr. LaTurner. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. LaTurner votes aye.
Mr. Meijer.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Swalwell.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Gottheimer.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Guest.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Meijer.
Ms. Slotkin. Is there any other Member wishing to vote or
wishing to change his or her vote?
How is the Chair recorded?
The Clerk. You are not recorded.
Ms. Slotkin. I vote yes.
The Clerk. Slotkin votes yes.
Ms. Slotkin. The Clerk will report the vote.
The Clerk. Madam Chair, on that vote, there were seven yeas
and zero noes.
Ms. Slotkin. The majority being present and voting in the
affirmative, the motion is agreed. Without objection, a motion
to reconsider is laid upon the table.
The subcommittee will reconvene in executive session in
HVC-302. Pursuant to the order of the subcommittee of today,
the Chair declares the subcommittee in recess, subject to the
call of the Chair. We will see you all in the executive
session.
[Whereupon, at 10:15 a.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session and subsequently adjourned at 11:55 a.m.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Damon Stevens
Question 1. What do you expect the time line is for ISIS and al-
Qaeda to reconstitute to the point that they pose a direct threat to
U.S. interests abroad? And the time line for posing a direct threat to
the homeland?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. What specific themes run through theoretical, or
actual, plans which ISIS and AQ are currently contemplating? For
example, are they threats to Government officials, to critical
infrastructure, to aviation, etc.?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. Are you aware of any al-Qaeda efforts to reestablish
training camps in Afghanistan or recruit forces to the country? If so,
please explain.
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4a. Last August, the Taliban released thousands of
prisoners from Pul-e-Charkhi prison as well as the Parwan Detention
Facility. Can you elaborate on who these prisoners were, their ties to
Foreign Terrorist Organizations, and their specific participation in
terrorist activity? Were there any individuals of particularly grave
concern released?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4b. Of those released, is the intelligence community
currently tracking the locations of all--or any--of those with FTO
connections? If so, who exactly and what have their travel patterns
been?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. What has happened with the over $7 billion worth of
American military equipment left in Afghanistan? Is it in the hands of
U.S. adversaries such as Iran and Pakistan? What are their intentions
with it and what are the long-term security implications for the United
States?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. What are the most important programs Congress needs to
support to prevent the expansion of the ISIS and al-Qaeda threat to the
homeland?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Samantha Vinograd
Question 1a. The Department of Defense Inspector General published
a report in February which brought to light some concerning information
regarding screening and vetting failures which arose during the
relocation and resettlement of Afghans last year. What were the
screening and vetting issues from your perspective?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1b. How many individuals, who were then determined to be
present within the TSDB or TIDE, were released within the United
States? How are you tracking those who have been identified? Where are
they currently?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1c. What measures have been taken to ensure that every
person who the U.S. Government--including the U.S. military--has
derogatory information on, has been identified and isn't able to apply
for asylum or otherwise attempt to remain in the country?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. Last month, Shihab Ahmed Shihab, an Iraqi man living
in Columbus, OH, was charged Federally with an immigration crime and
aiding and abetting a plot to murder former United States President
George W. Bush. Shihab was able to enter the United States through a
visitor visa and subsequently filed a claim for asylum. Respecting that
it is the State Department's decision as to whether to grant non-
immigrant visitor visas, please explain the fact pattern and reasoning
which led CBP to grant Shihab entry upon his arrival at a POE. What
exact criteria does CBP use to determine whether someone is likely to
overstay their visa (including through claiming asylum) and how did
they determine that Shihab met those criteria?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2b. Was Shihab's application for a visitor visa run
through the NVC? Which immigrant and non-immigrant visa applications
are and are not run through the NVC?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3a. Is it correct that the position of DHS is that no
error was made regarding the admittance of Malik Faisal Akram to the
United States and that Akram's criminal record and prior terror
investigations were not determined to be derogatory information because
current information-sharing agreements do not include domestic criminal
convictions and terror investigations which are deemed to be
unsubstantiated?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3b. Is it DHS policy to not collect this information from
VWP partners in order to avoid the reciprocal sharing of USPER
information with those foreign countries?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3c. In the wake of Colleyville, could you explain all
measures which have been taken to prevent an attacker such as Akram
from entering the country through VWP? If the same circumstances
existed--including the subject's dishonesty on his application--would
Akram be admitted to the United States under current VWP standards?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. Will you commit to sharing--on a quarterly basis and
via Classified email--the derogatory information (including FTO
affiliation and any pertinent facts) of those apprehended at our land
borders who are present within the TSDB?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. What are the most important programs Congress needs to
support to prevent the expansion of the ISIS and al-Qaeda threat to the
homeland?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. How would the biometric-sharing requirements in the
Enhanced Border Security Partnership (EBSP) prevent an attacker such as
Malik Faisal Akram from entering the country through the U.S. Visa
Waiver Program (VWP)? In the wake of Colleyville, what specific changes
are being made now to VWP since the EBSP information-sharing
requirements will not be fully implemented until 2027?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Ranking Member August Pfluger for Timothy Langan
Question 1a. The Department of Defense Inspector General published
a report in February which brought to light some concerning information
regarding screening and vetting failures which arose during the
relocation and resettlement of Afghans last year. What were the
screening and vetting issues from your perspective?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1b. How many individuals, who were then determined to be
present within the TSDB or TIDE, were released within the United
States? How are you tracking those who have been identified? Where are
they currently?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. What are the most important programs Congress needs to
support to prevent the expansion of the ISIS and al-Qaeda threat to the
homeland?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.

[all]
