- SECURING THE DOTGOV: EXAMINING EFFORTS TO STRENGTHEN FEDERAL NETWORK CYBERSECURITY

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SECURING THE DOTGOV: EXAMINING EFFORTS
TO STRENGTHEN FEDERAL NETWORK CYBERSE-
CURITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION, AND INNOVATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 17, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-55

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-403 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            John Katko, New York
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island      Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Clay Higgins, Louisiana
J. Luis Correa, California           Michael Guest, Mississippi
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri            Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Al Green, Texas                      Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Yvette D. Clarke, New York           Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
Eric Swalwell, California            Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Dina Titus, Nevada                   Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey    Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Val Butler Demings, Florida          Peter Meijer, Michigan
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California    Kat Cammack, Florida
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          August Pfluger, Texas
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey
Ritchie Torres, New York
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Daniel Kroese, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Clerk

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, AND
INNOVATION

Yvette D. Clarke, New York, Chairwoman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York,
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island          Ranking Member
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Ritchie Torres, New York             Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex  Jake LaTurner, Kansas
officio)                         John Katko, New York (ex officio)
Moira Bergin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Austin Agrella, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
Mariah Harding, Subcommittee Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Yvette D. Clarke, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York, and Chairwoman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Andrew R. Garbarino, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................     5

Witnesses

Mr. Christopher J. DeRusha, Federal Chief Information Security
Officer, Office of Management and Budget, and Deputy National
Cyber Director for Federal Cybersecurity, Office of the
National Cyber Director:
Oral Statement.................................................    11
Prepared Statement.............................................    12
Mr. Eric Goldstein, Executive Assistant Director for
Cybersecurity, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency:
Oral Statement.................................................    15
Prepared Statement.............................................    16
Mr. Charles H. Romine, Director, Information Technology
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology,
U.S. Department of Commerce:
Oral Statement.................................................    19
Prepared Statement.............................................    20
Mr. David Shive, Chief Information Officer, General Services
Administration:
Oral Statement.................................................    30
Prepared Statement.............................................    32

For the Record

The Honorable Diana Harshbarger, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Tennessee:
Article........................................................    40

Appendix

Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Christopher J.
DeRusha........................................................    53
Questions From Hon. Yvette D. Clarke for Christopher J. DeRusha..    53
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Eric Goldstein....    54
Question From Hon. Yvette D. Clarke for Eric Goldstein...........    54
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Charles H. Romine.    54
Question From Hon. Andrew Garbarino for David Shive..............    54

SECURING THE DOTGOV: EXAMINING EFFORTS TO STRENGTHEN FEDERAL NETWORK
CYBERSECURITY

----------

Tuesday, May 17, 2022

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Infrastructure Protection,
and Innovation,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:19 p.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Yvette D. Clarke
[Chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Clarke, Jackson Lee, Langevin,
Rice, Torres, Garbarino, Harshbarger, Clyde, and LaTurner.
Chairwoman Clarke. The Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation will come to order.
The subcommittee is meeting today to receive testimony on
``Securing the DotGov: Examining Efforts to Strengthen Federal
Network Cybersecurity.'' Without objection, the Chair is
authorized to declare the committee in recess at any point.
Before I begin with my opening remarks, I would like to
take a moment to express my most profound and sincere
condolences to the family and friends of those were so
senselessly murdered in the mass shooting at a grocery store in
Buffalo, New York over the weekend. For too long, hate-driven
domestic terrorism has made the core of our communities,
grocery stores, schools, places of worship unsafe. We cannot
tolerate that any longer. I am pleased that both the Biden-
Harris administration and this committee are confronting the
threat posed by domestic extremists with such urgency and
looking forward to those efforts.
In December 2020, we learned that the Russian intelligence
services has infiltrated the networks of multiple Federal
agencies by inserting malware in a SolarWinds software update.
The Russians remained on Federal networks undetected for
months. This intrusion highlighted that the Federal
Government's signature cybersecurity programs had failed to
evolve--excuse me--and adapt to meet the threats our Nation
faces today. Fortunately, over the past year-and-a-half, we
have seen a renewed focus in Congress and the Executive branch
on taking the necessary steps to bring our Federal network
security to where it must be.
Immediately upon taking office in January, President Biden
assembled a top-notch cybersecurity team that has brought
together leading cybersecurity experts with decades' experience
in both the public and private sector. The administration
worked expeditiously, but methodically, to put together
Executive Order 14028, which President Biden signed just over 1
year ago. This Executive Order represents a landmark effort to
transform Federal cybersecurity by modernizing Federal agency
cyber practices, strengthening supply chain security, and
improving incident response and information sharing, among many
other necessary enhancements. Security experts have hailed this
Executive Order as a historic action to protect our Federal
Government networks, while using the Federal Government's
purchasing power to lift the cybersecurity baseline for the
private sector. Now that the initial deadlines set by the
Executive Order have largely passed the relevant agencies have
had a year to implement its mandate.
I look forward to the discussion today on what has been
achieved so far and what the strategy is for the continued
implementation going forward. High-profile cyber incidents and
the concerns of Russian cyber activity associated with the on-
going conflict in Ukraine has made the importance of
cybersecurity a front-page story. But this isn't the first time
cybersecurity issues have captured headlines. It isn't the
first time Congress and the Executive branch have committed to
prioritizing cybersecurity and modernizing security policy.
Historically, however, Government focus has shifted after
the headlines fade, and we have suffered the consequences. For
example, in the aftermath of the 2015 OPM breach, Congress
passed the Federal Cybersecurity Enhancement Act, which
included mandates for agencies to implement multi-factor
authentication and encryption. But not all agencies have--but
not all agencies have complied. We must ensure that we do not
lose focus and momentum this time. Fortunately, I am confident
that the Biden administration shares my commitment to ensuring
we continue to accelerate our efforts to protect the Federal
networks.
Today, I hope to hear more about how this subcommittee can
partner with the administration to provide the necessary
resources and authorities to continue the Executive Order's
work. I also look forward to hearing more about how CISA has
utilized the $650 million in funding Democrats in Congress
included in the American Rescue Plan to strengthen our Federal
cybersecurity.
I know our witnesses agree that is a--that it is a down
payment on much-needed sustained investment in Federal
cybersecurity, and we must continue to build on it by ensuring
CISA has the necessary resources to modernize its National
Cybersecurity Protection System and continue to mature its
Continuous Diagnostic and Mitigation Program. Cybersecurity
must be a priority for every single agency, but the ones
represented here today have the expertise that other agencies
may lack.
Continuing to build out CISA's role as the operational lead
for Federal network security is a priority for me, and today's
hearing will be an important opportunity to hear from the
witnesses on how their agencies can better support the
cybersecurity needs of the entire Federal enterprise.
[The statement of Chairwoman Clarke follows:]
Statement of Chairwoman Yvette D. Clarke
May 17, 2022
Before I begin with my opening remarks, I would like to take a
moment to express my condolences to the family and friends of those who
were so senselessly murdered in the mass shooting at a grocery store in
Buffalo over the weekend.
For too long, hate-driven domestic terrorism has made the core of
our communities--grocery stores, schools, and places of worship--
unsafe. We cannot tolerate that any longer.
I am pleased that both the Biden-Harris administration and this
committee are confronting the threat posed by domestic extremists with
such urgency and look forward to continuing those efforts.
In December 2020, we learned that the Russian intelligence services
had infiltrated the networks of multiple Federal agencies by inserting
malware in a SolarWinds software update.
The Russians remained on Federal networks undetected for months.
This intrusion highlighted that the Federal Government's signature
cybersecurity programs had failed to evolve and adapt to meet the
threats our Nation faces today.
Fortunately, over the past year-and-a-half, we have seen a renewed
focus in Congress and the Executive branch on taking the necessary
steps to bring our Federal network security to where it must be.
Immediately upon taking office in January, President Biden
assembled a top-notch cybersecurity team that has brought together
leading cybersecurity experts with decades of experience in both the
public and private sector.
The administration worked expeditiously, but methodically, to put
together Executive Order 14028, which President Biden signed just over
1 year ago.
This Executive Order represents a landmark effort to transform
Federal cybersecurity by modernizing Federal agency cyber practices,
strengthening supply chain security, and improving incident response
and information sharing, among many other necessary enhancements.
Security experts have hailed this Executive Order as a historic
action to protect our Federal Government networks, while using the
Federal Government's purchasing power to lift the cybersecurity
baseline for the private sector.
Now that the initial deadlines set by the Executive Order have
largely passed and the relevant agencies have had a year to implement
its mandates, I look forward to the discussion today on what has been
achieved so far and what the strategy is for continued implementation
going forward.
High-profile cyber incidents and the concerns about Russian cyber
activity associated with the on-going conflict in Ukraine have made the
importance of cybersecurity a front-page story.
But this isn't the first time cybersecurity issues have captured
headlines. It isn't the first time Congress and the Executive branch
have committed to prioritizing cybersecurity and modernizing security
policy.
Historically, however, Government focus has shifted after the
headlines fade, and we have suffered the consequences.
For example, in the aftermath of the 2015 OPM breach, Congress
passed the Federal Cybersecurity Enhancement Act, which included
mandates for agencies to implement multi-factor authentication and
encryption. But not all agencies have complied.
We must ensure that we do not lose focus and momentum this time.
Fortunately, I am confident that the Biden administration shares my
commitment to ensuring we continue to accelerate our efforts to protect
Federal networks.
Today, I hope to hear more about how this subcommittee can partner
with the administration to provide the necessary resources and
authorities to continue the Executive Order's work.
I also look forward to hearing more about how CISA has utilized the
$650 million in funding Democrats in Congress included in the American
Rescue Plan to strengthen our Federal cybersecurity.
I know our witnesses agree that it is a down payment on much-needed
sustained investment in Federal cybersecurity, and we must continue to
build on it by ensuring CISA has the necessary resources to modernize
its National Cybersecurity Protection System and continue to mature its
Continuous Diagnostic and Mitigation Program.
Cybersecurity must be a priority for every single agency, but the
ones represented here today have the expertise that other agencies may
lack.
Continuing to build out CISA's role as the operational lead for
Federal network security is a priority for me, and today's hearing will
be an important opportunity to hear from the witnesses on how their
agencies can better support the cybersecurity needs of the entire
Federal enterprise.
I thank our witnesses for joining us today, and I look forward to
our discussion.

Chairwoman Clarke. I thank our witnesses for joining us
today and I look forward to our discussion. The Chair now
recognizes the Ranking Member of the subcommittee, the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Garbarino, for an opening
statement.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this
critical conversation regarding the security of Federal agency
networks. I would like to thank our witnesses for being here
today. I look forward to a constructive dialog.
The SolarWinds breach of December 2020 was a wake-up call
to the vulnerabilities that exist within the Federal
enterprise. Since then, we have uncovered the impact it had on
9 or more Federal agencies and hundreds of other companies. We
simply must do more to adopt Government standards to not only
meet but exceed adversarial capabilities like those of the
Russian SolarWinds campaign.
The Federal Government must also be a bold example for
industry and set the bar high for enterprise network
resilience. In order to secure Federal networks, we must
continue the nonpartisan tradition of addressing cybersecurity
risks. Executive Order on improving the Nation's cybersecurity
provided timely guidance to Federal entities on the diligence
required to secure their networks.
I was pleased to see the expertise of CISA fully leveraged
throughout the EO and as the lead Federal civilian cyber
agency. CISA was importantly charged with developing a Federal
cloud security strategy easing understanding of cyber incident
reporting requirements and working with Federal partners like
NIST to develop standards for critical software.
I have long maintained that CISA is uniquely equipped to
lead the Federal Government on cybersecurity measures, and I am
pleased to see its potential recognized. The continued use of
CISA's National Critical Functions as a guide will assist
agencies in prioritizing assets and meeting the new security
standards they are entrusted to maintain. I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses on their continued efforts to
execute on the EO.
Further, I hope to hear more about what Congress can do to
support efforts to secure the Nation's critical infrastructure
at the Federal level and across the private sector. I
specifically look forward to hearing from the CIO of GSA, an
agency that has done well in meeting the requirements of the
EO. I hope that Mr. Shive can provide a valuable perspective to
assist other agencies in improving their own cyber posture.
I, again, thank the Chairwoman for holding this important
hearing and I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Garbarino follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Andrew Garbarino
Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this critical conversation
regarding the security of Federal agency networks. I would like to
thank our witnesses for being here today. I look forward to a
constructive dialog.
The SolarWinds breach of December 2020 was a wake-up call to the
vulnerabilities that exist within the Federal enterprise. Since then,
we've uncovered the impact it had on 9 or more Federal agencies and
hundreds of other companies.
We simply must do more to adapt Government standards to not only
meet, but exceed, adversarial capabilities like those of the Russian
SolarWinds campaign. The Federal Government must also be a bold example
for industry and set the bar high for enterprise network resilience.
In order to secure Federal networks, we must continue the
nonpartisan tradition of addressing cybersecurity risk. The Executive
Order (EO) on Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity provided timely
guidance to Federal entities on the diligence required to secure their
networks. I was pleased to see the expertise of CISA fully leveraged
throughout the EO as the lead Federal civilian cyber agency.
CISA was importantly charged with developing a Federal cloud
security strategy, easing understanding of cyber incident reporting
requirements, and working with Federal partners like NIST to develop
standards for critical software. I have long maintained that CISA is
uniquely equipped to lead the Federal Government on cybersecurity
measures, and I am pleased to see its potential recognized. The
continued use of CISA's National critical functions as a guide will
assist agencies in prioritizing assets and meeting the new security
standards they are entrusted to maintain.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on their continued
efforts to execute on the EO. Further, I hope to hear more about what
Congress can do to support efforts to secure the Nation's critical
infrastructure at the Federal level and across the private sector.
I specifically look forward to hearing from the CIO of GSA, an
agency that has done well in meeting the requirements of the EO. I hope
Mr. Shive can provide a valuable perspective to assist other agencies
in improving their own cyber posture.
I again thank the Chairwoman for holding this important hearing
today.

Chairwoman Clarke. I thank the Ranking Member. Members are
also reminded that the subcommittee will operate according to
the guidelines laid out by the Chairman and Ranking Member in
their February 3, 2021, colloquy regarding remote procedures.
Additional Member statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Hon. Sheila Jackon Lee follows:]
Statement of Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee
May 17, 2022
Chairwoman Clarke, and Ranking Member Garbarino, thank you for
holding today's hearing on ``Securing the DotGov: Examining Efforts to
Strengthen Federal Network Cybersecurity.''
I look forward to the questions that will follow the testimony of:

Mr. Christopher DeRusha, deputy national cyber director for
Federal cybersecurity, Office of the National Cyber Director;
Federal chief information security officer, Office of
Management and Budget;

Mr. Eric Goldstein, executive assistant director for
cybersecurity, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency;

Dr. Charles Romine, director, Information Technology
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology; and

Mr. David Shive, chief information officer, General Services
Administration (Republican witness).
I welcome today's witnesses for their testimony before the House
Homeland Security Committee.
I thank each of you for your service to our Nation.
This hearing will provide an opportunity for Members to hear from
administration officials on the status of efforts to strengthen the
cybersecurity of Federal networks.
In light of the SolarWinds compromise discovered in December 2020,
the Biden administration and Congress have prioritized enhanced Federal
network security, including by providing $650 million to CISA in the
American Rescue Plan Act and issuing Executive Order 14028, Improving
the Nation's Cybersecurity.
By hearing from officials from the key Federal agencies responsible
for securing Federal networks, Members will learn more about the
progress the Biden administration has made, the strategy going forward,
and how Congress can continue to support these efforts.
Cybersecurity is not something you can see or actively prove--it is
established by each moment of each day that a network or computing
device remains free of breaches by adversaries.
The vulnerabilities in computing technology from the most complex
systems to the smallest devices are often found in its software.
This was true in the early 1990's when the first desktop computing
technology was produced.
Desktop computing devices were quickly adopted for business and
Government use.
The market and regulatory forces that should have forced security
and safety improvements on computing technology never developed due to
interference from Congress and the courts that excused or deflected
culpability for known computing technology errors or omissions in
product development or manufacturing that left systems open to attack.
The last defense for computing technology and systems are the
concrete steps that organization, companies, and agencies can take to
secure their computing assets; and business continuity measures that
can be in place to allow meaningful recovery of operations should a
successful cyber attack occur.
The Federal Government has invested billions in funding and
resources to secure Government networks and devices from cyber attacks
and threats, but in the case of SolarWinds it was FireEye a private
company that detected the threat and alerted the Government and private
sector.
The SolarWinds compromise and the failure of Federal agencies to
detect the intrusion in a timely manner demonstrated the inadequacy of
Federal cybersecurity practices.
On December 8, 2020, the cybersecurity company FireEye announced it
had been compromised ``by a nation with top-tier abilities.''
Five days later, initial reports surfaced that a sophisticated
actor breached the U.S. Departments of Treasury and Commerce by
inserting malicious code into the SolarWinds Orion platform, which
agencies used to automate certain network monitoring activities.
As the investigation into the malicious cyber campaign progressed,
additional attack vectors unrelated to SolarWinds were identified.
Ultimately, 9 Federal agencies and numerous private companies were
impacted.
The software update containing malicious code had become available
for download in March 2020, meaning the intruder had access to certain
networks for a period of several months.
On January 5, 2021, a joint statement issued by the Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI), the Office of the Director of National
Intelligence (ODNI), and the National Security Agency (NSA) indicated
the campaign was ``likely'' carried out by a Russian Advanced
Persistent Threat actor.
On April 15, 2021, the Biden administration formally attributed the
cyber campaign to Russia's Foreign Intelligence Service, the SVR.
In response to this intrusion, Congress and the Biden
administration began to take immediate steps to strengthen Federal
network security.
As part of the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) enacted in March
2021, Congress provided CISA with $650 million for cybersecurity risk
mitigation, which CISA dedicated to the deployment of detection sensors
across Federal agencies, expanding capacity for incident response and
threat hunting, improving the capacity to analyze cybersecurity
information, and shifting to a Zero Trust Architecture.
Additionally, ARPA included $1 million to the Technology
Modernization Fund, which provides financing to Federal agencies to
replace aging IT systems that are harder to secure.
President Biden's Executive Order 14028 represented an ambitious
approach that, if properly implemented and resourced, will elevate
Federal network cybersecurity to the standards necessary to meet an
evolving threat landscape.
Democrats in Congress prioritized securing Federal networks by
providing $650 million to CISA to support its efforts and $1 billion to
the Technology Modernization Fund.
President Biden's budget request for fiscal year 2023 requests an
estimated $10.9 billion for civilian cybersecurity efforts, an 11
percent increase over last year's request.
Congress must ensure agencies get sufficient resources to implement
improved cybersecurity practices.
While all agencies must prioritize strengthening their own
cybersecurity, there must be coordinated efforts to assist Federal
agencies and provide them with the necessary expertise.
Congress has provided CISA with additional authorities in recent
years to enhance its ability to serve as the operational lead for
cybersecurity across the Federal civilian Executive branch (FCEB), and
Congress must continue to grow CISA's ability to assist other Federal
agencies.
The Committee on Homeland Security must provide effective oversight
of the work of CISA to best determine the ability of the agency to
respond to and effectively defend against cyber threats.
If we wait until the cyber threat is present to learn whether the
protections in place are effective, we have not done our jobs to
protect the American people from cyber threats.
I believe that a key component of protecting the public is to
prepare for the possible disruption of computing services or access and
to have mechanisms in place to establish and maintain continuity of
government should computing networks come under distress due to a cyber
attack.
Business continuity refers to the capability of an organization to
continue the delivery of products or services at acceptable levels
following a disruptive incident, and business continuity planning or
business continuity and resiliency planning is the process of creating
systems of prevention and recovery to deal with potential threats to
operations.
To survive in the current high-risk computing landscape both
Government and private-sector entities must engage in risk mitigation
strategies that assess operations from top to bottom to identify
potential cyber threats and risk vectors.
This assessment should include both internal and external threats
that could compromise business continuity or Government services.
Some risks are firmly within an organization's ability to control,
such as the measures they implement to secure data and systems.
Continuity planning is also firmly under the control of
organizations, and to not invest in proven strategies to survive a
cyber attack, is not only irresponsible on the part of owners--but it
creates unacceptable risks for their employees, customers, and
investors.
I introduced the Cybersecurity Vulnerability Remediation Act was
introduced and passed the House during the 115th and 116th Congresses
and has been updated again in the 111th Congress to meet the ever-
evolving nature of cyber threats faced by Federal and private-sector
information systems and our Nation's critical infrastructure.
This bill goes significantly further than the first Cybersecurity
Vulnerability bill that I introduced in the 115th Congress, to address
the instance of Zero-Day Events that can lead to catastrophic
cybersecurity failures of information and computing systems.
The ANS to H.R. 2980 responds to the recent cyber attacks on
America's private sector and establishes the Federal Government as
having a major role in fighting cyber attacks that target Government
agencies and the private-sector critical infrastructure.
H.R. 2980, the Cybersecurity Vulnerability Remediation Act:

Changes the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) definition
of security vulnerability to include cybersecurity
vulnerability,

Provides the plan to fix known cybersecurity
vulnerabilities,

Gives the Department of Homeland Security the tools to know
more about ransomware attacks and ransom payments, and

Creates greater transparency on how DHS will defend against
and mitigate cybersecurity vulnerabilities and lays the road
map for preparing the private sector to better prepare for and
mitigate cyber attacks.
The bill requires a report that can include a Classified annex,
which I strongly recommend to the Secretary of DHS so that it can be
available should the agency elect to engage private-sector entities in
a discussion on cyber attacks and breaches targeting critical
infrastructure.
This bill is needed because the Nation's dependence on networked
computing makes us vulnerable to cyber threats.
In 30 years the world has gone from one divided by oceans to one
that is interconnected through the internet.
An interconnected world has brought us closer together, created new
opportunities for business, and citizen engagement, while at the same
time given new tools to those who may wish to cause harm using cyber
attacks.
In cyber space an attack against one entity or device can devolve
into an attack against many.
The work that must be done to secure critical infrastructure from
cybersecurity vulnerabilities that include oil and gas pipelines; the
electric grid, water treatment facilities, and other privately-held
infrastructure must occur with much more order and purposefulness.
The consolidation of cybersecurity for both the .gov domain and for
the private sector is now under the jurisdiction of the Committee on
Homeland Security was is an important step to better coordinating
domestic cybersecurity.
We should be clear that it is not just the criminals that are the
source and motivations for all ransomware attacks, a key factor is the
nations that provide them with safe harbor.
When nation-states engage in exfiltration of networks, they gather
data on the networks, as well as the information that is housed there.
Information on computing networks can be used by ransomware
attackers to target victims and increase the likelihood of success.
Late last year, SolarWinds revealed that that Russian actors
compromised software updates of its Orion platform--and created
backdoors into certain customer networks, including Federal networks.
Within months, Microsoft disclosed that Chinese hackers exploited
multiple zero-day vulnerabilities in Microsoft Exchange Servers to gain
access to emails and maintain persistent access to the networks.
In the spring, CISA announced that malicious actors exploited
vulnerabilities in certain Ivanti Pulse Connect Secure products to gain
access and persistence to victim networks.
Meanwhile, ransomware attacks against critical infrastructure, from
Colonial Pipeline to JBS, have increased in frequency, threatening to
disrupt the economy.
challenges to cyber defense of government and civilian networks
The vulnerabilities in computing technology from the most complex
systems to the smallest devices are often found in its software.
This was true in the early 1990's when the first desktop computing
technology was produced.
Desktop computing devices were quickly adopted for business and
Government use.
evolution of computing and telecommunications
Moore's Law is still relevant in the pace of computing capacity as
the power and complexity of computing continues to expand.
Moore's law is a term used to refer to the observation made by
Gordon Moore in 1965 that the number of transistors in a dense
integrated circuit (IC) doubles about every 2 years.
The rollout of 5G wireless transmission speed and the mobile
devices deigned to take advantage of this advance in telecommunications
is placing additional burdens on cybersecurity measures already in
place to protect systems for breach or compromise.
In addition to this challenge are advances in quantum computing,
which will increase computational speeds to beyond the point where
cryptographic systems will no longer protect networks or the data, they
contain from state-sponsored attacks.
The Biden administration is aggressively pursuing ambitious
cybersecurity policies to make up for 4 years of missed opportunities
to improve the Nation's cybersecurity posture.
The success of those efforts rests on effective interagency
coordination and the provision of appropriate resources and
authorities.
The previous administration eliminated the White House
Cybersecurity Coordinator and Federal cybersecurity policy suffered.
Frustration from both sides of the aisle led Congress to establish
the Office of the National Cyber Director.
It is time that Congress to fund it.
The NCD must articulate a clear vision for the Office and the
unique value it will add to Federal cybersecurity efforts and NCD
institutionalize its role among its counterparts at CISA and the
National Security Council.
private-sector forces impacts security of networks
The market and regulatory forces that should have forced security
and safety improvements on computing technology never developed due to
interference from Congress and the courts that excused or deflected
culpability for known computing technology errors or omissions in
product development or manufacturing that left systems open to attack.
The last defense for computing technology and systems are the
concrete steps that Government agencies, organization, and companies
can take to secure their computing assets; and business continuity
measures that can be in place to allow meaningful recovery of
operations should a successful cyber attack occur.
Business continuity refers to the capability of an organization to
continue the delivery of products or services at acceptable levels
following a disruptive incident, and business continuity planning or
business continuity and resiliency planning is the process of creating
systems of prevention and recovery to deal with potential threats to
operations.
To survive in the current high-risk computing landscape both
Government and private-sector entities must engage in risk mitigation
strategies that assess operations from top to bottom to identify
potential cyber threats and risk vectors.
This assessment should include both internal and external threats
that could compromise business continuity.
Some risks are firmly within an organization's ability to control,
such as the controls they implement to secure data and systems.
Continuity planning is also firmly under the control of
organizations, and to not invest in proven strategies to survive a
cyber attack, is not only irresponsible on the part of owners--but it
creates unacceptable risks for their employees, customers, and
investors.
In cyber space an attack against one entity or device can devolve
into an attack against many.
The work that must be done to secure critical infrastructure from
cybersecurity vulnerabilities that include oil and gas pipelines; the
electric grid, water treatment facilities, and other privately-held
infrastructure must occur with much more order and purposefulness.
The consolidation of cybersecurity for both the .gov domain and for
the private sector is now under the jurisdiction of the Committee on
Homeland Security was is an important step to better coordinating
domestic cybersecurity.
This is especially critical to the protection of large complex
information systems that run on applications and hardware that may be
decades old, which is the case with some supervisory control and data
acquisition (SCADA) control system architectures that are pervasive in
the provision of essential services provided critical infrastructure
owner and operators.
H.R. 2890 bolsters the efforts to engage critical infrastructure
owners and operators in communicating cybersecurity threats; and lays
the foundation for greater transparency on the real threats posed by
cyber terrorist to private- and Government-sector critical
infrastructure and information systems.
The legislation allows the Science the Technology Directorate in
consultation with CISA to establish an incentive-based program that
allows industry, individuals, academia, and others to compete in
identifying remediation solutions for cybersecurity vulnerabilities to
information systems and industrial control systems including
supervisory control and data acquisition systems.
This bill when it becomes law would put our Nation's best minds to
work on closing the vulnerabilities that cyber thieves and terrorists
to use them to access, disrupt, corrupt, or take control of critical
infrastructure and information systems.
In addition to these changes, the bill requires a report to
Congress that may contain a Classified annex.
Today, our Nation is in a cybersecurity crisis.
My concern regarding the security of information networks began in
2015 when the Office of Personnel Management's data breach resulted in
the theft of millions of sensitive personnel records on Federal
employees.
What few understood in 2015 was that the attack on the OPM may have
actually begun in 2013 when cyber criminals breached the computer
network and stole the operation manuals for the agency's information
system.
The on-going attacks against Federal, State, local, territorial,
and Tribal governments, as well as threats posed to private information
systems, and critical infrastructure systems makes this bill necessary.
On May 13, 2021 it was reported that the DC Metropolitan Police
Department had experienced the worst reported cyber attack against a
police department in the United States.
The gang, known as the Babuk group, released thousands of the
Metropolitan Police Department's sensitive documents on the dark web.
A review by The Associated Press found hundreds of police officer
disciplinary files and intelligence reports that include feeds from
other agencies, including the FBI and Secret Service.
This type of attack has the potential to undermine trust within the
ranks regarding the security of personal information in the
Department's information network as well as reduce cooperation of other
Federal law enforcement agencies with the DC Police Department out of
cybersecurity concerns.
These problems are not limited information related to Government
employees.
In February 2021, a cyber attack on an Oldsmar, Florida water
treatment facility involved increasing the levels of sodium hydroxide
from 100 parts per million to 11,100 parts per million in drinking
water.
This is just one example of how terrorists can attack critical
infrastructure and cause threats to health, safety, and life.
ransomware
Ransomware is becoming the tool of choice for those seeking a
payout because it can be carried out against anyone or any entity by
perpetrators who are far from U.S. shores.
The ill-gotten gain reaped from ransomware can be used to fuel
terrorist networks, drug cartels, attacks against the homeland, human
trafficking, or other efforts to undermine homeland security.
The Colonial Pipeline incident is just one in a long line of
successful attacks or infiltrations carried out against domestic
information systems and critical infrastructure with increasing
consequences for the life, health, safety, and economic security of our
citizens.
There is no way of knowing how many attacks resulted in payouts to
criminals, who would use the funds to fuel additional attacks that
target business, Government, or other entities in the United States.
There are few concrete details on how the cyber attack took place,
and it is likely that this will not change until Colonial Pipeline and
the third-party company brought in to investigate have concluded their
analysis of the incident.
However, what did occur was a ransomware outbreak, linked to the
DarkSide group, that struck Colonial Pipeline's networks.
The initial attack entry point into Colonial Pipeline's network is
not known, but it may have been an old, unpatched vulnerability in a
system; an email that got passed its firewall to an employee who opened
it unknowingly; the use of a legitimate employee's computer access
credentials that were purchased or obtained by the thieves that were
leaked previously, or any other number of tactics employed by cyber
criminals to infiltrate a company's network.
There would be no need for the Cybersecurity Vulnerability
Remediation Act if owners and operators were succeeding in meeting the
cybersecurity needs of critical infrastructure.
I know that there is more that should and ought to be done to
address the issue of cyber crime and I will be pursuing this avenue
under the jurisdiction of the House Judiciary Committee, as the Chair
of the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security.
the role of the international community
When nations of good will band together they have ended depletion
of the ozone layer, ended piracy on the high seas, controlled the
proliferation of nuclear weapons, eradicated smallpox, and ended global
pandemics.
Ending the threat of ransomware attacks is a worthy challenge and
one that our allies can agree is in the interest of the global
community of nations.
The United States is in a position to lead this effort and I along
with other Members of this committee stand ready to support an effort
to find common ground and common purpose among like-minded nations.
Thank you.

I now welcome our panel of witnesses. First, we will hear
from Mr. Christopher DeRusha who serves as both the Federal
chief administration security officer at the Office of
Management and Budget and as the deputy National cyber director
for Federal cybersecurity within the Office of the National
Cyber Director.
I would also like to welcome Mr. Eric Goldstein back to the
panel. Mr. Goldstein serves as the executive assistant director
for cybersecurity at CISA, where he leads the cybersecurity
division at CISA, which is responsible for carrying out CISA's
programs to secure Federal networks.
Next, we will hear from Dr. Charles Romine, the director of
the Information Technology Laboratory at the National Institute
of Standards and Technology, or NIST, which plays a vital role
in developing the standards and security frameworks deployed
across the Federal enterprise.
Finally, I look forward to hearing from Mr. David Shive,
the chief information officer for the General Services
Administration, or GSA, which plays a key role in the services
and technologies used throughout the Federal Government.
Without objection, the witnesses' full statements will be
inserted in the record. I now ask our witnesses to summarize
their statements for 5 minutes, beginning with Mr. DeRusha.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER J. DE RUSHA, FEDERAL CHIEF INFORMATION
SECURITY OFFICER, OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET, AND DEPUTY
NATIONAL CYBER DIRECTOR FOR FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY, OFFICE OF
THE NATIONAL CYBER DIRECTOR

Mr. DeRusha. Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino,
and Members of the subcommittee, thank you for holding this
important hearing today to highlight the 1-year anniversary of
Executive Order 14028, Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity. I
am pleased to testify before you today with my colleagues from
CISA, NIST, and GSA to discuss how the EO represents a true
paradigm shift for Federal cybersecurity. I will talk a little
bit about why that shift is urgently needed and review some of
the successes that we feel we have had over the first year.
The bottom line here is we can no longer rely on the
outdated perimeter-based approach, or digital walls, that we
have used to keep sophisticated actors from gaining
unauthorized access to our systems. We really need to
aggressively invest in making our systems more defensible by
employing zero trust principles to better detect and contain
our adversaries, replace ineffective deterrents like passwords
with multi-factor authentication and encryption, continuously
identify and remediate vulnerabilities, and transform our
workplace culture by adopting a secure aware mindset. This
paradigm shift is really our best opportunity to change our
adversaries' decision calculus and prevent harm.
President Biden's Executive Order has set us on this path
by aggressively and ambitiously shifting our cybersecurity
strategy from an outdated mindset to one that is clear-eyed
about our adversaries' capabilities and intent. The security of
our Nation will be drastically improved when the goals of the
EO have been met and we feel we have made tremendous progress
over this first year.
For the Office of Management and Budget and the Office of
National Cyber Director, we have issued a series of policies
that carry forward the vision and actions laid out in the EO.
In January of this year, OMB issued the zero trust strategy,
which directed agencies to invest in technology that is built
and deployed with security at the forefront. This strategy sets
out a common baseline of actions and investments to ensure
consistent approach across Government, which will allow us to
benchmark progress and share lessons among the agencies.
Federal agencies have responded to this call of action and
provided their zero trust implementation plans spanning through
fiscal year 2024.
Second, recognizing that all Government's vital services
rely on software, as we learned in SolarWinds, OMB required
agencies to comply with recent NIST guidance to protect
critical software. Agencies are taking a phased approach to
initially focus on stand-alone on-premise software that perform
critical security functions. When this first phase is complete,
we will ensure that Government services function not only as
intended, but also in a manner that is secure by design.
Third, while the aforementioned policies make our systems
more defensible, we do recognize that incidents may still
occur. By enabling a continuously monitored Government-wide
endpoint detection and response system, we will improve our
ability to quickly address malicious activity on Federal
systems.
Finally, last August, OMB issued the first log-in
requirements for Federal agencies. This information provides
the digital fingerprints, which are critical to our system
defenders' ability to detect, investigate, and remediate cyber
incidents. These measures represent an extremely important step
in the shift toward defensible systems.
The vast majority of the actions called for in the EO,
including these four that I have just highlighted, are now
established policies and are being implemented. This
illustrates the commitment that has been made across the entire
Federal enterprise to embracing the paradigm shift envisioned
by the EO.
Congress, and specifically this committee, have shown a
very strong commitment to our Government's cybersecurity. We
appreciate the recent investment that was made in critical
technology funds like the $1 billion appropriation to the
Technology Modernization Fund, or TMF, which has already
expanded our opportunities to address cybersecurity challenges.
But this is just the beginning. We recognize that large-scale
transformation does not happen in a year by launching new
programs. It requires a commitment to cultural change, tireless
implementation, and continued investment.
This team sitting before you here, along with the dedicated
cyber and IT professionals across the Federal Government, is
committed. Together we will tirelessly implement these
initiatives. I look forward to partnering with you to
demonstrate that in outcomes and the importance of sustained
investment as we move forward together.
So, I thank you for the opportunity to testify here today
and I really look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. DeRusha follows:]
Prepared Statement of Christopher J. DeRusha
May 17, 2022
Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for holding this important hearing to highlight
the 1-year anniversary of Executive Order (EO) 14028, Improving the
Nation's Cybersecurity. I am pleased to testify before you today with
Eric Goldstein, Dr. Charles Romine, and David Shive. I would like to
use this opportunity to discuss why EO 14028 represents a paradigm
shift for Federal cybersecurity, why I believe that shift is important,
as well as the successes we have had implementing EO 14028 over the
first year.
Foundationally, EO 14028 recognizes the hard truth: ``The United
States faces persistent and increasingly sophisticated malicious cyber
campaigns that threaten the public sector, the private sector, and
ultimately the American people's security and privacy.'' Each section
of the EO aggressively challenges the Federal Government to ``identify,
deter, protect against, detect, and respond to these actions and
actors.'' Many of the goals within the order are ambitious, but we are
never going to improve our shared security if we are not ambitious. As
chief information security officer and deputy national cyber director
for Federal cybersecurity, my goal is to focus on Government-wide
outcomes, and ensure that the Federal enterprise is taking a holistic
approach to confronting evolving cyber threats. I welcome the
aggressive and ambitious goals of EO 14028.
The security of the Nation will be vastly improved when the goals
of the EO are met and the programs I talk about today are fully
implemented. Instead of accepting the inherent vulnerabilities of the
weakest part of the system architecture, we will have robust zero trust
principles deployed. Rather than accepting SolarWinds as the new
normal, we will directly protect critical software through enhanced
security measures. Firewalls will be augmented by a Government-wide,
continuously-monitored endpoint detection and response (EDR) system. No
longer will we be forced to relearn the same lessons from every attack,
but instead we will systematically store and keep system logs to learn
from past vulnerabilities and train the next generation of system
defenders.
The work toward building the secure future envisioned by the EO has
begun, but it is far from done, and challenges remain. However, the
agencies have made tangible security gains and will continue to do so
as this administration implements the EO. My comments today will focus
on the EO's intent to aggressively evolve the security strategy and
culture across the Federal enterprise.
the paradigm shift in the cybersecurity mindset
EO 14028 makes a significant contribution toward modernizing
cybersecurity defenses by protecting Federal systems, improving
information sharing between the U.S. Government and the private sector
on cyber issues, and strengthening the United States' ability to
respond to incidents when they occur. It was the first of many
ambitious steps the administration has taken to modernize National
cyber defenses.
The intent of the EO is to aggressively change the security
strategy and culture across the Federal enterprise to center around
leading practices in the cybersecurity community. The first step is
eliminating the outdated mindset and related focus on investing in
digital walls around networks in an attempt to keep sophisticated
actors out. We need to invest in secure solutions to make our Federal
systems defensible and then defend those systems such that we can
change the decision calculus of the adversary. We will do this by
applying multi-factor authentication, building in segmentation,
eliminating the use of passwords, performing routine patching, and
training our workforce.
key successes this past year
In January 2022, we released Moving the U.S. Government Toward Zero
Trust Cybersecurity Principles (M-22-09) to direct agencies to invest
in technology that is built and deployed with security foremost in mind
and move toward a zero trust architecture that provides the vigilance
to detect malicious behaviors and react quickly. Whether it is the next
SolarWinds or supply chain compromise Log4j vulnerability, we need to
be ready to rapidly identify malicious behavior and eliminate it before
it can do harm. Our security will never be impermeable, but adopting a
defensible approach will bring risks down to a level we can manage.
Federal agencies have responded to this call to action and provided
their zero trust implementation plans, thereby demonstrating a path to
a new baseline for Government security that will be iterated and
improved upon over time.
The goal of the zero trust strategy and associated implementation
plans is to demonstrate investment in secure solutions and people over
time. The EO mandates encryption of data, and agencies have responded.
They are implementing higher levels of encryption, using the best
methods in the industry to verify legitimate users, and bringing in
common toolsets that create constant vigilance within our networks.
Additionally, the use of strong, industry-leading multi-factor
authentication makes it harder for an adversary to move into and then
laterally in a target environment.
The vital services the Federal Government provides to the Nation
are reliant on critical software. Events like SolarWinds demonstrate
the fragility of those services when critical software is not secured.
The EO recognizes that software security must be one of our top
concerns. The practice of developing software through opaque processes
lacking sufficient controls only hinders security; and more often,
introduces vulnerabilities throughout the application. We must ensure
that products and application function not only in the manner intended
but also in a manner that is secure by design. We will do so by
partnering with the private sector to develop processes that enhance
the software supply chain security.
The EO directed the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) to develop guidance on core security measures to protect
critical software and OMB to require agencies to comply with that
guidance. Last July, NIST issued that guidance. The following month,
OMB required agencies to adopt a phased approach to implement NIST's
guidance. The memorandum on Protecting Critical Software Through
Enhanced Security Measures (M-21-30) is intended to: (1) Protect
critical software and critical software platforms from unauthorized
access and usage; (2) protect the confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of data used by these software and software platforms; and
(3) allow agencies to quickly detect, respond to, and recover from
threats and incidents involving critical software and critical software
platforms.
Given the magnitude of threats Federal agencies face, they must be
prepared for a threat actor to compromise someone's account or device;
this is why the EO-mandated deployment of a Government-wide endpoint
detection and response (EDR) system that is being continuously
monitored. This will improve our ability to detect malicious cyber
activity on Federal networks. To achieve this, OMB issued
implementation guidance to agencies as they accelerate the adoption of
EDR solutions and work to improve visibility into and detection of
cybersecurity vulnerabilities and threats to the Federal Government.
The memorandum, Improving Detection of Cybersecurity Vulnerabilities
and Incidents on Federal Government Systems through Endpoint Detection
and Response (M-22-01) is intended to improve agency capabilities for
early detection, response, and remediation of cybersecurity incidents
on their networks through the use of advanced technologies and leading
practices. At its core, cybersecurity is a risk reduction and
management activity. We are countering our adversaries' tactics and
improving the resiliency of our Nation.
However, despite our best efforts to defend Federal systems,
cybersecurity incidents may still occur. The EO recognized this and
requires agencies to improve their investigative and remediation
capabilities so they can be better prepared to respond. It is essential
that agencies and their IT service providers collect and maintain
information from networks and system logs on Federal information
systems. Log information is crucial to diagnosing, investigating, and
responding to cyber incidents. Without this information it can be
nearly impossible to know when and how a victim was compromised or
regain confidence in the integrity of affected systems. Further, the
maintenance of these logs affords the Federal Government the
opportunity to learn from attempts to breach system security.
OMB issued Improving the Federal Government's Investigative and
Remediation Capabilities Related to Cybersecurity Incidents (M-21-31)
last August to establish requirements for logging, log retention, and
log management across Federal civilian Executive branch agencies. The
requirements established in the memorandum will ultimately increase
information sharing enabling both accelerated incident response and
more effective information system defense.
We recognize there is much more work to be done and this first year
has shined a light on the challenges and opportunities ahead. The
framework created under the EO and subsequent OMB policies are nothing
less than a paradigm shift for Federal agencies. Large-scale change as
envisioned here does not happen in a year; it requires continued
investments, resources, and cultural change derived from the visibility
and support of leaders both within the Executive branch and here in
Congress.
Strong security requires time and investment, but the cost of
neglecting security is far higher, whether measured in dollars, lost
data, and PII, or impact to National security. The $1 billion
investment in the Technology Modernization Fund in the American Rescue
Plan Act of 2021 has already expanded our opportunities to address
cybersecurity challenges. We encourage Congress to support the full
fiscal year 2023 budget request for the Technology Modernization Fund
at $300 million and continue to invest in the many other resources that
support cybersecurity throughout the Federal enterprise.
conclusion
This administration made cybersecurity an immediate priority in
Federal IT. Since January 2021, we have been extremely active in laying
the strategic groundwork for the future of Federal cybersecurity. As we
move forward, we will focus on helping agencies implement these
priorities with the diligence this work requires and the speed the
moment demands.
None of us can do it alone. It is a partnership where collaboration
is key--collaboration with my colleagues here today and, most
importantly, collaboration with all of the cybersecurity personnel who
support the Federal Government and work tirelessly to safeguard our
Nation. I appreciate this committee's leadership, and I am confident
that through partnership, mutual transparency, and frank discussions
about where we need additional improvement, we will build a more secure
and resilient Federal enterprise.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look forward
to your questions.

Chairwoman Clarke. We thank you for your testimony and I
now recognize Mr. Goldstein to summarize his statement for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF ERIC GOLDSTEIN, EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR
CYBERSECURITY, CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY AGENCY

Mr. Goldstein. Thank you. Chairman Clarke, Ranking Member
Garbarino, Members of the subcommittee, it is a privilege to
rejoin the group today and speak a bit about the role of the
Cybersecurity Infrastructure Security Agency, or CISA, in
driving essential progress across the Federal civilian
Executive branch.
As we pass the 1-year anniversary of President Biden's
issuance of the Executive Order on Improving National
Cybersecurity, it is an opportune time to step back and reflect
on the progress that CISA and our partners across the 101
Federal civilian Executive branch agencies have made in driving
improvements in National cybersecurity and the urgent work that
we are driving going forward. As the Nation's cyber defense
agency and operational lead for civilian cybersecurity, CISA
played an integral role in implementing the provisions of the
Executive Order. We have done so in close collaboration with
our partners reflected on this witness table, CIOs and CSOs
across the Federal civilian Executive branch and our partners
across the private sector and even the international community.
I am proud to report that CISA met each of our assigned
efforts under the EO by the deadlines enumerated therein. But
deadlines matter less than outcomes and our focus needs to be
on ensuring that the cybersecurity that we expect across
Federal civilian agencies is present across every department,
every agency, every time. Our goal is simple, to reduce the
prevalence and impact of cybersecurity intrusions targeting
Federal agencies, ensure that intrusions are detected more
quickly, and that Federal agencies are using modern secure
technology that reduce the likelihood of intrusions by design.
To appreciate the progress we have made, it is useful to
step back and reflect on where we came from. As the committee
well knows, the supply chain compromise perpetrated by
malicious Russian cyber actors targeting, in many cases,
SolarWinds devices was a call to action for the Nation in
cybersecurity and reflected a delta between the ability of our
adversaries and our National cybersecurity posture. It also
reflected, as my co-witness noted, the need for a new model.
The Executive Order is based directly on what we learned from
the SolarWinds intrusion and our improvement plan to get to a
better state.
I am looking forward during this hearing to talk a bit more
about the urgent efforts that CISA is helping to drive to get
us to this place where we will have less intrusions by design.
This includes gaining centralized visibility across all Federal
civilian agencies by deployment of endpoint detection and
response technologies and by fully implementing our authorities
to conduct persistent hunts across Federal networks. It
includes helping agencies more rapidly adopt zero trust
principles where networks are presumed to be untrusted. We
focus on securing the most important assets, accounts, and data
by design. I am proud that CISA's zero trust maturity model
along with OMB's National zero trust strategy are key
accelerants for this effort.
We are focused on advancing transparency in management of
third-party cybersecurity risks, including by driving adoption
of automated and interoperable software bill of materials that
will give us a much more granular view into third-party risks
affecting Federal agencies and, indeed, across the Nation.
Expanding our provision of shared services and direct support
to Federal agencies to ensure that we reach a common baseline
of maturity that we can reasonably expect to yield the
cybersecurity outcomes that we expect.
Our Nation's at a turning point in cybersecurity and the
Executive Order helped us make that turn and took important
steps toward driving the change that we need to seek, but we
have a tremendous amount of more work to do. In order to get
where we need to be, we need continued focus and continued
investment in both cybersecurity and IT modernization across
the entire Federal civilian Executive branch. We deeply
appreciate the support of Congress in getting us to this point.
The focus of the Biden-Harris administration in driving needed
change to achieving our shared goal of an environment where the
American people's sensitive information and essential
Government services are rendered secure and resilient under all
conditions.
Thank you, again, for the chance to appear today. I am very
much looking forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goldstein follows:]
Prepared Statement of Eric Goldstein
May 17, 2022
Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to testify today on behalf
of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA). As we
recently passed the 1-year anniversary of President Biden's Executive
Order on Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity, I appreciate the
opportunity to highlight how CISA is driving improved cybersecurity
across the 101 departments and agencies of the Federal civilian
Executive branch (FCEB) in order to protect the Government services and
sensitive information upon which the American people depend.
As the operational lead for Federal civilian cybersecurity, CISA
has served a central role in implementing the Executive Order and
driving broad strategic change across the cybersecurity landscape. We
have done so in close collaboration with my fellow witnesses from the
Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Office of the National Cyber
Director (ONCD), and the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), in addition to our many public and private-sector partners. I
am proud to report that CISA met each of the requirements in the Order
by the relevant deadlines. More importantly, CISA and our partners have
catalyzed adoption of new approaches that should yield material
benefits in securing the Federal civilian enterprise going forward and
driving systemic improvings in security and resilience of the broader
technology ecosystem.
Partnership and collaboration are critical to our success and at
the heart of CISA's mission. Our goal is simple: Actively defend and
strategically guide FCEB departments and agencies through best-in-class
and cost-effective services, capabilities, and information as part of a
deep partnership with OMB, ONCD, the National Security Council (NSC),
and each agency's CIO and CISO. While we remain on a journey of
improvement across the FCEB, the Executive Order and resources provided
by Congress have dramatically accelerated progress over the past year.
the solarwinds compromise: a call to action
To understand the importance of the Executive Order, it's important
to begin by reflecting on lessons leared from the SolarWinds intrusion
campaign. In early December 2020, the Federal Government became aware
of a cyber intrusion campaign that included compromises of U.S.
Government agencies and private-sector organizations. This highly
sophisticated campaign, attributed to the Russian Foreign Intelligence
Service (SVR), involved a compromise of trusted software updates to
inject malicious code into thousands of victim organizations. After
gaining entry, the SVR used advanced techniques and tradecraft to
remain hidden for an extended period.
The SolarWinds supply chain compromise served as an important call
to action for the Government, and the Nation as a whole, demonstrating
the capabilities of our most sophisticated adversaries and the
potential implications of persistent intrusions on our National
security, economic prosperity, and public health and safety. The
campaign highlighted a delta between our adversaries' capabilities and
our National cyber defense posture, and reflected the need for a new
model. CISA led the U.S. Government's response to the campaign,
including by actively responding to intrusions, issuing an Emergency
Directive requiring specific mitigation steps, and developing tools to
help organizations drive remediation and eviction. As part of this
role, CISA supported Federal CIOs to gain reasonable confidence into
the integrity of their networks and eviction of the adversary. Each
significant line of effort in the Executive Order is based upon our
lessons learned during the SolarWinds campaign or other major
intrusions.
First, the campaign reinforced that traditional architectures that
rely upon perimeter defenses will often fail to protect networks
against malicious attacks, and, in some cases, facilitate our
adversaries' ability to move freely within networks. The Executive
Order tackles this issue by driving urgent adoption of Zero Trust
Architectures with heightened focus on securing data and services that
assume no implicit trust can be granted based on physical or network
location. Zero Trust Architectures will require significant changes to
Federal Government information technology environments and
cybersecurity capabilities. As part of this effort, CISA published a
Zero Trust Maturity Model that guides agencies' adoption of Zero Trust
principles and illustrates how CISA's services, like Continuous
Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM), will evolve to enable agencies' Zero
Trust implementations. Recognizing that secure migration to cloud
environments is inherently related to progress toward Zero Trust, we
published a Cloud Security Technical Reference Architecture and
continue efforts to help Federal civilian agencies, and the broader
community, utilize cloud resources with security as a priority. CISA
published technical guidance outlining preferred approaches to
enhancing the security of cloud business applications while enabling
greater operational visibility of those environment.
Second, CISA and individual agencies must continue to pursue
enhanced visibility into potential adversary activity targeting Federal
networks. The Executive Order has driven urgent steps to improve
visibility into threats targeting the U.S. Government, including
deployment of Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) capabilities across
FCEB networks. CISA developed a FCEB-wide EDR initiative to support
host-level visibility, persistent threat hunting, containment and
remediation, and incident response. To this point, we have provided
leading commercial EDR capabilities to more than 15 agencies, published
an EDR Concept of Operations to define how CISA and agencies will
proactively and persistently hunt for threats, which will dramatically
reduce our time to detect intrusions. This has allowed us to directly
engage and support all agencies impacted by the SolarWinds event. We
have also made urgent improvements into our CDM program to understand
the state of cyber risk across the FCEB, including deploying a new
dashboard that now provides information on asset status,
vulnerabilities, configuration flaws, and other risk conditions across
65 agencies, with more coming on-line each month.
Third, we gained an understanding of the deep criticality of
managing supply chain risks. To this end, CISA and our partner agencies
have developed new contract clauses that will impose strong security
and information-sharing requirements on Federal contractors. We also
worked with our partners at NIST to develop an inventory of critical
software, which will ensure that providers of such software are held
accountable to rigorous development and security controls. As an
additional critical step, CISA supports the effort to drive adoption of
Software Bills of Material (SBOM), the equivalent of ``food labels'',
throughout the software supply chain, enumerating the specific packages
and libraries used to construct the software. CISA will help refine,
operationalize, and scale SBOM, building on the community work begun by
NTIA, NIST, and a very diverse set of industry leaders and experts.
Widespread adoption of SBOM will provide essential transparency in
understanding security risks affecting our Nation's critical
technology.
Fourth, we recognized that incident response, threat hunting, and
security operations capabilities across the FCEB required further
maturation. We developed and published cybersecurity incident response
playbooks that will govern a standardized approach to incident response
across the civilian government and provide a benchmark for the broader
cyber community. Being prepared and formalizing a standardized plan for
how the U.S. Government responds to cyber incidents will improve the
speed and efficiency with which we can respond to, recover from, and
minimize impact from cyber intrusion campaigns. We also recognized an
urgent need to remove barriers to sharing threat information between
the Government and private sector. Industry is often uniquely
positioned to detect a compromise first, which is why it is imperative
for us to continue to deepen operational collaboration with key
industry partners. The actions set out in the Executive Order ensure
that IT service providers are able to share information with the
Government, and even requires them to share certain breach information.
It is becoming increasingly clear that sophisticated actors don't care
about the boundaries between individual agencies' networks and systems.
We need to continue to focus on CISA being the recipient of threat,
vulnerability, and incident information, even as we work to urgently
and transparently implement requirements under the Cybersecurity
Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2022, so we can
enrich that information and broadly share it to protect other potential
victims.
a vision for the future of federal civilian cybersecurity
It is clear that status quo approaches to Federal civilian
cybersecurity have been unsuccessful. A new approach is needed that is
grounded in the foundational precept that the Federal enterprise must
have unified visibility, capability, and trust of our partners to
rapidly identify and drive mitigation of cybersecurity risks and
accelerate progression toward secure technology environments. Our
vision is an FCEB environment in which intrusions are swiftly detected
and remediated, security weaknesses are identified and mitigated before
intrusions occur, and outdated or insecure technologies are replaced by
modern infrastructure leveraging Zero Trust principles.
To achieve this vision, we must continue four urgent efforts.
First, we must continue to gain visibility across FCEB agencies,
including by accelerating our EDR initiative and advancing our
visibility into threats targeting agency cloud environments--and using
this visibility to more quickly notify agencies of potential intrusions
and drive remediation. Second, we must expand our provision of shared
services to FCEB agencies to provide scalable, cost-effective
capabilities that drive down known security risks. Third, we must
provide agencies with actionable guidance and hands-on support,
including through our Federal Enterprise Improvement Teams, to help
agencies accelerate progress toward implementing Zero Trust
architectures and implement our directives. Finally, CISA will continue
to lead our National effort to drive adoption of modern security
practices, including Zero Trust principles and secure cloud
implementations, that will make measurable progress in reducing
cybersecurity risk at scale.
conclusion
Our Nation is at a turning point in cybersecurity. The Executive
Order has provided us a roadmap to make that turn and take important
steps toward this new direction. We must continue to work together, by
deepening our operational collaboration and ensuring we have the plans
and policies in place now, to defend against new and changing cyber
threats going forward. Recent incidents and the on-going threat of
malicious Russian cyber activity provide a stark reminder about the
vulnerability of our Federal networks.
The Executive Order catalyzed extraordinary action--but it was just
the start. In order to get to where we need to be in terms of Federal
cybersecurity, we need sustained and coordinated investment in
cybersecurity and IT Modernization over time. Our approach will require
multiple layers of protection, integrated technology, and continued
investment from Congress. There is no silver bullet or single
technology that will secure our systems. At CISA, alongside OMB, ONCD,
NSC, and our partners across the Federal Government, we stand ready for
the challenge ahead. And we deeply appreciate Congress' and this
administration's commitment to achieving our shared end goal of
safeguarding our most sensitive data and ensuring the availability of
critical services on which our citizens depend.

Chairwoman Clarke. Thank you for your testimony. I now
recognize Dr. Romine to summarize his statement for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHARLES H. ROMINE, DIRECTOR, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY LABORATORY, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND
TECHNOLOGY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

Mr. Romine. Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino,
and distinguished Members of the subcommittee, I am Charles
Romine, the director of the Information Technology Laboratory
at the National Institute of Standards and Technology, also
known as NIST. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today
on behalf of NIST on efforts to improve the cybersecurity of
the Federal Government.
This year, NIST is celebrating its 50th anniversary of its
work in cybersecurity. NIST's role in addressing cybersecurity
and privacy challenges includes conducting research and
developing broad and foundational standards, guidelines, and
tools for public and non-public organizations. The
collaborative, transparent, and open processes that NIST uses
to develop these resources results in more effective and usable
resources that are widely trusted and, therefore, more widely
used.
Technology standards and the foundational research that
enables their development and use are critical to advancing
trust in digital products and services. They can provide
increased assurance thus enabling more secure private and
rights preserving technologies. With growing cybersecurity
risks and rapid advances in technology, advancing trust in
technology could not be more important.
Federal agencies rely on NIST to provide unbiased,
technically sound information that is both actionable and
flexible to manage cybersecurity risks within their unique
missions. NIST's standards and guidelines provide a baseline
and how-to direction for Federal agencies in developing and
managing their cybersecurity and privacy programs. NIST's work
also informs OMB and CISA in their roles to help Federal
agencies operationalize these strong cybersecurity measures. I
am pleased to testify today with my fellow panelists from OMB,
from CISA, and from GSA, all critical partners with NIST in
enhancing Federal cybersecurity.
The Executive Order, Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity
was critically aimed at improving the cybersecurity of Federal
Government and the Nation. Many recent incidents share
commonalities including insufficient software and supply chain
cybersecurity defenses that leave organizations vulnerable to
incidents. In response to the EO, over the last year, NIST
published groundbreaking work to enhance software supply chain
security. The guidance developed by NIST is aimed at securing
existing software already in use by Federal agencies, as well
as adopting strong, secure software development and supply
chain risk management principles to address the security of
software procured by Federal agencies.
NIST is committed to working within the Executive branch to
assist OMB and agencies in implementing these practices. The
Executive Order also directed Federal agencies to adopt zero
trust architectures based off NIST guidelines moving toward a
new paradigm for cybersecurity, as you have been told. As
agencies work to implement the guidance under the Executive
Order, it is important to continue to implement the full
complement of our guidance to manage risks. Along these lines,
NIST has kicked off a process to update the NIST cybersecurity
framework, widely used across public and private sectors, to
make it easier for organizations to manage growing
cybersecurity risks.
Emerging technologies, such as internet of things, quantum
computing, and artificial intelligence will add additional
challenges for Federal cybersecurity. More than ever, Federal
agencies and other organizations must balance a rapidly-
evolving threat landscape against the need to fulfill mission
requirements. Cybersecurity must be considered alongside all
other types of risks addressed by organizations and by
leadership at the most senior level. NIST is committed to
ensuring that organizations have the guidance and the tools
they need to do so.
Thank you for the opportunity to present on NIST activities
to improve Federal network cybersecurity through implementation
of Executive Order 14028, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Romine follows:]
Prepared Statement of Charles H. Romine
May 17, 2022
Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and distinguished
Members of the subcommittee, I am Dr. Charles Romine, the director of
the Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the Department of
Commerce's National Institute of Standards and Technology--known as
NIST. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on behalf of NIST
on our efforts to improve the cybersecurity of the Federal Government.
NIST is home to five Nobel Prize winners, with programs focused on
National priorities such as artificial intelligence, advanced
manufacturing, the digital economy, precision metrology, quantum
information science, biosciences and, of course, cybersecurity. The
mission of NIST is to promote U.S. innovation and industrial
competitiveness by advancing measurement science, standards, and
technology in ways that enhance economic security and improve our
quality of life.
In the NIST Information Technology Laboratory, we work to cultivate
trust in information technology and metrology. Trust in the digital
economy is built upon key principles like cybersecurity, privacy,
interoperability, equity, and avoiding bias in the development and
deployment of technology. NIST conducts fundamental and applied
research, advances standards to understand and measure technology, and
develops tools to evaluate such measurements. Technology standards--and
the foundational research that enables their development and use--are
critical to advancing trust in and promoting interoperability between
digital products and services. Critically, they can provide increased
assurance, thus enabling more secure, private, and rights-preserving
technologies.
nist's role in cybersecurity
This year, NIST is celebrating the 50th anniversary of its work in
cybersecurity. NIST's role in addressing cybersecurity and privacy
challenges includes conducting research and developing broad and
foundational standards, guidelines, and tools for public and non-public
organizations. These efforts are focused on securing the technology
used today, while also conducting ground-breaking research focused
toward securing the technology of the future. Fifty years ago, NIST
efforts began with the publication of the Data Encryption Standard,
which enabled efficiencies with security, like the electronic banking
that we all enjoy today. The NIST Advanced Encryption Standard has been
estimated to provide more than $250 billion in economic value over a
period of 20 years. Today, our efforts include everything from
technical cryptography algorithms, establishing strong cybersecurity
and privacy controls, and operational resources on managing
cybersecurity and privacy risks, to cybersecurity education and
training programs. In celebration of our 50th anniversary, we are
hosting several events and resources to highlight some of the
extraordinary advancements in cybersecurity at NIST over the years and
encourage you to check it out on our website.
As a non-regulatory agency, NIST prides itself on the strong
partnerships we have developed with the Government and private sector.
NIST seeks and relies on diverse stakeholder feedback amongst
Government, industry, academia, and non-profit entities to develop and
improve our cybersecurity resources. The collaborative, transparent,
and open processes NIST uses to develop resources results in more
effective and usable resources that are widely trusted, and therefore,
more widely used by various organizations. Therefore, NIST resources
are used not only by Federal agencies, but also private-sector
organizations of all sizes, educational institutions, and State, local,
and Tribal governments.
Cybersecurity is critically important to accomplishing Federal
missions and protecting Federal systems and information, as well as
ensuring access to important programs and services relied on by
Americans. I am pleased to testify today with Chris DeRusha from the
Office of Management and Budget and the Office of the National Cyber
Director and Eric Goldstein from the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, two critical partners with NIST in enhancing the
cybersecurity of Federal agencies. Under the Federal Information
Security Modernization Act (FISMA), NIST develops security standards
and guidelines for non-National security Federal agency systems, which
may be mandatory for Federal agencies. NIST standards and guidance
provide a baseline and how-to direction for Federal agencies in
developing and managing their cybersecurity and privacy programs for
Federal systems. NIST's work also informs OMB and CISA in their roles
to help Federal agencies operationalize these strong cybersecurity
measures. Federal agencies rely on NIST to provide unbiased,
technically sound information that is both actionable and flexible to
meet their unique missions and business needs while managing
cybersecurity and privacy risks. NIST's explicit role in developing
security guidelines for Federal agencies was first established in the
Brooks Automatic Data Processing Act in 1965 (Public Law 89-306). Its
role was strengthened through the Computer Security Act of 1987 (Public
Law 100-235), the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002
(FISMA) (Public Law 107-347),\1\ and reaffirmed in the Federal
Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA 2014) (Public Law
113-283).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ FISMA was enacted as Title III of the E-Government Act of 2002
(Public Law 107-347).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
executive order 14028 on improving the nation's cybersecurity
On May 12, 2021, President Biden signed Executive Order,
``Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity'' (EO 14028), which was
critically aimed at improving the cybersecurity of the networks of the
Federal Government and the Nation. Cybersecurity incidents such as
SolarWinds, Microsoft Exchange, and the Colonial Pipeline incident are
a sobering reminder that U.S. public and private-sector entities
increasingly face sophisticated malicious cyber activity from both
nation-state actors and cyber criminals. These incidents share
commonalities, including insufficient software and supply chain
cybersecurity defenses that leave public and private-sector entities
vulnerable to incidents. It highlights the importance of both securing
existing software already in use by Federal agencies, as well as
adopting strong secure software development and supply chain risk
management principles to address the security of software procured by
Federal agencies.
The Executive Order included several directives for the Secretary
of Commerce, through NIST, aimed at enhancing software supply chain
security. I am pleased to report that NIST has met all the deliverables
under the EO, despite tight time lines. NIST carried out the EO
directives in close cooperation with other Government agencies and
private- and public-sector organizations and individuals through our
open, transparent, and inclusive processes. This included hosting 7
workshops over the past year to solicit input from stakeholders. The
initial workshop, hosted June 2 and 3, 2021, 3 weeks after the EO was
issued, garnered more than 1,400 participants and 150 position papers.
In addition, NIST participated in two White House Summits, on
Cybersecurity Supply Chain and on Open Source Software Security, that
informed our efforts.
enhancing software security and cybersecurity supply chain risk
management
In response to the EO, over the last year, NIST published ground-
breaking work to identify and secure critical software, establish
secure software development life-cycle best practices, establish
minimum standards for vendor or developer verification of software,
establish supply chain security guidance, and develop the technical
criteria to inform initiation of pilot labeling programs to help
consumers understand the cybersecurity of software products and
internet of things devices. The NIST guidance developed under the EO
provides effective measures to reduce risks to software supply chains
while allowing for future innovation and economic growth within the
secure software ecosystem. In the process, NIST has also assisted the
Office of Management and Budget, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, the General Services Administration, and other
agencies to meet their responsibilities under the EO. A full list of
NIST's efforts and deliverables under EO 14028 can be found in the
appendix, but I will expand on a few critical efforts in detail here.
Defining and Securing Critical Software
One of the goals of the EO is to assist in developing a security
baseline for critical software products used across the Federal
Government. The designation of software as EO-critical will then drive
additional activities, including how the Federal Government purchases
and manages deployed critical software. Under the EO, NIST defined EO-
critical software as any software that has, or has direct software
dependencies, upon one or more components with at least one of these
attributes: Is designed to run with elevated privilege or manage
privileges; has direct or privileged access to networking or computing
resources; is designed to control access to data or operational
technology; performs a function critical to trust; or, operates outside
of normal trust boundaries with privileged access. The EO directs NIST
to issue guidance on security measures for critical software, and
further directs the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to require
Federal agencies to comply with that guidance. The guidance issued by
NIST in July 2021 outlines core cybersecurity measures for the
protection of critical software in use by Federal agencies. The
guidance developed by NIST is intended to supplement, not supplant,
other NIST security measures for securing software, including guidance
on supply chain security and zero trust practices.
Ensuring Secure Software Development
The EO requires the Government to only purchase software that is
developed securely and directs NIST to ``issue guidance identifying
practices that enhance the security of the software supply chain.''
Secure development practices will help ensure security is a
consideration throughout the life cycle of a software product. Updated
in February 2022 in response to EO 14028, the Secure Software
Development Framework (SSDF) provides a set of fundamental and sound
practices for secure software development. The SSDF was developed in
partnership with organizations across the software industry. It is
intended to help software producers reduce the number of
vulnerabilities in released software, reduce the potential impact of
the exploitation of undetected or unaddressed vulnerabilities, and
address the root causes of vulnerabilities to prevent recurrences.
Also, because the SSDF provides a common language for describing secure
software development practices, software producers and acquirers can
use it to foster their communications for procurement processes and
other management activities.
In addition, to meet the goals of the EO, NIST also released
related Software Supply Chain Security Guidance to help Federal
agencies as they acquire software or a product containing software on
how to ensure conformity with the secure software development practices
outlined in the SSDF. The guidelines recommend agencies should use the
SSDF terminology to organize communications about secure software
development requirements, require attestation to cover secure software
development practices throughout the software life cycle, accept first-
party attestation of conformity with SSDF practices unless a risk-based
approach determines that a second- or third-party attestation is
required, and when requesting artifacts of conformance, request high-
level artifacts. It also recommends agencies implement the practices
outlined in NIST's supply chain cybersecurity guidance, to increase
visibility into, and mitigation of, supply chain cybersecurity risks.
As directed by OMB in March, pursuant to the EO, Federal agencies
are now required to implement the SSDF and associated security guidance
from NIST. NIST is committed to working within the Executive branch to
assist OMB and agencies in implementing this guidance. In the future,
NIST will provide additional practical guidance to organizations on
implementing the SSDF, as well as how to leverage the guidance to
address open-source software security vulnerabilities.
Cybersecurity Supply Chain Risk Management
NIST has collaborated with public and private-sector stakeholders
to research and develop Cybersecurity Supply Chain Risk Management (C-
SCRM) tools and metrics, producing case studies and widely-used
guidelines on mitigation strategies. These multiple sources reflect the
complex global marketplace and assist Federal agencies, companies, and
others to manage cybersecurity risks in supply chains. The SECURE
Technology Act authorized a specific role to NIST in developing
cybersecurity supply chain risk management guidelines. In response to
EO 14028, NIST recently issued an update to its foundational guideline,
Cybersecurity Supply Chain Risk Management Practices for Systems and
Organizations (SP 800-161 Revision 1) to guide organizations in
identifying, assessing, and responding to cybersecurity supply chain
risks at all levels. NIST's guidance provides additional information on
how to leverage emerging concepts like the software bill of materials
(SBOM).
Building from this foundational cybersecurity supply chain risk
management guideline and deliverables issued in response to EO 14028,
NIST recently announced the National Initiative for Improving
Cybersecurity in Supply Chains (NIICS), a new public-private
partnership to improve cybersecurity in supply chains. This initiative
will emphasize tools, technologies, and guidance focused on the
developers and providers of technology as well as help organizations to
build, evaluate, and assess the cybersecurity of products and services
in their supply chain. NIST issued a Request for Information in
February 2022 to inform further development of NIICS and other NIST
cybersecurity frameworks, standards, and guidelines.
Advancing Zero Trust Architecture
EO 14028 directs Federal agencies to develop plans to implement a
Zero Trust Architecture in support of Federal cybersecurity
modernization efforts. Agency migration plans needed to be consistent,
where appropriate, with NIST standards and guidance on zero trust.
NIST's technical guidance defines zero trust, identifies foundational
zero trust tenets, and shares deployment models and use cases where
zero trust could improve an enterprise's overall information technology
security posture. NIST has also launched a collaborative project with
industry to demonstrate practical, example approaches to implementing a
zero trust architecture to aid agencies and other organizations in
their implementations.
other challenges faced by federal agencies
Managing Cybersecurity and Privacy Risk
More than ever, Federal agencies and other organizations must
balance a rapidly-evolving cybersecurity and privacy threat landscape
against the need to fulfill business requirements on an enterprise
level. Risk management underlies everything that NIST does in
cybersecurity and privacy and is part of its full suite of standards
and guidelines. NIST equips organizations with an aligned and
integrated portfolio of tools to understand, measure, manage, and
communicate risk--specific to various risk domains, including
cybersecurity, privacy, and supply chain--in the context of the
enterprise.
Among many risk management resources, the NIST Risk Management
Framework (RMF) provides a comprehensive, flexible, repeatable, and
measurable 7-step process to manage information security and privacy
risk. The RMF links to a suite of NIST standards and guidelines to
support implementation of risk management programs for Federal agencies
to meet the requirements of FISMA. For example, the RMF provides a
process in which to select and implement security and privacy controls
(SP 800-53) and to assess if they are operating as intended and
achieving the desired outcomes (SP 800-53A).
Executive Order 13800 also provides direction to Federal agencies
with respect to cybersecurity, and specifies that Federal agencies
shall use NIST's Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure
Cybersecurity (Cybersecurity Framework). NIST continues to maintain the
Cybersecurity Framework to help organizations--including Federal
agencies--better identify, assess, and manage cybersecurity risks in
the context of their missions and business objectives. The
Cybersecurity Framework is used widely by private and public sector
organizations in and outside of the United States and has been
translated into multiple languages, speaking to its global success as a
commonly-used resource. The Cybersecurity Framework was last updated in
April 2018. Much has changed in the cybersecurity landscape in terms of
threats, capabilities, technologies, education, and workforce, and the
availability of resources to help organizations to better manage
cybersecurity risk. NIST has begun the update process, beginning with a
request for information to gather stakeholder input about evaluating
and improving the Cybersecurity Framework.
NIST believes privacy should be an equal consideration to other
risks such as cybersecurity and safety that organizations manage in
their risk portfolios. Privacy plays a critical role in safeguarding
fundamental values such as human autonomy and dignity, as well as civil
rights and civil liberties. NIST has prioritized measurement science
research and the creation of frameworks, guidance, tools, and standards
that protect privacy. Much of NIST's critical cybersecurity guidelines
now includes privacy considerations. In addition, NIST maintains the
NIST Privacy Framework, modeled on the NIST Cybersecurity Framework, to
help organizations identify and manage privacy risks. NIST is also
collaborating with the White House Office of Science and Technology
Policy and the National Science Foundation to advance privacy-
preserving data sharing and analytics through bilateral prize
challenges with the United Kingdom this year.
Vulnerability Management
Protecting information technology is critical and NIST plays a key
role in this area by maintaining the repository of all known and
publicly reported information technology vulnerabilities, called the
National Vulnerability Database (NVD). The NVD is an authoritative
source for standardized information on security vulnerabilities that
NIST updates regularly.
The vulnerabilities catalogued in the NVD are weaknesses in coding
found in software and hardware that, if exploited, can impact the
confidentiality, integrity, or availability of information or
information systems. The NVD tracks vulnerabilities over time and
allows users to assess changes in vulnerability discovery rates within
specific products or specific types of vulnerabilities. The NVD is the
second-most frequently accessed website at NIST, after the NIST time
service, and is used across the country by the IT and cybersecurity
industry, by cybersecurity tools and scanners, by other nations and by
computer emergency response teams around the world.
emerging technologies
Cryptography
NIST has fostered the development of cryptographic techniques and
technology for 50 years through an open process which brings together
industry, Government, and academia to develop workable approaches to
cryptographic protection that enable practical security. Our work in
cryptography has continually evolved to meet the needs of the changing
IT landscape. As our electronic networks grow increasingly open and
interconnected, it is crucial to have strong, trusted cryptographic
standards and guidelines, algorithms, and encryption methods that
provide a foundation for e-commerce transactions, mobile device
conversations, and other exchanges of data. NIST has several
cryptography efforts, but one worth highlighting today, will be the
difficult and long transition to ensure our systems and data remain
encrypted when quantum computing becomes a reality. If large-scale
quantum computers are ever built, they will be able to break many of
the public-key cryptosystems currently in use. This would seriously
compromise the confidentiality and integrity of digital communications
on the internet and elsewhere. The goal of post-quantum cryptography
(also called quantum-resistant cryptography) is to develop
cryptographic systems that are secure against both quantum and
classical computers, and can interoperate with existing communications
protocols and networks.
Motivated by these considerations, NIST is in the process of
selecting public-key (quantum-resistant) cryptographic algorithms
through a public, competition-like process. The intent is for new
public-key cryptography standards to specify one or more additional un-
Classified, publicly-disclosed digital signature, public-key
encryption, and key-establishment algorithms that are available world-
wide and capable of protecting sensitive Government information well
into the foreseeable future, including after the advent of quantum
computers.
In parallel, NIST has launched a project in collaboration with
industry and Government partners at its National Cybersecurity Center
of Excellence (NCCoE) to develop practices to help agencies and other
organizations prepare now for future cryptographic algorithm
transitions. Established in 2012, the NCCoE is a collaborative hub
where industry organizations, Government agencies, and academic
institutions work together to address businesses' most pressing
cybersecurity issues. This public-private partnership enables the
creation of practical cybersecurity solutions for specific industries,
as well as for broad, cross-sector technology challenges. This project
will help agencies and other organizations prepare now for migration to
post-quantum cryptographic algorithms and plan for the replacement of
hardware, software, and services that use public-key algorithms now so
that information is protected from future attacks.
Cybersecurity for the Internet of Things (IoT)
The rapid proliferation of internet-connected devices and rise of
the IoT come with great anticipation. Connected devices bring the
promise of enhanced business efficiencies and increased customer
satisfaction. IoT devices could include wearable fitness trackers,
``smart'' televisions, wireless infusion pumps, and cars--among many
others. Internet-connected devices generally sense, collect, process,
and transmit a wide array of data, ranging from consumer personally
identifiable information to proprietary company data to infrastructure
data used to make critical real-time decisions or to effect a change in
the physical world. Just as there are a variety of new uses, the IoT
ecosystem's nature brings new security considerations.
NIST's Cybersecurity for IoT program conducts research and produces
guidelines to help device manufacturers and users understand and manage
risk of IoT devices in their operating environments. NIST provides
guidance for manufacturers and their supporting third parties as they
conceive, design, develop, test, sell, and support IoT devices across
their spectrum of customers.
The IoT Cybersecurity Improvement Act of 2020 requires NIST to
provide guidance for Federal agencies on ``the appropriate use and
management by agencies of [IoT] devices'' connected to information
systems. NIST has issued IoT-specific guidance for Federal
organizations in understanding and defining their IoT cybersecurity
requirements, including the role of IoT devices as elements of Federal
systems and provides guidance for addressing the unique risks such
devices can present. This guidance includes a collection of technical
and non-technical cybersecurity controls defining a broad range of IoT
device capabilities and supporting non-technical actions that an agency
can apply in documenting their IoT cybersecurity requirements.
Artificial Intelligence
Cross-cutting technologies like artificial intelligence (AI) that
increasingly affect so many dimensions of our lives raise a number of
new and unique cybersecurity challenges. With the advent of AI and
machine learning, today's machines are engineered for complex decision
making that historically only people could handle.
Trust is key to realizing the full promise of artificial
intelligence (AI) as a tool to enable innovation, enhance economic
security, and improve our quality of life. To help build that trust,
NIST is developing the AI Risk Management Framework to provide guidance
on better managing risks to individuals, organizations, and society
associated with AI. The framework adopts a ``rights-preserving
approach'' to AI, putting the protection of individual rights at the
forefront of AI development and use. NIST released the first draft of
this framework for public comments in March. The AI RMF outlines a
process to address traditional technical measures of accuracy,
robustness, resilience, and reliability. It also acknowledges that
sociotechnical characteristics of the system--characteristics such as
privacy, interpretability, safety and bias, which are inextricably tied
to human and social behavior--are equally important when evaluating the
overall risk of a system.
As a first step on a long road to responsible AI development, NIST
has recently produced guidance to help identify and manage AI bias.
This work underlines that a complete understanding of bias must take
into account both human and systemic biases.
NIST has a long history of devising appropriate metrics,
measurement tools, and challenge problems to support technology
development. These evaluations strengthen research communities,
establish research methodology, and facilitate technology transfer.
NIST is looking to bring these benefits of community evaluations to
bear on the problem of constructing trustworthy AI systems. These
evaluations will begin with community input to identify potential harms
of selected AI technologies in context, and the data requirements for
AI trust evaluations.
conclusion
Advancing cybersecurity research and standards that ensure a
secure, private, and interoperable digital economy is a significant
priority for NIST. Our economy is increasingly global, complex, and
interconnected. It is characterized by rapid advances in technology.
The timely availability of international cybersecurity standards and
guidance is a dynamic and critical component to ensure the
cybersecurity and resilience of such advances in technology. With
robust collaboration with stakeholders across Government, industry,
international bodies, and academia, NIST aims to cultivate trust and
foster an environment that enables innovation on a global scale.
Cybersecurity challenges, and the supply chain software security
challenges discussed today, are a complex issue. Cybersecurity must be
considered alongside all other types of risks addressed by
organizations and by leadership at the most senior level. NIST is
committed to ensuring that organizations have the guidance and tools to
do so.
My staff at NIST are some of the top cybersecurity and standards
experts in the world. Working with our partners in other Federal
agencies, such as OMB and CISA, the private sector, academia, and other
allied countries, and with the support of Congress, we will work
tirelessly to address current and future cybersecurity challenges.
Thank you for the opportunity to present on NIST activities to
improve Federal Network Cybersecurity through implementation of
Executive Order 14028. I look forward to your questions.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Clarke. We thank you for your testimony here
today. Finally, let me apologize, and recognize Mr. Shive to
summarize his statement for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID SHIVE, CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER, GENERAL
SERVICES ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Shive. Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member
Garbarino, and Members of the subcommittee. My name is David
Shive, and I am the chief information officer at the U.S.
General Services Administration. I am pleased to be here today
to discuss the important role and impact of Federal network
security and the role that plays for GSA and the larger Federal
Government. The Executive Order on Improving the Nation's
Cybersecurity has laid out a clear vision for cybersecurity
through a targeted focus on improving the Federal Government's
ability to identify, deter, protect, detect, and respond. The
Executive Order is wide-ranging and outlines the standards and
requirements that Federal organizations will take to ensure
cyber resiliency.
Among the numerous key activities is the adoption of zero
trust. At GSA, we have transformed our cybersecurity strategy
to a zero trust strategy that aligns with the administration's
goals. We have worked collaboratively in partnership with our
colleagues at the Office of Management and Budget, the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, the Office of
the National Cyber Director, and the National Institute of
Standards and Technology, to leverage best practices and the
sharing of information. Zero trust is not a panacea. It is not
a singular solution either. Zero trust presents an opportunity
for an important pivot that requires a multi-year approach and
sustained financial investment that builds on the existing
cybersecurity principles of least privilege and layered
defense, made possible by advances in technology that make it
more readily achievable today.
For the past few years, GSA has been working to modernize
technology to protect against cyber threats and deliver a
better digital experience for the American people. We are
committed to realizing the promise of these innovations in the
most simple and secure way possible, balancing cybersecurity
with customer experience. My organization has been working to
enhance the security of our underlying systems, making
available more secure authentication options, moving beyond
simple user IDs and passwords, to uniquely log in to systems.
We have implemented rigorous cybersecurity and privacy
requirements, independent assessment and authorization, and on-
going security monitoring. We have also focused on encryption
to ensure our information is secure in transit from web
browsers to sites, and in the back-end databases where our data
is stored. We are evolving from the traditional perimeter-
based, compliance-oriented model to a zero trust architecture
that considers resources as fundamentally untrusted. With zero
trust, we seek to verify everything and anything attempting
access and verify that access continually.
In 2021, GSA received $29.8 million investments from the
Technology Modernization Fund to modernize legacy network
systems and advance our zero trust architecture strategy. We
are focusing that funding on three zero trust building blocks:
Users and devices, networks, and enhanced security operations
center capabilities, expanding it to also cover our Government-
wide shared services like Data.gov, Cloud.gov, Login.gov, and
Max.gov.
We are also accelerating our adoption of secure cloud
services, leveraging modern cloud services to improve
cybersecurity and user experience. We continue to support the
FedRAMP program, which provides a standardized approach to
security authorizations for cloud authorizations.
By implementing these modernization efforts, GSA will
improve cybersecurity capabilities to continually verify the
security of users, devices, applications, and data, as well as
to achieve broad-based visibility across the GSA ecosystem with
enhanced capabilities leveraging automation to manage and
respond to threats in real time.
GSA will also improve user experience through seamless
connection to GSA-managed environments and applications while
maintaining zero trust principles. The security of Federal
systems is paramount. This is truer today than at any time
before.
We are at an age where increasingly connected and where the
cybersecurity threat landscape is heightened. As a Nation, we
face persistent and increasingly sophisticated malicious cyber
campaigns that threaten all of us, the public sector, private
sector, and the security and privacy of the American people.
These threats have evolved from basic hacking and denial-
of-service operations seeking to disrupt mission delivery, to
more sophisticated nation-state sponsored threats targeting
critical infrastructure that seek to use cyber as an asymmetric
tool of broader warfare.
All organizations can be vulnerable if they do not take
appropriate steps to plan for and avoid cyber attack. We have
no choice but to evolve.
As the last few years have shown, traditional approaches to
cyber and network defense are no longer commensurate with the
threats we face as a Government. We need to raise the security
bar, integrating zero trust concepts into everything we do in
IT, security, and assurance levels, which also necessarily
includes sustained funding.
Thanks for the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss Federal information security and its important role in
the Government. I look forward to answering any questions you
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shive follows:]
Prepared Statement of David Shive
May 17, 2022
Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and Members of the
committee, my name is David Shive, and I am the chief information
officer at the U.S. General Services Administration (GSA). I am pleased
to be here today to discuss the important role and impact that Federal
Network Security plays for GSA and the larger Federal Government.
executive order on improving the nation's cybersecurity
The Executive Order on Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity has
laid out a clear vision for cybersecurity through a targeted focus on
improving the Federal Government's ability to identify, deter, protect,
detect, and respond. The Executive Order is wide-ranging, and outlines
standards and requirements that Federal organizations will take to
ensure cyber resiliency. Among the numerous key activities is the
adoption of zero trust. At GSA, we have transformed our cybersecurity
strategy to a zero trust strategy that aligns with the administration's
goals. We have worked collaboratively in partnership with our
colleagues at the Office of Management and Budget, the Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Security Agency, the Office of the National Cyber
Director, and the National Institute of Standards and Technology, to
leverage best practices and sharing of information.
Zero trust is not a panacea. It is not a singular solution either.
Zero trust presents an opportunity for an important pivot and requires
a multi-year approach and sustained financial investment that builds on
the existing cybersecurity principles of least privilege and layered
defense, made possible by advances in technology that make it more
readily achievable today.
advancing zero trust
GSA's mission is to deliver the best value in real estate,
acquisition, and technology services to the Government and the American
people. Our priorities are to deliver superior service and savings,
serve our customers, expand opportunities for small business, make
Government more sustainable, and be a leader in innovation.
For the past few years, GSA has been working to modernize
technology to protect against cyber threats and deliver a better
digital experience for the American people. We are committed to
realizing the promise of these innovations in the most simple and
secure way possible, balancing cybersecurity with customer experience.
My organization has been working to enhance the security of our
underlying systems, making available more secure authentication options
to identify and authenticate people with Multi-Factor Authentication,
moving beyond simple User ID and Passwords to uniquely log on to the
systems. To ensure continued security and resiliency of the underlying
information systems we depend on, we have implemented rigorous
cybersecurity and privacy requirements, independent assessment and
authorization, and on-going security monitoring. We have also focused
on encryption to ensure our information is secure in transit from web
browsers to sites, and in the back-end databases where our data is
stored.
We are evolving from the traditional perimeter-based, compliance-
oriented model to a zero trust architecture that considers resources as
fundamentally untrusted. With zero trust, we seek to verify everything
and anything attempting access and verifying that access continually.
technology modernization
In 2021, GSA received a $29.8 million investment from the
Technology Modernization Fund to modernize legacy network systems and
advance our zero trust architecture strategy. We are focusing the
funding on three zero trust building blocks: Users and devices,
networks, and enhanced security operations center capabilities.
To improve user and devices security, we are modernizing and
redesigning our legacy directory service, and aligning to an identity,
credential, and access management (ICAM) capability leveraging cloud-
based solutions to ensure secure authentication and identity validation
for GSA staff, customers, and public access.
For networks, we are breaking down our traditional perimeter-based
approach in favor of moving security directly to the users, devices,
applications, and data. We have two key focus areas where we are
working to achieve micro-segmentation:

Deployment of a Secure Access Service Edge (SASE) technology
solution that directly connects users everywhere--at home and
in offices via broadband to a central security stack that then
achieves secure authentication, validates identities, and
negotiates access at the application level.

We are also working to achieve micro-segmentation within our
Building Security Network in 500 GSA Federally-owned buildings
under GSA's jurisdiction, custody, and control that house
operational technology and internet-of-things (OT/IOT) devices
that support the running of our buildings. This is key to
address the nascent state of security in this area and will
further our efforts in combating challenges like ransomware
that target this space.
Last, we are focused on further modernizing our security operations
center and expanding it to also cover our Government-wide shared
services, like Data.gov, Cloud.gov, Login.gov, and Max.gov. Here we
have invested heavily to achieve reciprocal security for workloads in
the cloud to that which we have on-premise. To achieve this, we are
investing in security automation, custom dashboarding, detection
aligned to application workflows and business functions, and on-going
curiosity hunting. While TMF funding was critical to allow GSA to begin
this work, the long-term success of these efforts also requires year-
over-year, consistent funding to carry out this work.
By implementing these modernization efforts, GSA will improve
cybersecurity capabilities to continually verify the security of users,
devices, applications, and data as well as achieve broad-based
visibility across the GSA ecosystem with enhanced capabilities
leveraging automation to manage and respond to threats in real time.
GSA will also improve user experience through seamless connection to
GSA-managed environments and applications while maintaining zero trust
principles.
While I serve as GSA's CIO, GSA as a whole is committed to this
work on a Government-wide scale as exemplified, to name just one, in
GSA's fiscal year 2023 budget request, which includes $300 million for
the Technology Modernization Fund that could be used by other Federal
agencies to support their modernization efforts including their
transition to zero trust.
cybersecurity outcomes
The security of Federal systems is paramount. This is truer today
than at any time before. We are in an age where we are increasingly
connected and where the cybersecurity threat landscape is heightened.
As a Nation we face persistent and increasingly sophisticated malicious
cyber campaigns that threaten all of us--the public sector, private
sector, and the security and privacy of the American people. These
threats have evolved from basic hacking and denial-of-service
operations seeking to disrupt mission delivery, to more sophisticated
nation-state sponsored threats targeting critical infrastructure that
seek to use cyber as an asymmetric tool in broader warfare.
All organizations can be vulnerable if they do not take the
appropriate steps to plan for and avoid a cyber attack. We have no
choice but to evolve. As the last few years have shown, traditional
approaches to cybersecurity and network defense are no longer
commensurate with the threats we face as a Government. We need to raise
the security bar, integrating zero trust concepts into everything we do
at the IT, security, and assurance levels, which also necessarily
includes sustained funding.
conclusion
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss
Federal Network Security and its important role in the Federal
Government. I look forward to answering any questions you have.

Chairwoman Clarke. I thank the witnesses for your testimony
here today. I will remind the subcommittee that we will each
have 5 minutes to question the panel. I will now recognize
myself for questions.
Russia's invasion of the Ukraine has highlighted the
serious cyber threats we face. In particular, during this
period of geopolitical conflict, interests from foreign
adversaries in accessing our Federal agency networks is likely
to be as high as ever. Mr. DeRusha and Mr. Goldstein, what
actions has the administration taken to secure Federal agencies
in response to the threat from Russia in recent months?
Mr. DeRusha. Well, thank you, Chairwoman, for the question.
We share a concern. That is why we have been convening Federal
CIOs and CSOs for conversations around elevated threat levels
and preparation measures since last November. It is something
that we have really sustained over that period of time with
regular communication. I give a lot of kudos to DHS both
headquarters standing up a unified coordination group to really
be proactively prepared for anything that could come our way
and also just the measures that CISA's taking in their Shields
Up effort. A lot of fantastic resources. Any time they see
something occurring in Ukraine or elsewhere, they are sharing
that information with the entire Federal CIO and CSO community
ensuring that they have that thread of information at their
fingertips, you know, to prevent any harm that could come our
way.
So, you know, it is something that we take seriously. We
remain in an elevated state and I kind-of offer Eric for
further comments on that.
Mr. Goldstein. Certainly, thank you so much. As noted by my
co-witness, this has been our paramount concern even well
before Russia's tragic invasion of Ukraine in February. As the
operational lead for Federal cybersecurity, our focus at CISA
has been on taking any information that we can glean from our
partners in the private sector, from our partners operating on
the ground in Ukraine, computer emergency response teams in
Eastern Europe, taking that information, distilling it down,
and then sharing it as quickly as possible with our key
partners here in the United States, including particularly,
Federal civilian Executive branch agencies. We have done that
work through our published advisories, all of which are
available at our centralized website, CISIA.gov/shieldsup, as
well as through our focused engagements with Federal agencies
and partners like OMB and ONCD to ensure that even though we
have not yet seen the damaging attacks on the homeland that we
were so concerned about, we remain in this posture of
heightened risk and focused on sharing information as quickly
as possible so we can stay ready if those attacks begin to
manifest.
Chairwoman Clarke. Fully implanting Executive Order 14028,
will take time and resources. But with other adversaries
constantly working to breach Federal networks, it is necessary,
it is essential that we make progress to shore up our defenses
now.
For all of the witnesses, now that it has been a year since
the Executive Order was signed, how are Federal networks more
secure today than they were 1 year ago? We will start with you,
Mr. DeRusha.
Mr. DeRusha. Absolutely. So, in the Executive Order, we
took on both root cause issues, which would take longer to, you
know, to fully address. Contract clauses are real kind-of
deeper barriers. We also made significant progress on some
security measures that have immediate impact like multi-factor
authentication, encryption at rest and in transit. We picked a
few of these measures that have most impact and have put the
highest amount of priority you could have around them.
Metricing them, having engagements with not just CIOs and CSOs,
but senior agency leadership, multiple meetings with deputy
secretaries, tracking and measuring progress. Learning about
their barriers to success, how we can support and work through
those.
So, you know, and also just starting on the path of zero
trust implementation. Agencies have, you know, have not been
standing still on that. Far from it. They started moving right
away, reprioritizing resources and investments. So, you know,
we have got a lot of work ahead, but I really feel very, very
good about the progress we are making and the path we put
ourselves on.
Chairwoman Clarke. Mr. Goldstein.
Mr. Goldstein. Building on the points from my co-witness.
If we look from the point of view of CISA as the operational
lead on the big gaps that we try to address with the Executive
Order, subsequent to the SolarWinds intrusion, we are making
tremendous progress across each of them. We are gaining
extraordinary, centralized visibility into threats and risks
targeting Federal agencies through expansion of our endpoint
detection and response capabilities, through maturation of our
continuous diagnostics and CDM program, a mitigation program,
or CDM, including by bringing on-line a new CDM dashboard that
provides never before available visibility into agency risks.
We are also rolling out new cybersecurity shared services,
increasing our direct support to Federal agencies so they can
more effectively meet CISA's directives and OMB guidance, and
we are working as part of the broader interagency as we push
this paradigm shift toward zero trust principles, including by
providing not only guidance, but also hands-on support to help
agencies make this transition. So, as my co-witness noted, you
know, this is going to be a journey. We have significant work
to do, but with support of Congress, we are certainly well on
our way.
Chairwoman Clarke. Gentleman, my time has expired but I am
going to circle back to you. Keep that question in mind. Having
said that, I now yield to the Ranking Member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Garbarino.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Chairwoman. First, I want to
start with Mr. Shive. In your testimony, you really talked
about what GSA had done, you know, how it met the requirements
under the EEO. Can you please share some of your lessons
learned from meeting those requirements that could be shared
with less cyber mature Federal agencies to help them catch up?
Mr. Shive. Yes, thank you for the question. There are a few
things that agencies can and should do. I will use GSA as the
example. One, make sure that cybersecurity is baked into every
business plan that you develop. Cybersecurity done in isolation
typically yields pretty poor results. No. 2, make sure you are
attracting topnotch talent. That is a difficult play here in
the Federal Government, but an important play. Make sure you
have the right cyber defenders. No. 3, make sure that deep and
meaningful partnerships are in place so that you can gain the
value of the larger cyber defense community. A cyber shop that
tries to implement the tenets of the cyber Executive Order in
isolation does so at their own peril. But if they leverage the
value of the larger community, the expertise of the larger
community, working with NIST, working with CISA, working with
others they will be able to accelerate the adoption of the
tenets within cybersecurity. Then the last thing is just get
started. It doesn't matter if you have to repurpose funds, if
you repurpose investment dollars, treat this with the
importance that it deserves.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that answer and specifically
since you talked about how both every Federal agency has a
unique mission, but they all have--they all face similar
challenges when it comes to cyber. You know, it doesn't just
end at cyber, but also with limited resources allocated to
defend against these unlimited cyber attacks. So, how have you
managed, how has GSA managed to be successful with these
constrained resources? How could the Federal Government be more
successful in this regard?
Mr. Shive. Right. So, the GSA experience, I should be
clear, we started implanting the tenets of the cyber EO before
the cyber EO was even a thing. When you look at the basic
tenets of cyber EO, good encryption, and supply chain risk
management, and stuff, these are just good cybersecurity
practices. We, as an agency, recognized the value of many of
these tenets before it was codified in an Executive Order. And
started to move out in our pilots and MVPs to assess whether or
not the theories that are baked into the EO were the things
that we should be making investments in time and people.
Another key enabler for the GSA experience is we have had a
succession of front offices that have seen cybersecurity as a
key enabler to 21st Century business, and especially 21st
Century Government business. So, we had a early and head start
on trying to tackle this big hairy problem.
The third is we have invested tons of time and energy into
attracting top-notch talent. We have a difficult challenge
there. We don't pay the same that the private sector does, but
we can appeal to public service because that is an important
mission space and attracts top-notch cyber defenders into the
organization.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that answer. I want to switch
over to Mr. Goldstein, a specific question. Given the continued
risks associated with the DotGov, how do you balance CISA's
emphasis on supporting National Critical Functions through the
private sector, with the work still to be done within the
Federal agencies?
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you for that question, sir. Actually,
you framed it very well in your opening remarks. Across the
breadth of our cybersecurity mission, we have to take a risk
and consequence-based approach and also be driven by our
understanding of the adversary. What are adversaries targeting?
What are the impacts of a potential intrusion? The National
Critical Functions, or NCF, provides us a model that
generalizes across the private sector and Federal agencies. Of
course, we know that Federal agencies provide essential
services and store sensitive data that underpin many National
Critical Functions really across the breadth of our Federal
Government.
Within the U.S. Government, we have a program focusing on
high-value assets, which really is the application of the
National Critical Functions principles to the services and
systems managed by Federal agencies. So, at CISA, by taking
this prioritization approach and applying it across our
National stakeholder base, that allows us to direct resources,
information, and guidance toward going to have the greatest
effect in driving down the most important cybersecurity risks
to the American people.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that answer. I had a follow-up,
but I ran out of time. So, I will yield back to the Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Clarke. The Chair will now recognize other
Members for questions they may wish to ask the witnesses. In
accordance with the guidelines laid out by the Chairman and
Ranking Member in their February 3 colloquy, I will recognize
Members in order of seniority alternating between Majority and
Minority. Members are also reminded to unmute themselves when
recognized for questioning.
The Chair recognizes for 5 minutes, the gentleman from
Rhode Island, Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Madam Chair. Can you hear me OK?
Chairwoman Clarke. Yes, I can.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to
thank our witnesses for their testimony today and the
outstanding work that you are doing to protect our Nation in
cyber space. Let me begin with Mr. Goldstein, if I could. Mr.
Goldstein, CISA is currently charged with implementing a
centrally-located endpoint detection and response initiative
across the Federal Government. This responsibility becomes
increasingly important as the Federal Government migrates to a
zero trust architecture and that the need for greater
visibility and security of Federal devices and other endpoints
become even more critical.
So, in your testimony, you mentioned that more than 15
agencies now have endpoint detection and response capabilities.
Can you tell me what the hold-up is with the other agencies why
they are not as mature or along the way in having this endpoint
detection and response capabilities yet? What resources can
Congress provide to accelerate CISA's work with the rest of the
Federal civilian Executive branch to procure and implement
endpoint detection and response solutions?
Mr. Goldstein. Congressman, thank you for that question. As
ever, thank you for your support on our National cybersecurity
and CISA, in particular. You know, our program to deploy
endpoint detection and response capabilities across the Federal
Government is a great example of Congress and the
administration working in consort toward a common end.
Resources provided by Congress in the American Rescue Plan Act
have been foundational in catalyzing deployment of these
necessary tools across Federal agencies and President Biden's
cybersecurity Executive Order took needed steps like for
requiring agencies to update legal agreements that accelerated
our access at CISA to necessary endpoint data.
At this point, we are in the process of deploying these EDR
tools across 26 Federal civilian agencies and expect to be
under way at 53 agencies by the end of this fiscal year. Only a
few short months away. Which means that, you know, not even a
year-and-a-half after execution of the Executive Order, we will
have EDR deployments in place or under way at over half of the
Federal Government with more rolling out in the months to come.
We have seen great uptake across Federal civilian agencies, but
the work needs to continue. We look forward to working with
Congress on annualizing investments under the American Rescue
Plan Act as part of the fiscal year 2023 President's budget so
we can ensure that this work continues in the months to come.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. So, to be clear, no specific ask
of Congress right now to help accelerate things?
Mr. Goldstein. That is correct, sir. The most important
thing that we can do together is ensure that we have the
resources as codified in the fiscal year 2023 President's
budget so we can keep advancing these deployments into the next
fiscal year.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. Then for both Mr. Goldstein or Mr.
DeRusha, as I mentioned, increasing our visibility Federal
endpoint is one component of the broader strategy for
transition Federal agencies to a zero trust model of network
security. OMB guidance issued earlier this year lays out
numerous objectives that agencies must complete in that effort.
Mr. DeRusha or Mr. Goldstein, what metrics will your agencies
be using to document and track agency adoption of these
objectives?
Mr. DeRusha. Absolutely, Congressman. So, in the zero trust
strategy, we really laid out an ambitious agenda. We followed
CISA's capability and maturity model and put out actions and
objectives across identity, devices, network, applications, and
data. We set key specific targets, many of which we put
specific deadlines on. So, we are going to be tracking those as
one success metric. But we also asked agencies to provide us
with specific tailored implementation plans. We have received
those now. We are going through them with cross-agency review
team, including CISA, ONCD, OMB to really make sure that they
are solid plans. That they are achievable and they have the
right investment requests behind them.
So, that is how we are going to track progress. We are
going to get specific----
Mr. Langevin. OK.
Mr. DeRusha [continuing]. With each of these agencies----
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Mr. DeRusha [continuing]. And hold them----
Mr. Langevin. All right.
Mr. DeRusha [continuing]. Accountable to those plans over
multi-year.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. Before my time expires, Mr.
Goldstein, last fall CISA issued Binding Operational Directive
2201 creating new requirements for the Federal civilian
agencies to patch known exploited vulnerabilities within a
specified time line. How would you assess agency compliance
with patching time lines as CISA had added new entries to the
known exploited vulnerabilities database?
Mr. Goldstein. Madam Chairwoman, may I answer? Thank you.
Binding Operational Directive 2201, which for the first time
directed Federal agencies to mitigate vulnerabilities that we
know to be actively exploited by adversaries in the real world
has been an extraordinary success story. I say that for two
reasons. First of all, across the Federal civilian Executive
branch, we are tracking mitigation of hundreds of thousands of
vulnerable instances. These are individual pieces of software
or products with vulnerabilities that we know are being
exploited in the wild. We have seen extraordinary work to
mitigate these vulnerabilities.
At the same time, we have also identified that there is
actually a small number of vulnerabilities that account for the
preponderance of unmitigated vulnerabilities, what we call
residual risk, across the Federal civilian Executive branch,
therefore allowing agencies to prioritize their resources to
most effect. But I will also add that this directive has sent
an extraordinary signal across the broader country. We hear
from companies big and small across sectors who use our catalog
of these vulnerabilities to prioritize their own mitigation
efforts thereby really reducing the attack surface that our
adversaries are able to exploit not just in Government but
across the country as a whole.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. I thank the witnesses and thank
you, Madam Chair, for the indulgence of the time. Thank you. I
yield back.
Chairwoman Clarke. Absolutely. The Chair now recognizes for
5 minutes, the gentlewoman from Tennessee, Mrs. Harshbarger.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I want to
thank all the witnesses for coming today to testify about
protecting our Federal networks.
You know, I read an article last month in Sempre. That is a
technology company that reviews American infrastructure. They
released a study finding that certain commercial smart phones
could resist an electromagnetic pulse, or an EMP, caused by the
detonation of a nuclear device. I guess this question is for
Mr. Goldstein. It is three parts. How is CISA evaluating the
emergence of commercial EMP survivability? The second part is
how quickly is CISA able to scale commercial EMP survivability
to harden and enable the National network against EMPs? The
third part of the question is: What does CISA need to do to
prepare for a potential response?
Mr. Goldstein. Great. Thank you for that question, ma'am.
At CISA, we are certainly concerned about a range of risks,
natural or human-caused, that could degrade our critical
infrastructure and National critical functions. Within CISA,
our National Risk Management Center, or NRMC, is deeply focused
on understanding how EMP risks could manifest to affect our
National critical functions and then understanding how critical
infrastructure can adopt measures in place to reduce the
likelihood of those risks occurring.
As part of that work, we work closely both with owners and
operators of infrastructure that could be impacted, as well as
with vendors of solutions that may provide technology that
could be available as solutions. That work continues.
Certainly, as the state-of-the-art to understand both the
potential for and impact of EMP risks evolve, we will keep
working with the broader technology community to ensure that
the right safeguards are in place to mitigate that risk to
critical infrastructure across the country.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well, Mr. Goldstein, were you aware that
they had tested that particular technology and they found two
different phone systems that could take an EMP strike?
Mr. Goldstein. Ma'am, I am not aware of that particular
report.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. Without objection, I would like to
submit the article into the record, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Clarke. Certainly, without objection.
[The information follows:]
Article Submitted by Hon. Diana Harshbarger
sempre finds smartphones survive a nuclear emp
News Provided By SEMPRE, April 6, 2022
SEMPRE, the technology company created to secure America's critical
infrastructure, today announced that in the course of testing its new
secure private 5G and edge solution it discovered, in conjunction with
Jaxon Engineering, that certain commercial-off-the-shelf smartphones
were able to resist an electromagnetic pulse (EMP) that can be caused
by the detonation of a nuclear device. Tested models include the Apple
iPhone 12 and the Samsung Galaxy S21 Ultra 5G.
``We know how to keep telecommunication survivable now,'' said
SEMPRE CEO Brig. Gen. Robert Spalding (USAF ret). ``We've been using
half the solution every day without realizing it; there's clearly no
need to build a new smartphone. The other half of the solution is a
secure EMP-hardened digital infrastructure that will keep our nation
connected and communicating when it was previously thought
impossible.''
General Spalding is a nuclear operations expert and former B-2
pilot, having served as the Operations Group Commander of the 509th
Bomb Wing, Whiteman AFB, MO. General Spalding has held senior positions
in strategy and diplomacy within the Defense and State Departments for
more than 26 years.
``Knowing that smartphones like the iPhone and Galaxy will survive
an EMP opens a lot of possibilities for our military to plan around. Of
course, it doesn't matter unless we have the telecommunications
infrastructure that survives as well,'' added General Timothy Ray (USAF
ret). General Ray is a retired four-star general who last served as
Commander of Global Strike Command, where he was in charge of all
nuclear forces. He recently joined SEMPRE as a Strategic Advisor.
This discovery was made in Colorado Springs by Jaxon Engineering, a
specialist in EMP shielding for the U.S. Department of Defense and
other security-focused customers. The tests were being made on the
latest military-grade data centers manufactured by SEMPRE. The Apple
iPhone 12 was tested using iOS 14.7.1, while the Samsung Galaxy S21
Ultra 5G had the Android 11 operating system.
``We've seen some parts of the U.S. Government take steps to secure
critical communications infrastructure, but we need our domestic
commercial infrastructure to show the same military-grade resiliency,''
said Scott White, CEO of Jaxon Engineering. ``We intend to continue
testing to get a better understanding of what is and isn't possible for
these mobile phones in the most extreme conditions.''
SEMPRE's patent-pending technology is designed for mission-critical
communications which meet stringent U.S. Government military standards
(MIL-SPECS) for EMP hardening and resiliency. Designed for use in
military applications, SEMPRE also ensures that U.S. critical
infrastructure will survive the most challenging environments. The
platform and its technology further enable a secure, end-to-end, truly
private 5G experience, providing ultra-low latency AR and VR and
superior processing speeds at the farthest reaches of the edge.
Furthermore, SEMPRE's technology is optimized for advanced AI/ML to
allow for enhanced military operation for the autonomous battlefield.
About SEMPRE
SEMPRE (Secure EMP-Resistant Edge) is a digital infrastructure
company founded by Brigadier General Robert Spalding (USAF ret) and a
team of national security and telecom pioneers. SEMPRE provides
military-grade 5G and high-performance edge computing infrastructure
for telecom operators, first responders, government and enterprise
customers. For more information, find us on Twitter, LinkedIn, or visit
www.sempre.ai.

Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. OK. Well, there were two different
phones that you don't have to reinvent the wheel. These phones
were found to--the tested models include the Apple iPhone 12
and the Samsung Galaxy S21 Ultra 5G. You know, the whole point
is to keep these telecommunications survivable. If you already
have a starting point, you don't have to go too far to figure
out that you can start there and go forward with trying to find
something and educate the public about this, not only the
Government, but the public. But, you know, and that begs the
second part of that question is how quickly can we scale this
up to harden and enable the National network against EMPs and
what do we need to do to prepare?
I guess I have a follow-up question for the whole panel and
anyone can jump in. Could you elaborate on any interagency
collaboration you have had in preparation with the evolving EMP
threat? That is for anybody to answer.
Mr. Goldstein. Certainly, ma'am. I will offer the risk of
EMPs remains a very active issue across the Federal Government
relating both to our National communications systems and our
Federal agencies. Certainly, this is an area where CISA in our
role in safeguarding critical infrastructure has a role to
play. But we certainly depend on the expertise of colleagues
across the Federal Government and, indeed, the private sector
to ensure that we are understanding the risk as it may evolve
and solutions that maybe adoptable or scalable in the future.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Anybody else want to elaborate on that?
Well, we know that there was a commission created by Congress
and it existed for a number of years and they produced many
detailed reports. Maybe we need to go back and reread those EMP
Commission reports going forward and put a little more emphasis
on that particular entity as far as what is going on and what
the U.S. Government can do to protect us from that. I guess
with that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Clarke. The Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes,
the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Sheila Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the Chair. I thank you for this
very important hearing and witnesses, as well.
Let me begin quickly. The United States has a limited
number of incident response and investigative teams capable of
responding to an attack as sophisticated as SolarWinds. In the
absence of investigators and incident responders, many
organizers are flying blind--many organizations. Is the U.S.
Government and CISA, in particular, able to triage support to
the Nation's most vital regionally- or Nationally-significant
assets, mainly such as airports or electric grids? Then,
secondarily, how confident are you that the most significant
assets and systems in the United States understand the exposure
to threats arising from the SolarWinds campaign? Any witness
can answer that.
Mr. Goldstein. Certainly, thank you, ma'am. Both great
questions. On the first, you know, we are deeply conscious of
the potential for a wide-spread cybersecurity intrusion
campaign that would stress the resources of CISA and the
broader cybersecurity community--pardon me--to respond and
recover. Congress was very thoughtful in anticipating this risk
and passing the Cyber Response and Recovery Act, which included
funding for the cyber response and recovery fund that allows
CISA to fund, for example, private incident responders to
support victims of intrusions where the U.S. Government's
resources may be exhausted.
Now, within the U.S. Government, CISA works closely across
our partners, including the Defense Department and the U.S.
Coast Guard, for example, to ensure that we have resources to
respond when asked, but with resources like the Cyber Response
and Recovery Fund, we are also able to leverage the resources
of the private sector to meet demand if our resources are
exceeded.
On the second question, ma'am, you know, one of our most
important efforts at CISA as part of the broader Government
community, is make sure that we are communicating with
organizations big and small about their exposure to cyber risks
like the SolarWinds campaign. You know, many larger and more
mature organizations certainly understand that risk, but we are
conscious that, for example, small local governments, small and
medium businesses, may still not understand that risk. That is
why at CISA we have regional cybersecurity personnel deployed
across every State in the country who everyday are knocking on
doors, physical and virtual, to make sure that organizations
understand their unique cybersecurity risk and take urgent
actions in response.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me pursue that and I have two
questions that I have to get answered quickly. One of them is
that we know that incident response teams were overwhelmed
before the SolarWinds campaign by ransomware, business email
compromises, and other traditional type of cyber attacks. Is
there any way to get our hands around those traditional attack
vectors like ransomware to free up our overall incident
response capacity?
Mr. Goldstein. Absolutely.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Who wants to take that question?
Mr. Goldstein. Yep, absolutely. You know, one of the ways
that we need to achieve that goal, making sure that we have the
capacity to respond and recover is, in part, by meeting the
National cyber work force challenge. The more that we can train
individuals and organizations, for example, individuals at
municipal governments, individuals at small and medium
businesses, to have, you know, some ability to do initial
analysis and triage, and then help organizations understand
what are the steps that they should take in the minutes after
an intrusion occurs, that can have a real impact in minimizing
the consequences of a cyber intrusion. So, at the end of the
day, there is a capacity challenge here that we can work
through, through funding and resources, but there is also an
education and awareness challenge. Making sure that every
entity in the country has the skilled and trained work force
that they need and that reflect the diversity of this country
to meet an incident if one occurs.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Chairwoman Clarke. Excuse me, Congresswoman, I think you
went on mute. Unmute.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Not intentionally, sorry. I don't know how
that occurred. Let me quickly say to Mr. DeRusha, are you
satisfied with the Federal Government's level of insight about
the extent to which U.S. critical infrastructure have been
infiltrated during this campaign? That is the SolarWinds. In
your opinion, is there anything that could have been improved?
If critical infrastructure entities were required to report
major cybersecurity incidents, for instance to CISA, would that
create better situational awareness? You can sort-of summarize
those questions. Thank you.
Mr. DeRusha. Thank you, ma'am.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. DeRusha.
Mr. DeRusha. It is absolutely the case that more cyber
incident reporting by CISA and our partners with essential
information to help victims and help other potential victims
before incidents happen. That is why we are so grateful for
Congress in passing the Cyber Incident and Critical
Infrastructure Reporting Act recently. We look forward to a
transparent process to put those rules in effect that will
require cyber incident reporting to CISA. That is information
that will be foundational to gain visibility into National
cybersecurity risks and drive urgent action to reduce those
risks wherever they manifest.
Chairwoman Clarke. The gentlelady's----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Do I have any----
Chairwoman Clarke. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I yield back.
Chairwoman Clarke. The Chair recognizes for 5 minutes, the
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Clyde.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke and Ranking Member
Garbarino for holding this important hearing focused on our
Nation's cybersecurity. In the light of the increased number of
cyber attacks in recent years and especially considering
Russia's maligned cyber activities, I think it is more
important than ever that the United States be proactive in
advancing our Nation's cybersecurity. I would also like to
thank each of you for being here. I am glad for work of your
agencies to develop standardized responses, consistent
terminology, and modernized approaches to strengthen our
defenses and protect the United States from bad actors in cyber
space.
Last week, the House Committee of Oversight and Reform held
a mark-up in which we reviewed legislation aimed at
transitioning to a post-quantum computing cybersecurity system.
While this particular legislation was brought up without
knowing the associated cost, and I think associated cost is
pretty important, I am interested to learn more about U.S.
preparations for a post-quantum computing scenario. So, Dr.
Romine, you briefly mentioned quantum computing in your
testimony so, this question is coming your way, sir.
From my understanding, NIST is currently developing post-
quantum cryptography standards and selecting quantum-resistant
cryptography algorithms. Can you briefly--can you please
briefly explain the United States' current defensive posture,
like where we are right now in the event of a large-scale
quantum computer--if a large-scale quantum computer is built
and employed against us by an adversary? Where do we stand,
sir?
Mr. Romine. Thank you, Congressman, for that question. I
really appreciate it. NIST has been working for a number of
years now with the private sector, with cryptographic experts
around the world, to identify the algorithms that will be
resistant----
Mr. Clyde. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Romine [continuing]. To quantum attack, but also
resistant to classical attack. We can't forget that.
Mr. Clyde. Right.
Mr. Romine. We can't put our defenses down. So, we are
excited that we are able to leverage, you know, hundreds and
hundreds of cryptographers around the world and the talents
associated, as well as those in our Federal work force,
including those at NIST.
The expectation is that a cryptographically-relevant
quantum computer, which is one of a sufficient size----
Mr. Clyde. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Romine [continuing]. To crack our current--most of our
current infrastructure, is still a number of years away. That
is some solace, but we cannot be complacent. We have to move
fast,----
Mr. Clyde. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Romine [continuing]. Which is why we started a number
of years ago to do this analysis. I am excited to tell you that
we are nearing the finish line for the identification of
multiple algorithms that we judge to be sufficiently strong to
withstand a cryptographic attack from a quantum computer.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you. That is good to hear. I look forward
to hearing more about that. I am going to transition to a
different topic. I think this question is for you, Mr. DeRusha.
Will CISA have any role with or--excuse me. Will your agency
have any role with or relationship to the Homeland Security
Disinformation Governance Board? This is a board that was
created within DHS and it has caused great concern with respect
to First Amendment rights, and I think rightfully so.
Mr. DeRusha. Congressman, the Office of Management and
Budget is not currently involved in that.
Mr. Clyde. OK. All right. So, Mr. Goldstein, this one is
for you. I would be remiss, as many times as we have seen each
other, if I didn't ask you a similar question. So, will CISA
have any role with or relationship to the Homeland Security
Disinformation Governance Board?
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, sir. The board that you mention
is a DHS body. Respectfully, sir, I will defer questions on the
board back to the Department.
Mr. Clyde. OK. The Disinformation Governance Board is a
prime example, in my opinion, of big Government socialism
overreach. So, you are saying that CISA will not have any
connection to, whatsoever, with the Disinformation Governance
Board?
Mr. Goldstein. Sir, respectfully, I will defer questions
back to the Department.
Mr. Clyde. Well, I am asking about CISA.
Mr. Goldstein. Sir, CISA shares this committee's concern
about malicious foreign influence targeting----
Mr. Clyde. Uh-huh.
Mr. Goldstein [continuing]. Critical infrastructure,
including U.S. elections. CISA's role in that particular space
is to promote National resilience through collaboration and
partnerships. I will defer questions on the referenced board
back to our Department.
Mr. Clyde. All right. I yield back.
Chairwoman Clarke. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes for 5 minutes, the gentlelady from New York, Miss
Rice.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Goldstein, as the
Biden administration works to secure Federal networks and shift
our cyber posture from reactive to proactive, it is focused on
developing capabilities for continuously monitoring threats and
providing real-time visibility into vulnerabilities. To that
end, the administration has emphasized continuous diagnostic
and mitigation capabilities to give threat hunters greater
visibility into agency networks. The administration's Executive
Order directed agencies to update their memorandum of agreement
with CISA to ensure object-level data is shared with CISA.
I would ask you, Mr. Goldstein, if agencies have updated
their agreements with CISA and has CISA received data necessary
to gain this critical visibility in Federal networks?
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, ma'am. It is a wonderful
question. I am very glad to report that every agency has
updated their relevant memorandum of agreement with CISA to
provide us with, as you noted correctly, object-level data
through our continuous diagnostic and mitigation dashboards. We
are now able to access that necessary data, which is so
critical for us to understand the prevalence of vulnerabilities
and other risk conditions across Federal agencies and drive
much more targeted and faster mitigation of risks that may
emerge.
Miss Rice. So, then you would also--so, you are confirming
that, you know, you mentioned the CDM dashboard. To what extent
are Federal agencies connected?
Mr. Goldstein. We are in the process of a rather remarkable
technology improvement across the Federal dashboard, which is
giving us this object-level data. We are getting more agencies
onboarded at this point every week. Nearly all large agencies,
or what we call the CFO Act agencies, are now connected and we
are getting the smaller and medium agencies connected up as
each week goes by. This really is the first time that CISA and
Federal agencies have had this level of visibility and we are
really excited for how we can use it both operationally and
also to one of the prior questions, to support our colleagues
in OMB and the Office of the National Cyber Director in
understanding and measuring Federal cybersecurity risks.
Miss Rice. So, you haven't been met with any resistance, I
would ask, right? It sounds like you have not.
Mr. Goldstein. We have not. I think agencies really see the
value in this visibility importantly here. Although CISA gets
the visibility we need, Federal CIOs and CSOs, like my co-
witness on this panel, also benefit from this same visibility
and so, there are really enterprise gains to be had for
agencies as well as for CISA in our cross-governmental role.
Miss Rice. So, you know, as you know, Congress provided the
CDM program with a significant funding increase in the fiscal
year 2022 omnibus to address specifically the mobile device
threat landscape across Federal civilian agencies. Mr.
Goldstein, can you give us a sense of how CISA plans to put
this fund into use to ramp up mobile device security?
Mr. Goldstein. Absolutely. This is really a key evolution
for the CDM program, which historically was really focused on
the workstations and servers sitting at Federal agencies but,
of course, we know in this new hybrid even remote first
universe in which we are living in, a lot of Federal employees
are really using their mobile devices for a significant volume
of agency work and processing important information. So, we are
in the process now of integrating new mobile asset management
capabilities into the CDM program and expect to make
significant progress on getting the breadth of Federal agencies
onboarded to those key tools by the end of this fiscal year.
Miss Rice. So, just to follow up on a question that Mr.
Langevin had regarding the EDR technology, are you--is CISA
focused on deployment, in deploying EDR technology on Federal
workers' mobile devices or is that rollout still focused more
on the traditional endpoints you mentioned like laptops,
desktops, servers, and the like?
Mr. Goldstein. Principally, our current deployment of EDR
functions focuses on agency workstations and servers based upon
our understanding of the adversary threat model. That is what
is going to allow us to fully implement our authorities to
conduct persistent hunts across Federal networks. If we look
back into the SolarWinds intrusion, one of the lessons learned
was the need to correlate, for example, threat activity that we
might see at the perimeter of a Federal agency, to something
happening at a workstation, to something happening in the
cloud, this EDR visibility is really foundational to giving us
our ability to connect those dots and detect intrusions far
more quickly.
Miss Rice. Thank you very much to all the witnesses and I
yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Clarke. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
recognizes for 5 minutes, the gentleman from Kansas, Mr.
LaTurner.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. My first
question is for Mr. Romine. Mr. Romine, can you briefly discuss
how you are involved in setting information technology
standards to enable National priorities, especially related to
cybersecurity?
Mr. Romine. Thank you for the question, absolutely. By
statute, NIST has the responsibility to develop guidelines and
standards documents for the purpose of securing Federal
networks. We provide those tools to operational entities across
the Federal Government for their use in managing their own
cybersecurity risk, cybersecurity and privacy risk. The way
that we do that is through a engagement with the public and
private sector. We do that through an open and transparent
process that ultimately garners the best technical expertise in
cybersecurity across all aspects of society and we bring that
information together and ultimately evolve these documents,
these tools, as a means of providing the necessary mechanisms
for agencies to improve or establish cybersecurity and privacy
programs.
Mr. LaTurner. Do you think--you talked about the
transparent process, do you think that you have the level of
participation that you need?
Mr. Romine. Thank you for the question. We do because NIST
as a nonregulatory agency, we have cultivated the trust of the
private sector, the public sector. We have no hidden agenda.
Our goal is specifically to get the very best technical
standards developed. For that reason, we get very active
participation across many different sectors, across
cybersecurity expertise, privacy experts, civil society. We get
input from a very large set of stakeholders and for that
reason, we feel that it is a very effective mechanism to
develop standards and guidelines for cybersecurity.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you. Mr. Shive, can you speak to how
you collaborate with other Federal agencies? How are you
interacting with your CIO peers to improve everyone's
understanding of the threat landscape?
Mr. Shive. So, we have both formal and informal
collaboration mechanisms. An example is the Federal CIO
Council. We meet twice a month to talk about these specific
issues. Cybersecurity, technology modernization, the plays
necessary to transform technology use and secure technology in
the Federal Government. There are also informal connections as
well. The CIO community is a fraternity of people who are all
trying to solve many of the same problems. They realize even
though our business missions are quite different, many of the
cybersecurity challenges are similar throughout the Federal
Government. So, we spend a fair amount of time talking amongst
each other about how we are solving specific and direct
problems.
I will give you an example. Dr. Romine's team sets
standards for cybersecurity that the Federal Government
follows. They have been very good over the last few years
instead of only reaching out to industry and academia and
research entities to help define and derive their standards
that then the Federal Government employs, they have been very
good about reaching out to the CIO community to take a look at
the practical cybersecurity practice that is taking place in
the field and allowing that to inform standards. So, standards
are not just academic, they are based on what is actually being
seen on the ground. Those type of informal collaborations
derive as much value as those formal collaborations you see in
places like the Federal CIO Council.
Mr. LaTurner. I appreciate that. I will stick with you.
What other areas should ONCD, CISA, and Congress focus on to
continue to be successful and improve our Nation's
cybersecurity posture in the face of ever-evolving increasingly
sophisticated cyber threats?
Mr. Shive. Great question. Thank you for asking that. Two
main things jump to mind. The first is as you consider the
business mission of the Federal Government, consider
cybersecurity as an integral part of that. So, as you are
making investment and appropriations decisions on how this
Government should run, be thinking about cybersecurity
implications to that.
The other is the cybersecurity play is a multi-year play.
The Government is not often funded in a multi-year strategy.
But we as a community, the Legislative and Executive branch,
need to analyze the risk on a multi-year strategy, make
investments in time and people and money in a multi-year
strategy. That would be a bit gamechanger for us.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you for your answer. Madam Chairwoman,
I yield back.
Chairwoman Clarke. The gentleman yields. The Chair now
recognizes for 5 minutes the Vice Chair of the committee,
gentleman from New York, Mr. Torres.
Mr. Torres. Thank you, Madam Chair. In the wake of
SolarWinds, President Biden issued Executive Order 14028
requiring all agencies to either implement multi-factor
authentication by November or provide a reason for failing to
do so. In January, Chair Clarke and I sent a letter seeking an
update on the full extent of agency compliance with the MFA
mandate. Director Easterly replied, despite November deadline
set by the President, only 13 Federal agencies and one CFO
agency reported compliance with the MFA mandate. In the same
letter, Director Easterly promised us that almost all agencies
that could implement MFA would do so by mid-March. So, my first
question to Mr. Goldstein, has that promise been kept?
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you for that question, sir. The
Executive Order, as you note, drove extraordinary progress in
foundational security controls, including MFA and encryption.
We have seen agencies invest significant amounts and make
significant progress in deploying MFA wherever possible and
encrypting data both in transit and at rest. Now, we know that
given the significant breadth of legacy outdated IT
infrastructure across Federal agencies, at times deploying
modern security controls can be challenging----
Mr. Torres. Sure, but I just want to interject. When
Director Easterly replied to our letter, she certainly was
aware of the obsolescence of technology. Even then, she said
that almost all the agencies with the capacity to implement MFA
would do so by mid-March. So, has that promise been kept? It is
either yes or no.
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. So, I would say every agency with
the capacity to deploy MFA and encryption has done so in almost
all cases. I am very glad to take a question for the record and
provide further data on the progress across agencies toward
that goal.
Mr. Torres. Do you have a number?
Mr. Goldstein. I don't, sir.
Mr. Torres. A number of agencies?
Mr. Goldstein. I don't, sir.
Mr. Torres. OK. The President's Executive Order founded the
Cyber Safety Review Board for the purpose of conducting a
review of the SolarWinds compromise. To Mr. Goldstein or Mr.
DeRusha, has the Cyber Safety Review Board undertaken review of
the SolarWinds breach?
Mr. DeRusha. So, I will answer that as actually a board
member. So, the board has taken on its first review and that is
absolutely a piece of the focus in the board's review. However,
we are also focused on the Log4j vulnerability event and
ensuring that we are learning critical lessons from that event
because of its drastic impact.
Mr. Torres. So, you have conducted a review of SolarWinds.
Mr. DeRusha. Sir, that is part of the Cyber Safety Review
Board's first review.
Mr. Torres. OK. So, and when is the--what is the time line
for the completion of the review?
Mr. DeRusha. So, the board's report is due to the Secretary
of Homeland Security at the end of May. Then there is a 30-day
period for review by the Secretary for submission to the
President after that.
Mr. Torres. The SolarWinds breach revealed the inadequacies
of the Einstein program, which as I understand it lacks the
capacity to detect anomalous network behaviors. Mr. Goldstein,
what is the time line for modernizing Einstein and equipping it
with the capacity to detect novel threats?
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you for that question, sir.
Modernization of Einstein is under way now. Our philosophy to
secure the Federal civilian Executive branch and make dramatic
progress toward detecting previously unknown or unseen threats
is to move beyond the perimeter or network focus of the legacy
Einstein system and focus really in three areas. First, getting
visibility into the endpoint level, the servers and
workstations where agencies do their work. As noted previously,
that work is well under way with more than half of agencies to
be progressing by the end of the year. Second, to gain
visibility into cloud environments for the ability to hunt
through and aggregate logs. Then third, to your question, sir,
modernizing the perimeter defenses that we deploy, including by
moving more toward commercial shared services. As one example
of that we are now providing----
Mr. Torres. My question was about the time line. So, what
is the time line?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes.
Mr. Torres. Do we have a time line for--if you have none,
then I can move on to my next question.
Mr. Goldstein. The timing is happening now, sir. We are
actively moving agencies to more modern shared services and
that progression is going to occur throughout future fiscal
years.
Mr. Torres. In the House, I passed legislation requiring
DHS to adopt a software bill of materials, SBOM. Should there
be an SBOM mandate to which every agency is subject? What are
your thoughts on that, Mr. Goldstein?
Mr. Goldstein. Sir, at this point, there is urgent work to
be done across the National and, indeed, global cybersecurity
community to get to a point where we have an approach to
software bill of materials that is automated and interoperable.
That is work that CISA is helping to drive under the auspices
of a broader effort focused on software security for the
broader community. At this point, that foundational work is a
prerequisite to a mandate being effective in achieving the
change that we collectively want to advance.
Mr. Torres. My time has expired, so.
Chairwoman Clarke. I thank our Vice Chair for his
questioning. I want to use the Chair's prerogative to circle
back to Dr. Romine and Mr. Shive on a question I raised--I
posed earlier. It is about fully implementing the Executive
Order 14028. Then we know that it will time and resource, but
with our adversaries constantly working to breach Federal
networks, it is essential that we make progress to shore up our
defenses now. So, my question to both of you, now that it has
been a year since the Executive Order was signed, how are
Federal networks more secure today than they were 1 year ago?
Dr. Romine.
Mr. Romine. Thank you for the question, ma'am. NIST is not
an operational agency, and----
Chairwoman Clarke. OK.
Mr. Romine [continuing]. Therefore, we don't really have
insight into the current stance of Federal networks at other
Federal agencies other than in conversations with our peers.
But I will say this, that because the Executive Order shined a
spotlight, a critical spotlight on this issue and provided a
set of actionable things that could be taken, steps that could
be taken, and because as CISA pointed out, they have achieved
all of their milestones in the first year, I am happy to report
that NIST achieved all of our milestones. I think we had a
dozen of them in the first year as well. Some of those were
interdependent. We worked collaboratively to make sure that
those things happened. I am confident that the hard work is now
beginning on rolling out the effect of the Executive Order to
the rest of the agencies and the improvement will continue over
the next year.
Chairwoman Clarke. Mr. Shive.
Mr. Shive. I can talk about the GSA experience. The ways
that we are more secure now than we were a year ago are we now
have the ability to assess endpoints with granular visibility.
That is not just laptops and servers. That is extensible out to
cell phones and operational technology devices, otherwise known
as the internet of things. We have expanded that ability to
have granular visibility into the form function in action of
those devices that we didn't have a year ago.
We have increased our presence. We already had nearly
ubiquitous multi-factor authentication running in the agency,
but we have employed multi-factor authentication that has deep
and meaningful user experience positive outcomes. So, it is
easier for our users to use that. So, they are not inclined to
try to find other ways to get into our systems.
We have much deeper encryption throughout our enterprise.
Everything out in the cloud, everything outside of the walls of
GSA has been encrypted for years. But we have even encrypted
most of our internal infrastructure. This is, and most
importantly, we have visibility about not only the user
actions, but the system actions running across our networks.
That visibility is giving us the ability to take a look at how
well things are patched and updated. How well people are using
systems and we are giving people access to systems based on
where they are at that moment and who they are and what they
are trying to do in that moment. But also increasingly, we have
the ability to extend that out to non-user-based devices, which
represent a significant threat vector for nation-state
adversaries.
Chairwoman Clarke. Very well. I want to thank our witnesses
for your valuable testimony and the Members of the committee,
of the subcommittee for their questions. The Members of the
subcommittee may have additional questions for each witness and
we ask that you respond expeditiously in writing to those
questions.
The Chair reminds Members that the subcommittee record will
remain open for 10 business days. Without objection, you are
off the hotseat. The subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:45 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Christopher J. DeRusha
Question 1. Many small businesses serve as critical vendors for the
Federal Government, but they may lack the cybersecurity expertise of
larger companies. It is important that we improve our supply chain
security while supporting small businesses as they implement new
mandates.
As the EO's new supply chain requirements are implemented, what are
the administration's plans for supporting small business vendors as
they seek to meet heightened standards?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. During the Federal investigation into the SolarWinds
intrusion, we learned that disparities in logging practices across
agencies hindered the investigation and response. Accordingly, the
Executive Order created new logging requirements for Federal agencies,
and OMB released a new directive for agencies last summer.
What is the status of agency compliance with the new logging
requirements? What are the anticipated costs of improved logging,
considering at times cloud service vendors have charged extra for
certain event logging data?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3a. President Biden signed Executive Order 14028 in May of
last year, before the Senate confirmed the first National Cyber
Director, Chris Inglis. Accordingly, the EO does not specify the
National Cyber Director's role in EO implementation, and instead gives
the National Security Advisor a key role in implementing certain
aspects of EO 14028. Additionally, it is my understanding that while
the EO contemplated in Section 11(a) a possible modification of the EO
to incorporate the National Cyber Director, no such modification has
occurred.
Considering the National Cyber Director's statutory
responsibilities for coordinating cybersecurity strategy, how has the
office been engaged in coordinating the EO's implementation?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3b. Is the administration considering any changes to EO
14028 that would more clearly delineate ONCD's role, or are such
modifications unnecessary?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Hon. Yvette D. Clarke for Christopher J. DeRusha
Question 1. In March, President Biden signed my legislation, the
Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act, as part of
the omnibus appropriations bill. This new law directs CISA to undergo a
rulemaking process to impose new mandatory cyber incident reporting
requirements on critical infrastructure owners and operators. The
Executive Order similarly imposes incident reporting requirements on
Federal contractors, which the FAR Council is working to implement.
As you work to implement cyber incident reporting, how do you plan
to ensure that new regulations are aligned with incident reporting
rules for Federal contractors?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Executive Order 14028 established a new Cyber Safety
Review Board (CSRB), a public-private panel of Federal officials and
private-sector experts who would investigate significant cyber
incidents, similar to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB).
However, the Executive Order did not grant this new Board authority to,
for instance, subpoena information from private-sector victims of cyber
attacks or take other actions necessary for a fulsome investigation of
cyber incidents on private networks.
What additional authorities should Congress consider if it wants to
strengthen the Board's investigative capacity?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Eric Goldstein
Question 1a. The SolarWinds attack exposed the cybersecurity risk
posed by unguarded network access management.
How would you assess the effectiveness of the capabilities being
rolled out by CISA to Federal agencies to address this critical gap?
What steps are you taking or are going to take to increase their
effectiveness?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1b. Are you adequately resourced with both staffing and
funding to implement access management protection programs for Federal
agencies?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. As the administration implements the Executive Order's
enhanced supply chain requirements, agencies have been directed to
adopt the Secure Software Development Framework (SSDF), which is
organized around four practices.
To what extent does the CISA's services to Federal civilian
agencies support implementation of the four practices of the SSDF?
Please explain how CISA's services align with each of the four
practices.
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2b. Some services such as scanning and on-site assessments
mirror suggested Federal best practices. To what extent can a service
such as Critical Product Evaluation be made mandatory either as a CISA-
provided service or by a Federal agency following the processes? How
portable are the processes and tools for use by others?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question From Hon. Yvette D. Clarke for Eric Goldstein
Question. In March, President Biden signed my legislation, the
Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act, as part of
the omnibus appropriations bill. This new law directs CISA to undergo a
rulemaking process to impose new mandatory cyber incident reporting
requirements on critical infrastructure owners and operators. The
Executive Order similarly imposes incident reporting requirements on
Federal contractors, which the FAR Council is working to implement.
As you work to implement cyber incident reporting, how do you plan
to ensure that new regulations are aligned with incident reporting
rules for Federal contractors?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Charles H. Romine
Question 1. Many small businesses serve as critical vendors for the
Federal Government, but they may lack the cybersecurity expertise of
larger companies. It is important that we improve our supply chain
security while supporting small businesses as they implement new
mandates.
As NIST has undertaken its work under the EO, how has it consulted
with small businesses?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. As we work to strengthen the security of our software
supply chain, it is critically important that we gain a better
understanding of software components. Therefore, implementing software
bills of materials (SBOM) is an essential part of this effort, which
the Executive Order correctly recognizes.
Based on NIST's work on SBOM, to what extent are agencies capable
of leveraging these emerging cybersecurity practices?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2b. What factors should agencies consider as they seek to
implement SBOM?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question From Hon. Andrew Garbarino for David Shive
Question. We are all concerned about the risk of Chinese
interference in our information and communications technology (ICT)
supply chains. Several Government agencies have highlighted the cyber
risk Chinese companies pose to our critical infrastructure. Yet, I
believe some of these Chinese companies are still approved vendors to
the Federal Government. I've now written twice to the Departments of
Homeland Security (DHS) and Commerce inquiring why we continue to allow
this known vulnerability into our supply chains, but I have not
received a clear response.
How is GSA working with DHS and Commerce to mitigate this known
cyber vulnerability from our ICT supply chain, especially given the
supply chain requirements in the EO?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.

[all]
