- TRANSPORTATION CYBERSECURITY: PROTECTING PLANES, TRAINS, AND PIPELINES FROM CYBER THREATS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TRANSPORTATION CYBERSECURITY: PROTECTING
PLANES, TRAINS, AND PIPELINES FROM CYBER
THREATS

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION, AND INNOVATION

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 26, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-34

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-812 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            John Katko, New York
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island      Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Clay Higgins, Louisiana
J. Luis Correa, California           Michael Guest, Mississippi
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri            Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Al Green, Texas                      Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Yvette D. Clarke, New York           Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
Eric Swalwell, California            Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Dina Titus, Nevada                   Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey    Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Val Butler Demings, Florida          Peter Meijer, Michigan
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California    Kat Cammack, Florida
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          August Pfluger, Texas
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey
Ritchie Torres, New York
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Daniel Kroese, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Clerk

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, AND
INNOVATION

Yvette D. Clarke, New York, Chairwoman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York,
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island          Ranking Member
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Ritchie Torres, New York             Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex  Jake LaTurner, Kansas
officio)                         John Katko, New York (ex officio)
Moira Bergin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Austin Agrella, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
Mariah Harding, Subcommittee Clerk

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey, Chairwoman
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida,
Dina Titus, Nevada                       Ranking Member
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex  Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
officio)                         John Katko, New York (ex officio)
Alex Marston, Subcomittee Staff Director
Kathryn Maxwell, Minority Subcomittee Staff Director
Alice Hayes, Subcomittee Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Yvette D. Clarke, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York, and Chairwoman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Andrew R. Garbarino, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Bonnie Watson Coleman, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New Jersey, and Chairwoman, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     7
Prepared Statement.............................................     8
The Honorable Carlos A. Gimenez, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Florida, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................    11

Witnesses

Ms. Suzanne Spaulding, Senior Adviser, Homeland Security,
International Security Program, Center for Strategic &
International Studies; Former Under Secretary, National
Protection and Programs Directorate:
Oral Statement.................................................    15
Prepared Statement.............................................    16
Ms. Patricia F.S. Cogswell, Strategic Advisor, Guidehouse; Former
Deputy Administrator, Transportation Security Administration:
Oral Statement.................................................    19
Prepared Statement.............................................    21
Mr. Jeffrey L. Troy, President, CEO, Aviation Information Sharing
and Analysis Center; Former Deputy Assistant Director, Cyber
Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation:
Oral Statement.................................................    23
Prepared Statement.............................................    25
Mr. Scott Dickerson, Executive Director, Maritime Transportation
System Information Sharing and Analysis Center:
Oral Statement.................................................    28
Prepared Statement.............................................    29

TRANSPORTATION CYBERSECURITY: PROTECTING PLANES, TRAINS, AND PIPELINES
FROM CYBER THREATS

----------

Tuesday, October 26, 2021

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection,
and Innovation, and the
Subcommittee on Transportation and Maritime Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 2:04 p.m.,
via Webex, Hon. Yvette D. Clarke [Chairwoman of the
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and
Innovation] presiding.
Present: Representatives Clarke, Watson Coleman, Jackson
Lee, Langevin, Titus, Slotkin, Rice, Luria, Torres, Garbarino,
Gimenez, Norman, Van Drew, Harshbarger, Miller-Meeks, Clyde,
and LaTurner.
Ms. Clarke. The Committee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure
Protection, and Innovation and the Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security will come to order for
today's hearing entitled ``Transportation Security: Protecting
Planes, Trains, and Pipelines from Cyber Threats.''
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare the
subcommittees in recess at any point.
Let me start by thanking Chairwoman Watson Coleman and
Ranking Member Garbarino, Ranking Member Gimenez, and our panel
of witnesses for joining us today.
We are here to assess the administration's actions aimed at
mitigating the cybersecurity challenges facing the
transportation sector. Earlier this year, our subcommittees
worked together to evaluate how the Federal Government partners
with the private sector to respond to a ransomware attack
against Colonial Pipeline which resulted in 5,500 miles of
pipeline being shut down.
As panic led to fuel shortages at gas stations along the
East Coast and airlines scrambled to find alternative fuel
supplies, we learned that, No. 1, attackers infiltrated
Colonial Pipeline's business network using a legacy VPN that
did not require multifactor authentication; No. 2, the flow of
information between Colonial Pipeline, the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, and the Transportation Security
Administration was slow, fueled in part by on-going confusion
about which agency was in charge; and, No. 3, despite repeated
offers from TSA, Colonial Pipeline had not yet undergone an
important security assessment, a validated architecture design
review, and did not have a disaster response plan that
contemplated a full--the full scope of cyber threats.
Shocked by what we learned during their oversight of
Colonial Pipeline and other recent high-profile cyber
incidents, Members of Congress have begun to question whether
the Federal Government's approach to cybersecurity, which
relies primarily on voluntary partnerships, actually works, or
whether some security requirements ought to be mandated.
The notion that certain entities should be subject to
cybersecurity standard mandates is not new. Almost 10 years
ago, President Obama issued Executive Order 13636 on improving
critical infrastructure cybersecurity. The Executive Order
directed sector risk management agencies to evaluate whether
they had sufficient authority to establish cybersecurity
requirements for critical infrastructure entities for which a,
``cybersecurity incident could reasonably result in
catastrophic regional or National effects on a public health or
safety, economic security, or National security,'' and report
back to DHS and the White House with what they found.
To the best of my knowledge, no agency suggested they
lacked authority to issue such requirements. Nevertheless, for
nearly a decade, the Federal Government has continued to pursue
security policies that rely primarily on voluntary partnerships
with the private sector. That is why the security directives
that TSA issued for pipelines and the requirements TSA plans to
issue for rail, transit, and aviation deserve such careful
attention. They mark a pivotal transition in the Federal
Government's approach to cybersecurity.
As a representative from Brooklyn, I welcome TSA's renewed
interest in improving the cybersecurity posture of the
transportation sector. New York City is a transportation hub,
home to two major airports, several rail lines, and the largest
mass transit system in the Nation. Just 6 months ago, actors
reportedly tied to the Chinese Government breached the
Metropolitan Transit Authority's network. Fortunately, they did
not gain access to operational systems that control rail cars,
but I remain concerned about the cybersecurity of mass transit
systems generally and MTA's network in particular.
Given the degree to which middle- and low-income people
rely on public transportation, a cyber attack affecting mass
transit could have a disproportionate impact on these
populations. In light of the conversations I have had regarding
cybersecurity threats to rail and aviation, I also support
TSA's efforts to raise the bar on cybersecurity for these
subsectors.
That said, as the Federal approach to securing critical
infrastructure evolves, we must get it right. TSA's security
directives on pipelines and pending securities directives on
trail--excuse me--on transit, rail, and aviation present an
opportunity to better understand the administration's security
goals, how the security directives align with those goals, and
the private sector's ability to effectively implement the
directives.
Today, I hope to identify the lessons learned from the
roll-out and implementation of the pipeline security directives
so we can use them to inform future transportation security
directives to ensure that they are buying down risk and
yielding the security benefits we expect. More broadly, I hope
today's conversation will provide insight into how we can raise
the cybersecurity posture across critical infrastructure
sectors.
I thank the witnesses for being here today, and I look
forward to your testimony.
[The statement of Chairwoman Clarke follows:]
Statement of Chairwoman Yvette D. Clarke
The Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and
Innovation and the Subcommittee on Transportation and Maritime Security
will come to order for today's hearing, titled ``Transportation
Cybersecurity: Protecting Planes, Trains, and Pipelines from Cyber
Threats.'' Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare the
subcommittees in recess at any point.
Thank you to Chairwoman Watson Coleman, Ranking Member Garbarino,
Ranking Member Gimenez, and our panel of witnesses for joining us.
We are here today to assess the administration's actions aimed at
mitigating the cybersecurity challenges facing the transportation
sector.
Earlier this year, our subcommittees worked together to evaluate
how the Federal Government partnered with the private sector to respond
to a ransomware attack against Colonial Pipeline, which resulted in
5,500 miles of pipeline being shut down.
As panic led to fuel shortages at gas stations along the East Coast
and airlines scrambled to find alternative fuel supplies, we learned
that:

attackers infiltrated Colonial Pipeline's business network
using a legacy VPN that did not require multi-factor
authentication;

the flow of information between Colonial Pipeline, the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, and the
Transportation Security Administration was slow, fueled in part
by on-going confusion about which agency was in charge; and

despite repeated offers from TSA, Colonial Pipeline had not
yet undergone an important security assessment--a Validated
Architecture Design Review--and did not have a disaster
response plan that contemplated the full scope of cyber
threats.
Shocked by what we learned during their oversight of Colonial
Pipeline and other recent high-profile cyber incidents, Members of
Congress have begun to question whether the Federal Government's
approach to cybersecurity--which relies primarily on voluntary
partnerships--actually works, or whether some security requirements
ought to be mandated.
The notion that certain entities should be subject to cybersecurity
standard mandates is not new.
Almost 10 years ago, President Obama issued Executive Order 13636,
on Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity.
The Executive Order directed sector risk management agencies to
evaluate whether they had sufficient authority to establish
cybersecurity requirements for critical infrastructure entities for
which a ``cybersecurity incident could reasonably result in
catastrophic regional or National effects on public health or safety,
economic security, or National security''--and report back to DHS and
the White House with what they found.
To the best of my knowledge, no agency suggested they lacked
authority to issue such requirements.
Nevertheless, for nearly a decade, the Federal Government has
continued to pursue security policies that relied primarily on
voluntary partnerships with the private sector.
That's why the security directives that TSA issued for pipelines--
and the requirements TSA plans to issue for rail, transit, and
aviation--deserve such careful attention. They mark a pivotal
transition in the Federal Government's approach to cybersecurity.
As a representative from Brooklyn, I welcome TSA's renewed interest
in improving the cybersecurity posture of the transportation sector.
New York City is a transportation hub--home to two major airports,
several rail lines, and the largest mass transit system in the country.
Just 6 months ago, hackers reportedly tied to the Chinese
government breached Metropolitan Transportation Authority's network.
Fortunately, they did not gain access to operational systems that
control rail cars--but I remain concerned about the cybersecurity of
mass transit systems, generally, and MTA's network, in particular.
Given the degree to which middle- and low-income people rely on
public transportation, a cyber attack affecting mass transit could have
a disproportionate impact on these populations.
In light of the conversations I have had regarding cybersecurity
threats to rail and aviation, I also support TSA's efforts to raise the
bar on cybersecurity for these subsectors.
That said, as the Federal approach to securing critical
infrastructure evolves, we must get it right.
TSA's security directives on pipelines--and pending security
directives on transit, rail, and aviation--present an opportunity to
better understand the administration's security goals, how the security
directives align with those goals, and the private sector's ability to
effectively implement the directives.
Today, I hope to identify the lessons learned from the rollout and
implementation of the pipeline security directives, so we can use them
to inform future transportation security directives to ensure that they
are buying down risk and yielding the security benefits we expect.
More broadly, I hope today's conversation will provide insight into
how we can raise the cybersecurity posture across critical
infrastructure sectors.
I thank the witnesses for being here today and I look forward to
their testimony.

Ms. Clarke. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member of
the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection,
and Innovation, the gentleman from New York, Mr. Garbarino, for
an opening statement.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke and Chairwoman
Watson Coleman, for holding this important hearing today. Thank
to you my colleague, Ranking Member Gimenez, for his continued
leadership on transportation security.
As you know, cybersecurity remains a bipartisan cooperation
in Congress. Bringing together these two subcommittees is a
continuation of the bipartisan spirit that makes this community
function so well. But there remains room for improvement.
This year, the full committee and our Cybersecurity
Subcommittee have held several hearings in the aftermath of
major cyber incidents to review the state of our Nation's cyber
preparedness and assess the overall efficacy of response
mechanisms across the Federal Government within various
industry sectors. This joint hearing is a great opportunity to
continue that work, focusing on the transportation sector which
impacts millions of Americans and many of my constituents.
Every day, Americans are already experiencing the impact of
a pervasive supply chain crisis. Goods are becoming more
expensive and harder to find. Nearly every sector of our
economy has been affected by this problem, which is
particularly acute in the auto industry. We have already
witnessed the impact of a devastating ransomware attack on
Colonial Pipeline which led to gas shortages on the East Coast.
Imagine a similar attack on a major U.S. port, airline, or
major logistics company as the holidays approach. We must
ensure that there is a robust partnership between the
Department of Homeland Security, particularly the Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Security Agency, the Transportation Security
Agency, and the U.S. Coast Guard, and the owners and operators
of our transportation systems.
I hope that this hearing reviews the cyber preparedness of
our critical transportation systems and how agencies like CISA,
TSA, and the Coast Guard can enhance their programs, services,
and guidance to best ensure entities can defend and mitigate
the threat of cyber attacks.
I am particularly interested in learning more about DHS's
use of security directives as a tool for enforcing new security
standards. I would like to hear testimony and learn from our
witnesses regarding the impact of security directives and how
TSA is working with relevant partners to ensure robust industry
input because they know their sector best. I would also like to
hear from our witnesses on the extent to which industry
expertise and feedback is utilized in the creation of these
security directives.
Members of this committee, including myself, are actively
engaged in crafting mandatory cyber incident reporting
legislation to improve CISA's ability into cyber incidents
impacting our Nation's critical infrastructure. I thank
Chairwoman Clarke for her leadership and partnership on this
effort.
I have also been working closely with Ranking Member Katko
and Representative Spanberger to introduce bipartisan
legislation to authorize the director of CISA to establish a
stakeholder-driven transparent process for identifying the
owners and operators of our Nation's most critical
infrastructure, known as systemically important critical
infrastructure.
How can we expect CISA and other sector risk management
agencies to prioritize limited services if we don't know what
is most critical? It is also incumbent on Congress to ensure
such a program includes the appropriate guardrails, guidance,
and built-in mechanisms for industry collaboration. Such an
important program must be done right. I believe that securing
systemically important critical infrastructure strives to these
very principles.
I am disappointed that the committee held a mark-up this
morning, this legislation was not included, despite months of
industry collaboration and attempts to collaborate with the
Majority. I hope it comes soon.
I do want to note Representative Langevin's leadership on
this important issue and his transparency with the Minority. I
look forward to working with him and with you, Chairwoman
Clarke, on this legislation to continue the bipartisan nature
of our subcommittee.
Last, I will just say that the issue of transportation
cybersecurity hits close to home. It was shortly after New
York's MTA systems were hacked in April and discovered in June
in which Secretary Mayorkas announced intentions to create a
new security directive for major rail and aviation entities.
I look forward to learning from our panelists here today
about what this committee can do to help TSA, CISA, and the
Coast Guard work toward an enhanced public-private partnership
with owners and operators of our Nation's transportation
system.
Thank you very much, Chairwomen. I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Garbarino follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Andrew Garbarino
Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke and Chairwoman Watson Coleman for
holding this important hearing today. And thank you, Ranking Member
Gimenez, for your continued leadership on transportation security.
As you know all, cybersecurity remains an area of bipartisan
cooperation in Congress.
Bringing together these two subcommittees is a continuation of the
bipartisan spirit that makes this committee function so well, but there
remains room for improvement.
This year, the full committee and our Cybersecurity Subcommittee
have held several hearings in the aftermath of major cyber incidents to
review the state of our Nation's cyber preparedness and assess the
overall efficacy of response mechanisms across the Federal Government
and within various industry sectors.
This joint hearing is a great opportunity to continue that work,
focusing on the transportation sector, which impacts millions of
Americans.
Everyday Americans are already experiencing the impact of a
pervasive supply chain crisis. Goods are becoming more expensive and
harder to find. Nearly every sector of our economy has been affected by
this problem, which is particularly acute in the auto industry.
We have already witnessed the impact of a devastating ransomware
attack on Colonial Pipeline, which led to gas shortages on the East
Coast. Imagine a similar attack on a major U.S. port, airline, or major
logistics company as the holidays approach.
We must ensure there is a robust partnership between the Department
of Homeland Security, particularly the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA), the Transportation Security Agency (TSA), and
the U.S. Coast Guard and the owners and operators of our transportation
systems.
I hope that this hearing reviews the cyber preparedness of our
critical transportation systems and how agencies like CISA, TSA, and
the Coast Guard can enhance their programs, services, and guidance to
best ensure entities can defend and mitigate the threat of cyber
attacks.
I am particularly interested in learning more about DHS's use of
security directives as a tool for enforcing new security standards.
I would like to hear testimony and learn from our witnesses
regarding the impact of security directives, and how TSA is working
with relevant partners to ensure robust industry input, because they
know their sector best.
I would also like to hear from our witnesses on the extent to which
industry expertise and feedback is utilized in the creation of these
security directives.
Members of this committee, including myself, are actively engaged
in crafting mandatory cyber incident reporting legislation to improve
CISA's visibility into cyber incidents impacting our Nation's critical
infrastructure. I thank Chairwoman Clarke for her leadership and
partnership on this effort.
I've also been working closely with Ranking Member Katko and Rep.
Spanberger to introduce bipartisan legislation to authorize the
director of CISA to establish a stakeholder-driven, transparent process
for identifying the owners and operators of our Nation's most critical
infrastructure--known as systemically important critical
infrastructure. How can we expect CISA, and other Sector Risk
Management Agencies to prioritized limited services if we don't know
who is the most critical?
It is also incumbent on Congress to ensure such a program includes
the appropriate guard rails, guidance, and built-in mechanisms for
industry collaboration, such an important program must be done right. I
believe that the Securing Systemically Important Critical
Infrastructure Act strives for these very principles. I'm disappointed
that the committee held a mark-up this morning, and this legislation
was not included despite months of industry collaboration and attempts
to collaborate with the Majority.
I do want to note Rep. Langevin's leadership on this important
issue, and his transparency with the Minority. I look forward to
working with him, and you Chairwoman Clarke on this legislation, to
continue to bipartisan nature of this subcommittee.
Last, I'll just say that the issue of transportation cybersecurity
hits close to home. It was shortly after New York's MTA systems were
hacked in April, and discovered in June, in which Secretary Mayorkas
announced intentions to create a new security directive for major rail
and aviation entities.
I look forward to learning from our panelists here today about what
his committee can do to help TSA, CISA, and the Coast Guard work toward
an enhanced public-private partnership with owners and operators of our
Nation's transportation system.

Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Ranking Member Garbarino.
The Chair now recognizes the Chairwoman of the Subcommittee
on Transportation and Maritime Security, the gentlelady from
New Jersey, Mrs. Bonnie Watson Coleman, for an opening
statement.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke. To our
Ranking Members Gimenez and Garbarino, thank you for coming
together around this very important issue. To our witnesses,
thank you for being willing to discuss this critical topic.
I want to be crystal clear. When it comes to transportation
cybersecurity, inaction is not an option. When gas stops
flowing due to a cyber attack, it doesn't just impact the
pipeline owner; it means Americans struggle to fill up their
tanks. If hackers succeed in bringing down a plane or derailing
a train, it is not an airline or railroad that would pay the
steepest price. Indeed, the real cost would be borne by the
passengers injured or even killed.
Simply put, when you own critical infrastructure, people's
lives and livelihoods depend on your cybersecurity. Yet despite
the stakes, most transportation operators currently have no
obligation to meet even baseline cybersecurity standards.
The status quo is dangerous. We are all familiar with the
attack on Colonial Pipeline, but just this year, hackers have
also targeted New York's MTA, as stated, the Massachusetts
ferry system, the Port of Houston, one of the largest
repositories of airline passenger records, a leading pipeline
maintenance company, and global freight railroads. The list
goes on.
Unquestionably, our Nation's transportation systems are
facing a crisis. Fortunately, TSA has begun the process of
requiring critical operators to take basic cybersecurity
precautions. The recent cybersecurity directors for pipelines
and Secretary Mayorkas' announcement of forthcoming
requirements for rail, transit, and aviation are justified,
necessary, and an important first step. But more action is even
needed.
For instance, TSA must ensure all transportation moves are
covered. Particularly as vehicles become increasingly connected
and autonomous, the cybersecurity of motor carriers and busses
cannot be forgotten. Meanwhile, the Coast Guard needs to hold
ferries, ports, and other maritime systems to similar
standards.
There is also the question of implementation and
enforcement. If an operator proposes an alternative procedure
that maintains robust cybersecurity, TSA needs to provide
timely, substantive feedback.
By the same token, if operators fail to comply, leaving our
Nation's critical infrastructure vulnerable to attack, TSA must
have the resources to enforce the rules. Ultimately, TSA should
pursue traditional notice-and-comment regulations so that
stakeholders can offer meaningful input.
But these conversations around implementation shouldn't
distract from the fundamental fact: There is no substitute for
mandatory transportation cybersecurity requirements like those
that are announced by TSA and Secretary Mayorkas.
While many operators employ best practices, invest in
cybersecurity talent, and coordinate with Government
voluntarily, some cut corners and put us all at risk. Without
requirements, there is nothing to compel those companies to
improve. That is a prospect we cannot take lightly, because in
the 21st Century, physical security and cybersecurity are two
sides of the same coin.
Historically, to hijack a plane, you had to clear TSA's
checkpoint and then breach the cockpit. Today, it may be
possible to hijack a plane by hacking it. The same is true for
railroads, subways, and other modes. Cameras and guards are no
match for a hacker seeking to control or derail a train.
This isn't science fiction. This is the future, and
cybersecurity requirements for all modes are the way to prepare
for it, as well as tackle today's immediate threats, such as
ransomware and state-sponsored data theft. A recent study found
that only 60 percent of transit agencies have a cybersecurity
preparedness program in place. The surge in cyber attacks
against railroads, airlines, airports, and maritime assets
suggest an equally grim picture in these modes.
This is our moment to ensure that every transportation
operator in America prepares themselves for 21st Century
threats. We can't wait until a hacked plane falls from the sky
or a breached railroad gridlocks our Nation's supply chain to
take action. I look forward to hearing from our panel today
about what can be done to shore up the cyber defenses of our
transportation system.
Again, I thank the witnesses for joining us.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
[The statement of Chairwoman Watson Coleman follows:]
Statement of Chairwoman Bonnie Watson Coleman
Thank you Chairwoman Clarke, and thank you to our witnesses for
joining us today to discuss this critical topic.
I want to be crystal clear: When it comes to transportation
cybersecurity, inaction isn't an option.
When gas stops flowing due to a cyber attack, it doesn't just
impact the pipeline's owner. It means Americans struggle to fill up
their tanks.
If hackers succeed in bringing down a plane or derailing a train,
it's not an airline or railroad that would pay the steepest price. The
real cost would be borne by the passengers injured or killed.
Simply put, when you own critical infrastructure, people's lives
and livelihoods depend on your cybersecurity. Yet despite the stakes,
most transportation operators currently have no obligation to meet even
baseline cybersecurity standards.
The status quo is dangerous. We're all familiar with the attack on
Colonial Pipeline, but just this year, hackers have also targeted New
York's MTA, the Massachusetts ferry system, the Port of Houston, one of
the largest depositories of airline passenger records, a leading
pipeline maintenance company, and global freight railroads. The list
goes on.
Unquestionably, our Nation's transportation systems are facing a
crisis. Fortunately, TSA has begun the process of requiring critical
operators to take basic cybersecurity precautions.
The recent cyber security directives for pipelines--and Secretary
Mayorkas' announcement of forthcoming requirements for rail, transit,
and aviation--are justified, necessary, and an important first step.
But more action is needed.
For instance, TSA must ensure all transportation modes are covered.
Particularly as vehicles become increasingly connected and autonomous,
the cybersecurity of motor-carriers and buses cannot be forgotten.
Meanwhile, the Coast Guard needs to hold ferries, ports, and other
maritime systems to similar standards.
There's also the question of implementation and enforcement. If an
operator proposes an alternative procedure that maintains robust
cybersecurity, TSA needs to provide timely, substantive feedback.
By the same token, if operators fail to comply--leaving our
Nation's critical infrastructure vulnerable to attack--TSA must have
the resources to enforce the rules.
And ultimately, TSA should pursue traditional notice-and-comment
regulations so stakeholders can offer meaningful input.
But these conversations around implementation shouldn't distract
from a fundamental fact: There's no substitute for mandatory
transportation cybersecurity requirements, like those announced by TSA
and Secretary Mayorkas.
While many operators employ best practices, invest in cybersecurity
talent, and coordinate with Government voluntarily, some cut corners
and put us all at risk. Without requirements, there is nothing to
compel those companies to improve.
That's a prospect we cannot take lightly, because in the 21st
Century, physical security and cybersecurity are two sides of the same
coin.
Historically, to hijack a plane, you had to clear TSA's checkpoint
and then breach the cockpit. Today, it may be possible to hijack a
plane by hacking it.
The same is true for railroads, subways, and other modes. Cameras
and guards are no match for a hacker seeking to control or derail a
train.
This isn't science fiction. This is the future, and cybersecurity
requirements for all modes are the way to prepare for it, as well as
tackle today's immediate threats--such as ransomware and state-
sponsored data theft.
A recent study found that only 60 percent of transit agencies have
a cybersecurity preparedness program in place, and the surge in cyber
attacks against railroads, airlines, airports, and maritime assets
suggests an equally grim picture in those modes.
This is our moment to ensure that every transportation operator in
America prepares themselves for 21st Century threats. We can't wait
until a hacked plane falls from the sky or a breached railroad
gridlocks our Nation's supply chain to take action.
I look forward to hearing from our panel today about what can be
done to shore up the cyber defenses of our transportation systems.
Again, I thank the witnesses for joining us, and I yield back.

Ms. Clarke. I thank the gentlelady from New Jersey.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee on Transportation and Maritime Security, the
gentleman from Florida, Mr. Gimenez, for an opening statement.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke and Watson
Coleman, for holding this important hearing today, and to
Ranking Member Garbarino as well. I am glad that we can bring
these two subcommittees together to discuss how to protect our
vital aviation service, transportation, and maritime systems
from cyber threats.
I know first-hand from my time as mayor of Miami-Dade
County how important these systems are to the flow of people
and goods and the overall health of our economy. As we are
seeing right now with supply chain challenges and the
increasing prices in everyday goods, keeping our transportation
system operating at a high level is imperative.
The recent ransomware attack on Colonial Pipeline only
served to highlight what owners and operators of these critical
infrastructure systems already knew: A significant cyber
incident has enormous ramifications to their systems and can
cripple the goods and services that our Nation needs.
Transportation system owners and operators have enhanced
their cybersecurity practices and real-time information sharing
over the years, but there is always more that can be done to
strengthen our defenses and it is imperative that we do so. As
TSA moves forward with new cybersecurity directives for
aviation, rail, and mass transit in the next few weeks, it is
important that industry is fully consulted as these
requirements are drafted and implemented.
The owners and operators know their systems the best and
what is workable. Having a strong public-private partnership as
new cyber requirements are imposed in the transportation sector
is key. I look forward to hearing from the witnesses today on
their perspectives on how to strengthen cybersecurity
throughout our transportation system.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Gimenez follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Carlos Gimenez
Thank you, Chairwomen Clarke and Watson Coleman, for holding this
important hearing today. And to Ranking Member Garbarino as well. I'm
glad that we can bring these two subcommittees together to discuss how
to protect our vital aviation, surface transportation, and maritime
systems from cyber threats.
I know first-hand from my time as Mayor of Miami-Dade County how
important these systems are to the flow of people and goods and the
overall health of our economy. As we're seeing right now with supply
chain challenges and the increasing prices in everyday goods, keeping
our transportation systems operating at a high level is imperative.
The recent ransomware attack on Colonial Pipeline only served to
highlight what owners and operators of these critical infrastructure
systems already knew--a significant cyber incident has enormous
ramifications to their systems and can cripple the goods and services
that our Nation relies on.
Transportation system owners and operators have enhanced their
cybersecurity practices and real-time information sharing over the
years, but there is always more that can be done to strengthen our
defenses.
As TSA moves forward with new cybersecurity directives for
aviation, rail, and mass transit in the next few weeks, it's important
that industry is fully consulted as these requirements are drafted and
implemented. The owners and operators know their systems the best and
what is workable. Having a strong public-private partnership as new
cyber requirements are imposed in the transportation sector is key.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses today on their
perspectives of how to strengthen cybersecurity throughout our
transportation systems.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.

Ms. Clarke. I thank the Ranking Member from Florida, the
gentleman, Mr. Gimenez, for his statement.
Members are also reminded that the committee will operate
according to the guidelines laid out by the Chairman and
Ranking Member in their February 3 colloquy regarding remote
procedures.
Member statements may also be included for the record.
[The statements of Chairman Thompson and Honorable Jackson
Lee follow:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
Thank you, Chairwomen Clarke and Watson Coleman, for holding
today's hearing, and thank you to our panelists for being here with us.
Today's hearing occurs amid a shifting conversation on how to
secure our Nation's transportation systems from cyber attacks.
The Transportation Security Administration has long relied on
voluntary collaboration with industry partners to develop and implement
cybersecurity measures.
The ransomware attack on Colonial Pipeline and the ensuing gas
shortage earlier this year tested the effectiveness of this approach
and highlighted the devastating potential effects of a successful cyber
attack on transportation systems.
In the aftermath of the attack, the Biden administration moved
swiftly to mandate cybersecurity requirements for owners and operators
of critical pipelines through two security directives issued by the
TSA, with support from CISA.
Over time, TSA will replace these security directives with full
notice-and-comment regulations, marking the start of a new regulatory
scheme for securing the transportation sector from cyber attacks.
Earlier this month, Secretary Mayorkas announced that TSA will also
expand this mandatory approach to other modes of transportation by
issuing new cybersecurity requirements for rail, transit, and aviation.
Indeed, while the attack on Colonial Pipeline dominated the
headlines, it is far from the only recent cyber attack we have seen
targeting transportation systems.
From the subway system in New York City to the Port of Houston, we
have seen cyber attacks attempted across all modes of transportation.
I commend the Biden administration for taking the bold steps needed
to address these emerging threats.
As DHS embarks upon this new approach, it must act deliberately to
ensure its mandates deliver the intended security results.
First, TSA must work in close collaboration with CISA and industry
experts to develop requirements that are intelligence-based,
actionable, and crafted to achieve the greatest security benefit.
TSA must focus its enforcement efforts on desired outcomes and work
with stakeholders to provide flexibility in how regulated parties
achieve those outcomes.
Second, DHS must develop a plan for developing the cybersecurity
expertise and resources it will need at TSA and CISA to carry out
robust outreach and enforcement efforts--not just for the immediate
implementation of new requirements, but as a regular way of doing
business going forward.
Congress will need to fully fund these efforts, and I look forward
to working with my colleagues to deliver the necessary resources.
Finally, as DHS considers plans for securing other critical
infrastructure sectors from cyber attacks, the transportation sector
may serve as a model for the prospect of mandating cybersecurity
measures.
DHS must be transparent with Congress, stakeholders, and the public
about its successes and failures.
Consistently evaluating the effectiveness of security efforts will
be key to fixing what may not be working well and to considering
whether to apply what does work well more broadly across critical
infrastructure sectors.
I look forward to discussing these topics with our witnesses today,
and I yield back.
______

Statement of Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee
October 26, 2021
I want to thank Congresswoman Yvette Clarke, Chair of the
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection and Innovation Subcommittee;
and Congresswoman Bonnie Watson Coleman, Chair of the Transportation
and Maritime Security Subcommittee and the respective Ranking Members
of these committees Congressman Andrew Garbarino and Congressman Carlos
A. Gimenez for holding today's hearing on ``Transportation
Cybersecurity: Protecting Planes, Trains, and Pipelines from Cyber
Threats''.
I thank today's witnesses for their service to their Nation; and I
look forward to their testimony:

Suzanne Spaulding, senior adviser, Center for Strategic and
International Studies and former under secretary, National
Protection and Programs Directorate;

Patty Cogswell, strategic advisor, Guidehouse, and former
deputy administrator, Transportation Security Administration;

Jeffrey Troy, president & chief executive officer, Aviation
Information Sharing and Analysis Center and former deputy
assistant director, Cyber Division, Federal Bureau of
Investigation; and

Scott Dickerson, executive director, Maritime Transportation
System Information Sharing and Analysis Center (MTS-ISAC)
(Minority witness).
Today's hearing affords Members an opportunity to engage with
former Federal cybersecurity and transportation security officials
about the current state of cybersecurity across all modes of
transportation, as well as recent and forthcoming regulatory actions to
enhance transportation cybersecurity.
I look forward to learning more about how the Transportation
Security Administration (TSA), Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA), the broader law enforcement, and intelligence
communities, and transportation owners and operators can address the
need for increased cybersecurity preparedness across the transportation
sector.
Today's hearing is an important opportunity to view the cyber
threat from a real-world perspective.
The threat is not limited to telecommunications, banking,
transportation, health care, or critical infrastructure because of
omnipresent and ubiquitous nature of attacks.
The Solar Wind attack was an equal opportunity abuser to any
network that it invaded.
Colonial Pipeline was just one victim in a long line of victims,
which ended with the consumer who curtailed travel plans due the impact
on gasoline availability due to the attack.
Any networked device can be a vector for an attack, no matter how
small.
The age of hyper-connectivity is upon us and we are not prepared to
protect devices that are by design linked to share data traffic.
Cybersecurity is not something you can see or actively prove--it is
established by each moment of each day that a network or computing
device remains free of breaches by adversaries.
For too long the policy of local and Federal law enforcement was
that some cyber crimes were too insignificant to waste limited
resources on to investigate, conduct arrests, or prosecute--this must
change.
We know from our work on this committee that determined adversaries
will spare little to succeed in breaching U.S. networks even small
efforts provide valuable insights that are applied to increase the
likelihood of success for much more damaging attacks.
The goal of cybersecurity throughout the Federal Government must be
to block adversaries when it is possible, detect and eradicate them
quickly when it is not, and impose consequences to raise the costs and
deter malicious behavior in cyber space.
For 4 years, Federal efforts to raise the National cybersecurity
posture--across Federal networks, State and local governments, and the
private sector--were stunted by a lack of steady, consistent leadership
from the White House, leaving agencies to pursue piecemeal approaches
to cybersecurity.
Congressional efforts to address the weaknesses in Federal
cybersecurity include several Jackson Lee bills that comprise the
following measures introduced in the 117th Congress:

H.R. 119--Cyber Defense National Guard Act, which requires
the Office of the Director of National Intelligence to report
to Congress regarding the feasibility of establishing a Cyber
Defense National Guard that may be activated during emergencies
that affect the cybersecurity of the Nation or critical
infrastructure.

H.R. 118--Cyber Vulnerability Disclosure Reporting Act,
requires the Department of Homeland Security to submit a report
describing the policies and procedures developed to coordinate
the disclosure of cyber vulnerabilities. The report shall
describe instances when these policies and procedures were used
to disclose cyber vulnerabilities in the previous year.
Further, the report shall mention the degree to which the
disclosed information was acted upon by stakeholders.

H.R. 57, the DHS Cybersecurity Asset Protection of
Infrastructure under Terrorist Attack Logistical Structure
Act'' or the CAPITALS Act, which requires the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) to report to Congress on the
feasibility of establishing a DHS Civilian Cyber Defense
National Resource.
The goals of the Jackson Lee legislative efforts during the 116th
Congress were to raise the baseline cybersecurity posture across the
Federal and work with the private sector to reduce avoidable,
opportunistic attacks and to refocus talent, time, and resources on
preventing, detecting, and eliminating more sophisticated attacks.
The raising the Nation's baseline cybersecurity posture will
require a systemic, whole-of-Government approach to cybersecurity.
The private sector has 85 percent of the Nation's critical
infrastructure and much of it has some connectivity to the internet,
which means they cannot adequately protect these National assets.
The vulnerabilities in computing technology from the most complex
systems to the smallest devices are often found in its software.
This was true in the early 1990's when the first desktop computing
technology was produced.
Desktop computing devices were quickly adopted for business and
Government use.
The market and regulatory forces that should have forced security
and safety improvements on computing technology never developed due to
interference from Congress and the courts that excused or deflected
culpability for known computing technology errors or omissions in
product development or manufacturing that left systems open to attack.
The last defense for computing technology and systems are the
concrete steps that organization, companies, and agencies can take to
secure their computing assets; and business continuity measures that
can be in place to allow meaningful recovery of operations should a
successful cyber attack occur.
Business continuity refers to the capability of an organization to
continue the delivery of products or services at acceptable levels
following a disruptive incident, and business continuity planning or
business continuity and resiliency planning is the process of creating
systems of prevention and recovery to deal with potential threats to
operations.
To survive in the current high-risk computing landscape both
Government and private-sector entities must engage in risk mitigation
strategies that assess operations from top to bottom to identify
potential cyber threats and risk vectors.
This assessment should include both internal and external threats
that could compromise business continuity.
Some risks are firmly within an organization's ability to control,
such as the controls they implement to secure data and systems.
Continuity planning is also firmly under the control of
organizations, and to not invest in proven strategies to survive a
cyber attack, is not only irresponsible on the part of owners--but it
creates unacceptable risks for their employees, customers, and
investors.
I introduced the Cybersecurity Vulnerability Remediation Act was
introduced and passed the House during the 115th and 116th Congresses
and has been updated again in the 117th Congress to meet the ever-
evolving nature of cyber threats faced by Federal and private-sector
information systems and our Nation's critical infrastructure.
This bill goes significantly further than the first Cybersecurity
Vulnerability bill that I introduced in the 115th Congress, to address
the instance of Zero Day Events that can lead to catastrophic
cybersecurity failures of information and computing systems.
The ANS to H.R. 2980 responds to the recent cyber attacks on
America's private sector and establishes the Federal Government as
having a major role in fighting cyber attacks that target Government
agencies and the private-sector critical infrastructure.
H.R. 2980, the Cybersecurity Vulnerability Remediation Act:

Changes the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) definition
of security vulnerability to include cybersecurity
vulnerability,

Provides the plan to fix known cybersecurity
vulnerabilities,

Gives the Department of Homeland Security the tools to know
more about ransomware attacks and ransom payments, and

Creates greater transparency on how DHS will defend against
and mitigate cybersecurity vulnerabilities and lays the road
map for preparing the private sector to better prepare for and
mitigate cyber attacks.
The bill requires a report that can include a Classified annex,
which I strongly recommend to the Secretary of DHS so that it can be
available should the agency elect to engage private-sector entities in
a discussion on cyber attacks and breaches targeting critical
infrastructure.
This bill is needed because the Nation's dependence on networked
computing makes us vulnerable to cyber threats.
In 30 years the world has gone from one divided by oceans to one
that is interconnected through the internet.
An interconnected world has brought us closer together, created new
opportunities for business, and citizen engagement, while at the same
time given new tools to those who may wish to cause harm using cyber
attacks.
In cyber space an attack against one entity or device can devolve
into an attack against many.
The work that must be done to secure critical infrastructure from
cybersecurity vulnerabilities that include oil and gas pipelines; the
electric grid, water treatment facilities, and other privately-held
infrastructure must occur with much more order and purposefulness.
The consolidation of cybersecurity for both the .gov domain and for
the private sector is now under the jurisdiction of the Committee on
Homeland Security was is an important step to better coordinating
domestic cybersecurity.
the need to take action
Ransomware is a form of cyber crime where criminal actors
compromise a victim's computer systems, preventing access or
threatening to release sensitive information if the victim does not
provide a ransom payment.
In recent years, the number of ransomware attacks has increased
significantly, affecting school districts, police departments,
hospitals, and numerous businesses, among others.
In 2020, an estimated 2,400 governments, hospitals, and school
districts were victims of ransomware attacks in the United States.
Victims made an estimated $350 million in ransomware payments in
2020, with an average payment of $312,493.
In the first quarter of 2021, the average monetary demand
associated with a ransomware attack increased to $220,298, up 43
percent from the previous quarter.
While many businesses suffer significant losses due to disruptions
from ransomware and the cost of remediation or making ransom payments,
when criminals groups target Government entities or other critical
infrastructure, the effects can pose significant risks to public
safety.
For example, there were 560 ransomware attacks on U.S. health care
facilities in 2020, in some cases causing delays in treatment for
serious illnesses.
In a growing number of ransomware attacks, the perpetrators engage
in ``double extortion'' where they threaten to release sensitive data
publicly if a ransom payment is not made.
Last week, the Washington, DC police department was hit by a
ransomware attack that included the release of detailed background
reports on 5 current or former police officers and the threat to
release files publicly.
Ransomware can be delivered in various ways, the majority of which
utilize email. Ransomware are real, but computers aren't infected just
by opening emails anymore.
Just opening an email to view it is safe now--although attachments
& links in the email can still be dangerous to open.
While it is not always possible to prevent a successful attack,
engaging in general security best practices and implementing effective
email protection can drastically reduce your risk.
The SolarWinds attack was a wake-up call on any notion that some
companies are more trustworthy than others because a trusted software
source was the cause of the company's 18,000 customers downloading a
compromised version of Orion.
Nearly 40 Federal agencies downloaded the compromised SolarWinds
Orion update, but evidence of further compromise has only been detected
at 9 Federal agencies to date. Agencies that downloaded the compromised
Orion update continue to hunt for indicators of compromise.
It is important to note that about 30 percent of both Government
and non-Government victims of the Russian cyber campaign had no direct
connection with SolarWinds.
According to news reports, hackers also breached networks by
``exploiting known bugs in software products, by guessing on-line
passwords and by capitalizing on a variety of issues in the way
Microsoft Corp.'s cloud-based software is configured.''
Bugs can also be called Zero Day Events that if exploited could
cost significant disruption in the function of application or services
that rely in computers or remote computing services.
The committee recently took action to address the lack of Federal
law requiring private entities to report cybersecurity incidents, there
is little public information on the number of victims that installed
the infected versions of SolarWinds Orion or experienced second-stage
intrusions.
The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency should be
empowered to more effectively coordinate and lead interagency
cybersecurity and risk management activities that coordinate functions
among critical infrastructure stakeholders.
Congress should provide CISA the authorities and budget that match
its mission.
Over the past decade, the private sector has raised fair concerns
about the value of many Federal cybersecurity programs and has used its
concerns as an excuse for not fully participating, to the detriment of
National cybersecurity efforts.
That must stop. The private sector has an important role to play to
improve the Nation's cybersecurity posture and must step up.
Solving this cybersecurity challenge will require creativity from
policy makers as we seek out new strategies to bolster security efforts
for Federal and private-sector networks.
I look forward the asking questions of today's witnesses.

Ms. Clarke. I now welcome our panel of witnesses. Ms.
Suzanne Spaulding is a senior advisor to the Center for
Strategic and International Studies. Before that, Ms. Spaulding
served as the under secretary for the Department of Homeland
Security's National Protection and Programs Directorate, which
Congress redesignated as CISA in 2018.
Next we have Ms. Patricia Cogswell, a senior strategic
advisor for the National Security at Guidehouse, who served as
the deputy administrator for the Transportation Security
Administration from 2018 through 2020.
I would also like to welcome Mr. Jeffrey Troy, the
president and CEO of the Aviation Information Sharing and
Analysis Center, or the Aviation ISAC. Prior to the Aviation
ISAC, Mr. Troy served as a deputy assistant director of the
FBI's Cyber Division.
Finally, we will hear from Mr. Scott Dickerson, the
executive director of the Maritime Transportation System
Information Sharing and Analysis Center, or the MTS-ISAC.
Without objection, the witnesses' full statements will be
inserted in the record.
I now ask each witness to summarize her or his statement
for 5 minutes, beginning with Ms. Spaulding.
Ms. Spaulding, I think you have to unmute.

STATEMENT OF SUZANNE SPAULDING, SENIOR ADVISER, HOMELAND
SECURITY, INTERNATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAM, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC
& INTERNATIONAL STUDIES; FORMER UNDER SECRETARY, NATIONAL
PROTECTION AND PROGRAMS DIRECTORATE

Ms. Spaulding. Madam Chairwoman, can you hear me at this
point?
Ms. Clarke. Yes, I can.
Ms. Spaulding. Excellent. All right. Thank you.
Chairwomen, Ranking Members, and Members of the committee,
thank you for this opportunity to testify today in this joint
hearing on TSA directives aimed at ensuring the security and
resilience of the aviation, rail, and pipeline sectors against
significant cyber incidents.
As the former under secretary at the Department of Homeland
Security, where I led what is now called the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, and as a member of the
Congressionally-created Cyberspace Solarium Commission, and
even going back to my involvement with the Commission on
Cybersecurity for the 44th President, which was run out of my
current organization, CSIS, I have always favored voluntary
market-based solutions to cybersecurity, as they are generally
more efficient and flexible. However, I have reluctantly had to
conclude that we cannot rely upon markets alone to ensure the
continuity of Nationally-critical functions upon which the
American public relies.
First, the purely voluntary approach simply has not gotten
us to where we need to be, despite decades of effort. The
threat is evolving much more quickly than our defense. Even in
these key sectors where there has been significant progress on
cyber, there is still a need to ensure continued investment
across all vital assets. Even in a perfect market, there are
external impacts on society and the Nation from inadequate
cybersecurity that will simply not be captured in a business'
bottom line or their calculation of return on investment.
Externalities have long justified regulation and mandates
such as with pollution and highway safety. This is the thinking
behind a number of recommendations from the Cyberspace Solarium
Commission.
First, we looked at ways to improve the performance of
relevant markets, including by providing better market
incentives, greater transparency, more information, to improve
the cybersecurity behavior of firms. But the Solarium
Commission too ultimately concluded that the market alone was
not going to be sufficient to provide the level of security and
resilience that is urgently needed for the most important
elements of our infrastructure, particularly with what the
Solarium calls systemically important critical infrastructure.
We recommended creating a transparent methodology for
identifying these most critical systems and assets and then
building a closer relationship between the Federal Government
and the firms that own and operate these systems. The
Government should offer a suite of benefits, like improved
intelligence sharing and operational support, but industries
should also accept burdens, like requirements for security
behavior and enhanced incident reporting.
Consistent with this thinking, I believe it is appropriate
for TSA to use its existing authority to put basic requirements
in place for the most critical assets in these three sectors.
The details will be important. But as described, these
directives seem like a step in the right direction.
Collaboration with industry will continue to be an imperative
as TSA further develops these directives and perhaps follow-on
regulations.
Industry has a level of expertise that will be essential in
understanding what needs to be done. It must be at the table to
help craft directives that are ambitious but achievable, and
Government must invite them early enough in the process to
allow them to make a meaningful contribution. In addition,
those who depend upon these critical sectors should also make
their voices heard in this process.
Moreover, requirements should be informed by an awareness
of the tools and technologies that are available to help these
asset owners and operators gain visibility into their
information technology and operational technology systems,
detect malicious activity, and respond quickly and effectively.
To encourage continued innovation in this area, Government
should lean toward open, performance-based standards that are
technology-neutral and vendor-agnostic. Any new regulations
should draw on existing guidelines, standards, and best
practices. They should be harmonized with requirements in other
sectors, particularly as between pipeline and electric sectors
for which there is often significant overlap.
Finally, Congress needs to ensure that DHS has provided the
resources necessary to effectively implement and monitor these
mandates and continue its equally important voluntary work.
Time is not on our side. The threat environment grows more
dangerous with each passing day. We should not wait for a
tragedy caused by malicious cyber activity in one of these
vital sectors before we take necessary action. The proposed TSA
directives reflect a growing body of evidence that the risk of
serious disruptions to critical infrastructure is not potential
or in the future. It is here now, and it requires an urgent
response.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Spaulding follows:]
Prepared Statement of Suzanne Spaulding
Tuesday, October 26, 2021
Chairwoman Clarke, Chairwoman Watson Coleman, Ranking Member
Garbarino, Ranking Member Gimenez, and distinguished Members of the
subcommittees, thank you for this opportunity to testify today in this
joint hearing on the important issue of ensuring the security and
resilience of the aviation, rail, and pipeline sectors against
significant disruption from malicious cyber activity.
The safety and security of these 3 sectors falls under the
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) at the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS). This Spring, following a ransomware incident
at Colonial Pipeline that disrupted fuel deliveries along the East
Coast and led to panic buying, long lines, and higher prices at gas
stations, TSA issued a security directive mandating that certain
pipeline owner/operators--those deemed by TSA to be most critical--
assess whether their current operations are consistent with TSA's
Guidelines on cybersecurity, identify any gaps and remediation
measures, and report the results to TSA and others. This was followed
in July 2021 with an additional cybersecurity directive mandating
implementation of cybersecurity mitigation measures; development of
Cybersecurity Contingency Response Plans in the event of an incident;
and an annual cybersecurity architecture design review, among other
things.
Recently, the Secretary of Homeland Security announced that DHS
would be coming out with similar mandates covering critical U.S.
airport operators, passenger aircraft operators, and all cargo aircraft
operators, as well as ``higher-risk'' railroad and rail transit
assets.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://thehill.com/policy/cybersecurity/575580-tsa-to-issue-
regulations-to-secure-rail-aviation-groups-against-cyber?rl=1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The pipeline directives have not been publicly released and the
aviation and rail directives are still under development. However, they
have generally been described as prescribing a relatively basic level
of cybersecurity measures and plans for incident response. The latter,
planning and exercising incident response to reduce the impact of a
successful hack is one of the most important, and often
underappreciated, elements of managing cyber risk.
The details will be important but, as described, these directives
seem like a step in the right direction. Moving forward, TSA will need
to operate collaboratively with these sectors to ensure that the
requirements and time lines drive toward actual improvements in
security and resilience. No directives or regulations will achieve
perfect security. This is an exercise in risk management, not risk
elimination, which is why planning for incident response is so crucial.
The objective should be to ensure that the relevant industries are
putting in place a common baseline of measures to strengthen the
security and resilience of the highest-risk assets.
As the former Under Secretary at the Department of Homeland
Security leading what is now called the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), as a member of the
Congressionally-created Cyberspace Solarium Commission (CSC), and going
back to my involvement with the Commission on Cybersecurity for the
44th President, which was run out of my current organization, the
Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), I have always
favored voluntary, market-based solutions to cybersecurity. Markets are
generally more efficient and, important for such a dynamic area as
cyber, nimbler. However, over the last couple of years, I have
reluctantly had to conclude that we cannot rely upon markets alone to
ensure the continuity of Nationally-critical functions upon which the
American public relies. I think there are several reasons for this.
The first is that the purely voluntary approach has not gotten us
where we need to be, despite decades of effort. There has been
significant progress and a growing level of maturity in industry and in
Government on cyber, including in the sectors under discussion today.
All three, aviation, rail, and pipelines, have worked collaboratively
with DHS over the years to improve their physical and cyber security.
But the threat is evolving much more quickly than our defense. There is
an urgency to addressing this risk to the American public that the
market simply cannot address fast enough.
One reason the market has not fully addressed this challenge is the
paucity of information. Markets need information to function
effectively. For example, information about the scale, scope, and cost
of inadequate cybersecurity is needed to drive a demand signal that
would prompt appropriate levels of investment and balance the ``first-
to-market'' imperative. Yet, since most cyber incidents are not
reported, and those that are do not provide details on costs, this
information is lacking. Furthermore, such information is needed to
calculate the return on investment (ROI) for security measures. Without
it, security professionals often have a hard time convincing management
to make needed investments.
Even in a perfect market, there are external impacts on society and
the Nation from inadequate cybersecurity, particularly in assets that
control essential functions, that will not be captured in a businesses'
bottom line or ROI. Externalities have long justified regulation and
mandates, such as with pollution and highway safety. In the case of
pipelines, rail, and aviation, the potential risks to public health and
safety, as well as the potential for cascading economic consequences,
calls for a Government role.
This is the thinking behind a number of the recommendations from
the Cyberspace Solarium Commission. First, we looked at ways to improve
the performance of relevant markets, including by providing better
market incentives to improve the cybersecurity behavior of firms.
Mandatory reporting of relevant cyber incidents can fill critical
information gaps, particularly if paired with the establishment of a
Bureau of Cyber Statistics. Bolstering the capabilities of cyber
insurance underwriters can help that industry play the role it does in
other risk categories to encourage appropriate investments in security
and safety.
In addition to nudging firms in the sector toward better
cybersecurity behavior, the Federal Government can do more to help
these firms make better purchasing decisions regarding the security of
the products and services they deploy as part of their business. More
Government-sponsored security testing of critical technologies and
applications--like industrial control systems--can help firms
understand the security characteristics of the devices they deploy. The
CSC recommended the creation of Government-sponsored critical
technology security centers at places like Federally-funded research
and development centers or National labs to fill this gap. Similarly, a
clearer ecosystem of cybersecurity product certifications would allow
procurement specialists at critical firms in the sector to more easily
price security into their purchasing decisions and manage their supply
chain risk.
But the CSC, too, ultimately concluded that the market was not
going to be sufficient to provide the level of security and resilience
that is urgently needed for the most important elements of our
infrastructure, particularly what CSC calls Systemically Important
Critical Infrastructure. The Solarium recommended creating a robust and
transparent methodology for identifying these most critical systems and
assets and then building a closer relationship between SICI firms and
the Federal Government through a suite of benefits--like improved
intelligence sharing and operational support--but also burdens--like
requirements for security behavior and enhanced incident reporting.
Consistent with this thinking, I believe it is appropriate for TSA
to use its existing authority to put basic requirements in place for
the most critical assets in these three sectors. That said, the process
is important. According to testimony from Kimberly Denbow Managing
Director, Security & Operations American Gas Association, in front of
this committee in September in support of the legislation to mandate
cyber incident reporting across critical infrastructure, ``The TSA
Pipeline Group has been the epitome of innovation--leveraging the
infrastructure subject matter expertise of pipeline operators,
partnering with CISA and Idaho National Labs for in-house industrial
control system cybersecurity knowledge, and collaborating with the
Department of Transportation's Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration (PHMSA) on cybersecurity reviews of control centers. AGA
helped champion the CISA/TSA Pipeline Cybersecurity Initiative and
promoted effortlessly the Pipeline Validated Architectural Design
Reviews. The quality output has been the result of the dedication of
TSA and CISA staff, in partnership with pipeline operators, toward a
shared common goal--pipeline security.''\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://homeland.house.gov/imo/media/doc/2021-09-01-CIPI-HRG-
Testimony-Denbow.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This level of collaboration should be the model as TSA, in
partnership with CISA, works to develop the aviation and rail
directives. Industry has a level of expertise that will be essential in
understanding what needs to be done. Businesses rarely embrace
Government mandates; that is not surprising. Nevertheless, industry
must be at the table to help craft directives that are ambitious but
achievable, and Government must invite them early enough in the process
to allow to make a meaningful contribution.
It's also important to note that the security directive process
allows the TSA administrator flexibility to work with businesses even
after the directive is issued. For example, a company can propose
alternative measures for achieving the objective(s), and the
administrator can amend or issue new directives as conditions warrant.
DHS has indicated that these temporary directives will be replaced
with regulations, presumably no later than 1 year from their issuance,
when they are set to expire. The informal consultation with industry
will, pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act, be supplemented by
a formal notice and comment process. Not only should the industries
directly covered by the proposed regulations weigh in, those who depend
upon these critical sectors should also let their voices be heard as
the Government considers how best to ensure the security, safety, and
reliability of these critical functions in the face of growing cyber
risks. In addition, these regulations should be informed by an
awareness of the tools and technologies that are available to help
these asset owners and operators gain visibility into their information
technology (IT) and operational technology (OT) systems, detect
malicious activity, and respond quickly and effectively. To encourage
continued innovation in this area, Government should lean toward open,
performance-based standards that are technology-neutral and vendor-
agnostic.
Furthermore, any new regulations should draw on existing
guidelines, standards, and best practices. They should be harmonized
with requirements in other sectors, particularly as between the
pipeline and electric sectors, in which there is often significant
overlap.
Finally, TSA has been working to build its cyber capacity, but it
should not try to duplicate expertise that resides at CISA. These two
DHS entities should continue to work closely together, with TSA
bringing industry relationships and expertise together with CISA's
cyber-specific and critical infrastructure resilience expertise. The
work of the National Risk Management Center should inform the
identification of highest-risk/highest-consequence functions. Congress
needs to ensure that DHS is provided the resources necessary to
effectively implement these mandates and to continue its equally
important voluntary work with these vital industries.
Time is not on our side. The threat environment grows more
dangerous with each passing day. In the recent words of one
administration official, ``the overall environment is more aggressive;
more sophisticated; and more belligerent . . . ''\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.justice.gov/opa/speech/deputy-attorney-general-
lisa-o-monaco-and-assistant-attorney-general-kenneth-polite-jr.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The general assessment is that neither state nor non-state actors
have current intent to cause significant disruption. But cyber
incidents can have unintended consequences. NotPetya came back to
impact Russian companies. And if we are to believe the criminals
involved in the Colonial Pipeline attack, they did not intend to
disrupt pipeline operations. I am inclined to believe that, since it
would've been hard to predict that an intrusion into the corporate IT
system, as opposed to the OT system, would have such a significant
impact on operations. It is a reminder that lack of intent should not
give us great comfort.
Moreover, intent can change. Even short of a direct kinetic
conflict in which an adversary might decide to disrupt our critical
infrastructure, there is the prospect of an adversary using the
credible threat of such disruption to deter us from taking actions in
our National interest. Having this leverage could embolden China in the
South China Sea or Russia in Ukraine or elsewhere, for example. It
seems likely that Russia's cyber attacks on Ukraine's electric grid
were designed not only to undermine the Ukraine government but to send
a signal to the United States about Russia's capabilities.
Perhaps most troubling is the threat of a destructive attack on the
safety systems of operations, leading not just to disruption but to
potentially catastrophic deadly consequences. In 2017, a Saudi
petrochemical plant was hit with malware later dubbed ``Triton'' which
disabled the Safety Instrumented System (SIS). SISs are the last line
of automated safety defense for industrial facilities, designed to
prevent equipment failure and catastrophic incidents such as explosions
or fire. Faulty code prevented that attack from succeeding but experts
say the technique is replicable by others. Moreover, in 2019, the
attackers behind the Triton malware, attributed to a Russian
government-funded research institution, were reported to be scanning
and probing at least 20 electric utilities in the United States for
vulnerabilities.
The bipartisan co-chairs of the Solarium have noted that it was
envisioned as a 9/11 commission to avert a cyber 9/11. We should not
wait for a tragedy caused by malicious cyber activity in one of these
vital sectors before we take the necessary action. The proposed TSA
directives reflect a growing body of evidence that the risk of serious
disruptions to critical infrastructure is not ``potential'' or in the
future, it is here now and requires an urgent response.
Thank you and I look forward to your questions.

Ms. Clarke. We thank you for your testimony, Ms. Spaulding.
I now recognize Ms. Cogswell to summarize her statement for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PATRICIA F.S. COGSWELL, STRATEGIC ADVISOR,
GUIDEHOUSE; FORMER DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR, TRANSPORTATION
SECURITY ADMINISTRATION

Ms. Cogswell. Chairwoman Clarke, Chairwoman Watson Coleman,
Ranking Member Garbarino, and Ranking Member Gimenez, and the
distinguished Members of the subcommittees, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you this afternoon on
transportation cybersecurity.
The insights I will share today are informed by my 24 years
of Federal service, serving in varied capacities from the
founding of DHS through my retirement as the deputy
administrator of the Transportation Security Administration.
My first significant engagement in countering cybersecurity
threats to industrial control systems was while I served as the
special assistant to the President for Transborder Security at
the National Security Council after the 2012 cyber attack on
Saudi Aramco.
Since that time, I have seen the number of security threats
increase, with an expanding number and type of threat actors,
including both state and non-state actors such as transnational
criminal entities; an increased focus by them on exploiting
network-connected ICS vulnerabilities; and an increasing level
of risk faced across our transportation infrastructure for both
the combination of increased threat but also of consequence as
we see how an attack on one entity can affect the entire
sector.
I have also seen very strong partnerships across Government
and industry to develop tools, programs, information-sharing
mechanisms, and standards to mitigate the risks, including the
NIST framework, TSA's pipeline security guidelines, and various
multi-entity exercises.
I am pleased to be able to be here today and hope that I
can assist you as you consider how best Congress can support
and enable transportation cybersecurity.
I thank you for your willingness to call attention to this
incredibly important topic. I want to recognize the work that
this committee, along with Senate Homeland Security and
Government Affairs and the Defense Armed Services Committee,
are leading to promote and standardize cyber incident
reporting.
As this committee further examines roles, responsibilities,
and activities, I would highlight the following: First is the
value of TSA's authority to issue security directives. Security
directives have repeatedly demonstrated their value, providing
a mechanism for TSA and industry to put immediate protective
mitigation measures in place. They send a clear message to our
adversaries, to the American people, and to our allies.
After the recent pipeline ransomware event, TSA security
directives were the tool of choice. SDs are most effective, as
you have noted, when TSA and the regulated industry are able to
work together throughout the entire process from development of
requirement through implementation.
Second, promote bidirectional partnership through analysis
of reporting data. As I have spoken with industry and
Government about the new cyber requirements, several colleagues
expressed their interest in using this reporting to promote a
deeper understanding of and engagement around cyber threats to
critical infrastructure. There is a recognition that analyzing
the threats of vulnerabilities associated with industrial
control systems can tell us more about the prevalence and use
of tactics, the effectiveness of measures to counter those
tactics, and best practices to follow.
Continued investment in open standards development. NIST
and DHS, through CISA and TSA, have established cybersecurity
and standards environments for ICS and critical infrastructure.
Continued evolution that provides transportation owners and
operators with an opportunity to participate in that
development and a mechanism to communicate direction to
solutions developers and providers should be encouraged.
Finally, incentivizing and encouraging innovative
approaches, while requiring transportation operators to achieve
minimum standards. As DHS looks to advance regulatory
requirements for transportation operators, I anticipate it will
look to adopt a set of baseline requirements based on current
best practices and recommendations, with the aim of continuing
to update them over time. DHS and Congress should consider
innovative mechanisms for how to achieve these goals, using a
model that emphasizes performance-based outcomes and allows
industry to use alternative methods to reach compliance.
This can be further encouraged through a regulatory model
where transportation operators can use a qualified third party
to complete the cybersecurity architecture reviews or planning
required, similar to TSA's third-party canine program, and
providing operators with access to a list of qualified entities
who can provide such functions and services, such as GSA does
for identity management and credentials, or providing other
recognized criteria.
Cybersecurity, it is often said, is a team sport. Having
many players on the field with standards-based interoperable
solutions will enable innovation and enhance the protection of
our critical infrastructure.
As you consider statutory language, I would encourage you
to develop it in a way that will create an enduring framework
that supports the evolution of cybersecurity as the threats and
risks continue to change. A technology-neutral approach based
on open standards that promote competition, innovation, and
interoperability should be the core of such effort.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before you
today. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Cogswell follows:]
Prepared Statement of Patricia F.S. Cogswell
October 26, 2021
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Katko, and distinguished Members
of the subcommittees, thank you for the opportunity to testify before
you this morning on Transportation Cybersecurity.
The insights I will share with the committee today are informed by
my 24 years of Federal service, my long-standing tenure as a founding
member of DHS serving on Day 1, and the varied capacities in which I
have served the transportation security mission of DHS through my
retirement as deputy administrator for the Transportation Security
Administration.
My first significant engagement in countering cybersecurity threats
to industrial control systems (ICS) was while I served as special
assistant to the President for transborder security, at the National
Security Council after the 2012 cyber attack on Saudi Aramco.
Since that time, I've seen:

The number of cyber threats increase--with an expanding
number and type of threat actors, including both state and non-
state actors, including transnational criminal entities;

Targeted exploitation of vulnerabilities in ICS-environment
management practices;

An increased recognition of the risk faced across our
critical transportation infrastructure, from the combination of
threat, vulnerability, and consequence; and

Partnership across Government and industry to develop tools,
programs, information-sharing mechanisms, and standards to
mitigate the risk, including the NIST Framework for Improving
Critical Infrastructure Security, TSA's Pipeline Security
Guidelines, and various multi-entity exercises, such as 2020
Ohio Cyber shield.
I am pleased to be here today to speak before the committee, and
hope that I can assist you as you consider how Congress can best
support and enable critical infrastructure cybersecurity. I thank you
for your willingness to call attention to this very important topic. I
also want to recognize the legislation this committee, along with
Senate Homeland Security and Government Affairs, and the Defense Armed
Services Committee are leading to promote and standardize cyber
incident reporting to DHS's Cybersecurity and Critical Infrastructure
Agency (CISA).
As this committee further examines how to incentivize the right mix
of roles, responsibilities, and activities across Government and
industry, I'd highlight the following areas as important in our common
interest in making progress:

The value of TSA's authority to issue Security Directives.
SDs have repeatedly demonstrated their value, providing a
mechanism for TSA and industry, often in concert with DOT and
other Federal entities, to put immediate measures into place--
and sending a clear message to our adversaries, to the American
people, and to our allies. After the recent pipeline ransomware
event, there was an understandable interest across the
administration, Congress, industry, and the public in taking
action. TSA's authority to issue Security Directives for the
transportation industry in response to emerging threats was the
tool of choice to rapidly direct owners and operators of
pipeline and natural gas facilities to implement necessary
cyber protections. TSA's SDs are most effective when TSA and
the regulated industries work together throughout the process
to ensure that requirements are achievable under the time lines
set and the regulated industries, all the way down the
individual companies can work through implementation.

Promote bi-directional partnership through analysis of
reporting data. As I've spoken with individuals in industry and
Government about the new CISA cybersecurity reporting
requirements, several colleagues expressed their interest in
using this to promote a deeper understanding and engagement of
cyber threats to critical infrastructure, particularly where
they can be done in a Classified setting. While there are
significant differences in transportation modes of operation,
there is a recognition that analyzing the threats and
vulnerabilities associated with industrial control systems
across critical infrastructure sectors can tell us more about
the prevalence and use of adversaries' tactics, the
effectiveness of measures to counter those tactics, and best
practices to follow. That analysis is also critical to feed
back to the industries required to report cyber incidents to
provide them with that deeper understanding of the threats and
vulnerabilities to proactively assess additional areas of focus
for their own systems and operations. These should then be
considered for adoption and reinforcement through regulatory
programs.

Invest in continued evolution of open standards. NIST and
DHS, through both CISA and TSA, along with other agencies, have
established a cyber standards environment for ICS and critical
infrastructure. This environment provides transportation owners
and operators with insight and visibility, as well as the
opportunity to participate in standards development. It also
creates a mechanism to communicate direction to solutions
developers and providers.

Incentivize and encourage innovative approaches, while
requiring transportation operators to achieve minimum
standards. Consistent with our approach to other transportation
security issues, DHS should look to advance regulatory
requirements for transportation operators. These could be a
formalization of actions already encouraged now or recognized
industry best practices, such as the validated architecture
reviews, with the aim of changing over time as the standards
evolve. By setting these baseline requirements, we can ensure
that critical infrastructure operators are on an even playing
field, and that the industry as a whole is less vulnerable to
the actions of a small few.
The Government should also consider innovative mechanisms for how
to achieve these goals, using a model that emphasizes performance-based
outcomes, and allows industry to use alternative methods to reach
compliance. A more open model also addresses the issues associated with
vendor lock or over reliance on a single set of tools, which can
disincentivize innovation. Cybersecurity, it's often said, is a team
sport. Having as many players on the field with standards-based
solutions interoperable solutions will enable innovation and enhance
the protection of our critical infrastructure.
I would also encourage DHS to establish a regulatory environment
where a transportation operator can use a qualified third-party entity
to complete the cybersecurity architecture reviews or planning
required. From a statutory and regulatory perspective, this could look
similar to how TSA established the third-party canine program. This
type of model would increase speed of adoption, and provide
transportation operators options for meeting the requirements. But,
from industry colleagues I have talked to, transportation operators
must have access to a list of Government-approved third-party entities,
or be able to rely on firms that meet specified criteria. My
understanding is that the pipeline industry is already working to begin
to identify those criteria and identifying firms who could serve these
needs. To scale this model effectively given the number of critical
infrastructure entities, both public and private, that would benefit
from industrial control systems cybersecurity expertise, it may make
sense to look to GSA to manage the vendor qualification process, with
DHS and other entities contributing their expertise, similar to other
cross-cutting needs.
As you consider statutory language, I would encourage you to
develop it in a way that will create an enduring framework that
supports the evolution of cybersecurity as the threats and risks
continue to change. A technology-neutral approach based on open
standards that promote competition, innovation, and interoperability
should be the core of any such effort.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before you today. I
look forward to your questions.

Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Ms. Cogswell, for your testimony.
Members should know that votes have been called, but we
will continue to receive testimony from our final two witnesses
today.
So I now recognize Mr. Troy to summarize his statement for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JEFFREY L. TROY, PRESIDENT, CEO, AVIATION
INFORMATION SHARING AND ANALYSIS CENTER; FORMER DEPUTY
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, CYBER DIVISION, FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION

Mr. Troy. Thank you, Chairwoman, Chairwoman, and Ranking
Members, and Members of the committee.
Good afternoon. My name is Jeffrey Troy. I am president of
the Aviation Information Sharing and Analysis Center.
The Aviation ISAC is a global nonprofit. Our members are on
5 continents and include air framers, airlines, airports, air
navigation service providers, and more. Our mission is to make
the aviation industry more resilient to cyber attacks.
Last time I came before you was in September 2018, and
thank you for the opportunity to talk to you once again about
the cyber risk landscape in aviation.
The cyber risks to the aviation industry have increased.
Together, both private industry and the public sector have
significantly increased cooperation and threat intelligence and
best practices sharing, and now is the time for industry and
Government to partner even more closely in creating and
enhancing effective cyber risk reduction frameworks.
Over the past several years, ransomware has become a common
term in aviation and many other sectors. The success of
ransomware operators to extort money from their victims has
greatly increased the level of skill and the number of persons
willing to conduct ransomware attacks. The second-stage
ransomware events, wherein additional ransoms are sought in
exchange for deletion of sensitive records stolen as a part of
the ransom operation, also highlights the risk, the theft of
intellectual property, sensitive business information, and
privacy data.
Ransomware can also shut down operations. This has the
potential to be very impactful to the aviation industry. Pardon
me. Ransomware--excuse me--it also becomes more complicated in
the aviation industry because many of the operational
technologies are mobile. The attack on Colonial Pipeline, which
has been spoken of today, and the QNX real-time operating
system vulnerability are two examples of where a cyber attack
or a vulnerability in a product can have a ripple effect across
many sectors.
Preventing, responding to, and limiting the impact of these
attacks requires a team-of-teams approach. Our core values
include creating and maintaining partnerships with numerous
Government and private-sector entities. The Aviation ISAC is
proud to have partnered with the Aviation Cyber Initiative, a
joint partnership led by DOD, FAA, and the DHS, which is in the
process of transferring this tri-chair seat to the TSA.
This year, the Aviation ISAC and the ACI significantly
solidified our partnership by co-hosting a summit on aviation
cybersecurity. We are also proud to partner with CISA. CISA is
maturing well and has been put out timely, relevant guidance in
direct response to recent cyber attacks on critical
infrastructure and the supply chain. On 6 occasions our
intelligence was used in CISA's intelligence bulletins and
intelligence information reports.
Similarly, we have reached out to the TSA as they build
their cybersecurity strategy and create a regulatory framework
over cyber events in aviation. Our industry is also benefiting
from a significant increase in cooperation between private
entities. This includes the Aerospace Village, the Aerospace
Industries Association, the American Institute of Aeronautics
and Astronautics, along with Airlines for America.
The Aviation ISAC is also working with ICAO, the United
Nations group--excuse me--International Civil Aviation
Organization, and working with them on their aviation
cybersecurity strategy and their cybersecurity action plan. We
are also working several other initiatives, to include secure
interoperability strategies across the globe.
As the United States considers legislation such as
mandatory cyber reporting, the Aviation ISAC has been reaching
out to educate stakeholders to ensure that the regulatory
requirements are risk-based, achievable, cost-effective, and do
not degrade the success the private sector has had in reducing
cyber risks through ISACs like ours.
With respect to the mandatory reporting requirements, we
believe it is important that the mandatory reporting is scoped
to well-defined and confirmed cyber incidents, that mandatory
reporting requirements should include robust liability
protections, and it is critical that Congress streamlines the
Federal and State reporting requirements to ensure that
industry resources are used efficiently to combat malicious
cyber threats rather than customizing reports on the same
incident for multiple agencies. We also believe that the
reporting program should encourage cooperation and strengthen
trust between the public and private sectors, which would
include bidirectional information sharing.
Information reported to the Government needs to be properly
aggregated, anonymized, analyzed, and shared with industry to
help prevent future incidents.
Thank you again for the opportunity to come before you
today and work on this important matter with cybersecurity and
aviation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Troy follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jeffrey L. Troy
October 26, 2021
Good afternoon. My name is Jeffrey Troy. I am the president of the
Aviation Information Sharing and Analysis Center or Aviation ISAC. The
Aviation ISAC is a global non-profit. Our members are on five
continents and include air framers, airlines, airports, air navigation
service providers, satellite companies, and more. Our mission is to
make the aviation industry more resilient to cyber attacks.
The last time I came before you was in September 2018. Thank you
for this opportunity to talk with you once again about the changes to
the cyber risk landscape in aviation. The cyber risks to the aviation
industry have increased. I will share with you about the good work
being done by both the public and private sectors. Together both
private industry and the public sector have significantly increased
cooperation in threat intelligence and best practices sharing. Now is
the time for industry and Government to partner even more closely in
creating and enhancing effective cyber risk reduction frameworks.
increase in threat actor activity
Over the past several years ransomware has become a common term in
aviation and many other sectors. A breach is a breach, but the success
of ransomware extortionists to collect money from their victims, has
greatly increased the level of skill and the number of persons willing
to conduct cyber attacks. Second stage ransomware events, wherein
additional ransoms are sought in exchange for the deletion of sensitive
records stolen as a part of the ransom operation also highlights the
risk to theft of intellectual property, sensitive business information,
and privacy data.
Ransomware can also shut down operations. This has the potential to
be very impactful on the aviation industry as the aviation eco-system
is supported by many operational technologies.
Other cyber and cyber-related activity include business email
compromises, ransom in lieu of a Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
attack, and other frauds.
These attacks are both directly on segments of the aviation
industry such as air framers, airlines, airports, etc., and their
supply chains. The attack on the Colonial Pipeline and QNX Real Time
Operating System (RTOS) vulnerability are two examples of where a cyber
attack or a vulnerability in a product can have a ripple effect across
many sectors.
increased collaboration
The aviation industry is a unique, global eco-system. Much of our
critical infrastructure is mobile. Each industry segment, air framers,
airlines, airports, services and more, are dependent on each other
effectively monitoring and responding to their cyber risk. In the same
way, as our assets move around the world, we benefit from trusted,
global cooperation and intelligence sharing.
Preventing, responding to, and limiting the impact of these attacks
requires a team of teams approach. The Aviation ISAC is primarily
private-sector members. However, our core values include creating and
maintaining partnerships with numerous Government and private-sector
entities.
We are working with many Government agencies to make the industry
more resilient by identifying and reducing cyber risks. The Aviation
Cyber Initiative (ACI) is a joint partnership with the Department of
Defense (DOD), the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) which is in the process of
transferring this tri-chair seat to the Transportation Security
Administration (TSA). This year the Aviation ISAC and the ACI
significantly solidified our partnership by co-hosting a Summit on
Aviation Cyber Security. This 3-day event included domestic and
international leaders and cybersecurity experts from both the
Government and private sector.
We are proud to partner with DHS's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA). CISA is maturing well and has been putting out
timely, relevant guidance in direct response to recent cyber attacks on
critical infrastructure and the supply chain. The Aviation ISAC has
shared intelligence on 18 occasions which were used in part in six of
CISAs Intelligence Bulletins and Intelligence Information Reports. CISA
has also been reaching out on vulnerability disclosures. It is also
promising to learn the TSA is considering CISA as an agent for the
collection of soon-to-be-required mandatory reporting of cyber events
impacting aviation.
Similarly, we have reached out to the TSA as they build their
cybersecurity strategy and create a regulatory framework over cyber
events in Aviation.
The Aviation ISAC has been in the forefront of ringing the bell on
the ransomware problem. We have been a strong voice in the crowd
calling for action to reduce and eliminate this threat. We were honored
to be a part of a group represented by the Government and private
sector in the writing of the ``Combatting Ransomware Report'' issued in
late April by the Institute for Security and Technology. The report has
many actionable recommendations. The world needs a stronger
international consensus on identifying ransomware operators and taking
them out of action. Law enforcement efforts must be enhanced with
private-sector expertise and a whole-of-Government as well as a whole-
of-governments working together. We encourage continued action on the
recommendations in this report.
Aviation is global. The Aviation ISAC has members on five
continents and from many segments of the Aviation industry. We engage
with global Computer Emergency Response Teams, the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), International Air Transport Association
(IATA), Airports Council International, and many European Union
entities, to name a few.
The public-private partnerships still have a long way to go,
especially in the area of trust, which I will talk about in a few
minutes. Our industry is also benefiting from a significant increase in
the cooperation between ``Private-Private'' entities.
To highlight a few, the Aviation ISAC has partnered with the
Aerospace Village. Each year, we sponsor a cyber skills event, also
known as a capture the flag event. The Aerospace Village has many cyber
security researchers as members. This is a great event for building
bridges between industry and the researcher community.
We partner with the Aerospace Industries Association, contributing
to discussions and development of a white paper on best practices in
aviation cyber security.
We also partner with the American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics (AIAA) and have a regular dialog with Airlines for
America.
The Aviation ISAC and our members are also building bridges with
security researchers through the creation, promotion, and ease of
access to Vulnerability Disclosure programs. These programs make
manufacturers more accessible to security researchers who can make
vulnerabilities known to manufacturers of software and hardware
products.
creating and enhancing effective risk reduction frameworks
There are many efforts going on across the globe to increase the
regulatory requirements related to cybersecurity in Aviation. Earlier I
mentioned ICAO, a United Nations organization, which establishes
guidance for the aviation industry around the world. The Aviation ISAC
is working with ICAO and partners across the globe in updating ICAO's
Aviation Cybersecurity Action Plan. We are also working on several
other initiatives to include an aviation cybersecurity framework and
secure interoperability strategies.
As the U.S. Government considers legislation such as mandatory
cyber reporting, the Aviation ISAC has been reaching out to educate
aviation stakeholders to ensure that the regulatory requirements are
risk-based, achievable, cost-effective, and do not degrade the success
the private sector has had in reducing cyber risk through ISACs like
ours.
Regarding Mandatory Reporting Requirements
1. We believe it is important that mandatory reporting is scoped to
well-defined and -confirmed cyber incidents. We must be focused
on quality information sharing. Too much information will
overload threat intelligence and incident response resources.
2. Any mandatory reporting requirements should include robust
liability protections. The act of reporting a covered incident
and the contents of any report, including supplemental
reporting, should be protected from legal liability.
Information contained in notifications should not be subject to
discovery in any civil or criminal action. Reporting entities,
in essence, should not be penalized after the fact for
complying with a legal obligation. In addition, only relevant
information which will assist others in protecting and
defending critical infrastructure systems should be required of
the sector regulator.
3. Several critical infrastructure sectors have existing
obligations to report significant cyber incidents to Federal
and/or State regulatory agencies. It is crucial that Congress
streamlines Federal and State reporting requirements to ensure
that industry resources are used efficiently to combat
malicious cyber threats, rather than customizing reports on the
same incident for multiple agencies. A single report to one
agency should suffice to meet legislative and regulatory
mandates. For example, many aviation sector companies are also
defense contractors. Reporting should be made either to CISA or
the appropriate sector risk management agency (SRMA), which
should then disseminate reports to other relevant agencies.
4. Cyber attack victims are victims. A reporting program should
encourage cooperation and strengthen trust between the public
and private sectors. A regulatory-based approach that focuses
on punitive actions, such as fines or penalties, rather than
mutual gains achieved through information sharing runs counter
to the goal of creating a strong National partnership model to
address the increasing cyber threats facing the United States.
5. The bills in draft would require CISA to take the lead in
writing an interim final rule. Lawmakers are urged to step back
from this line of thinking and call on CISA to first provide
notice that it intends to promulgate a rule. With input from
industry, the process will work faster as industry can assist
in making the rules achievable. Industry is passionate about
protecting our customers, employees, and our businesses. We are
operators of critical infrastructure and our industry has
incredible passion and cybersecurity talent working to protect
it. The rule-making process must include coordination with
impacted private industry stakeholders because many of the
programmatic details, such as definitions and the contents of
reporting, would be determined through the rulemaking process.
At a minimum, we ask you to consider a rulemaking process which
features an initial 90-day consultation period with industry
followed by a 90-day comment period.
6. Cyber intelligence is a requirement to protect the sector. It is
not a singular need of the Government, nor the private sector.
Information reported to Government needs to be promptly
aggregated, anonymized, analyzed, and shared with industry to
foster the mitigation and/or prevention of future cyber
incidents. Nothing in future legislation or processes should
limit or impede companies continuing to work together through
ISACs. With respect to the Government sharing back information
to the private sector, in many cases, the private sector will
be able to enhance that information, keeping the intelligence
cycle active and benefiting us all as we protect aviation. A
persistent shortcoming experienced by businesses across many
sectors is a lack of timely and effective action or feedback on
cyber reports from Government. We need legislation that leads
CISA, law enforcement, and other agencies to provide more
timely, relevant cyber intelligence to industry groups' and
sector businesses.
conclusion
We have made great strides in coming together as a Government and
an industry in making aviation more resilient to cyber attacks. We
applaud the efforts of the Government to continue to strengthen the
ability of our Government entities to investigate, prosecute, and
dismantle ransomware gangs. We will continue to partner and engage with
the Aviation Cyber Initiative and our many partners as we seek out
vulnerabilities and develop best practices to protect, defend, respond
to, and mitigate cyber attacks. We applaud the efforts of CISA in
publishing vulnerability and best practices and encourage more
bidirectional information sharing. Finally, thank you once again for
the opportunity to come before you today on this important matter of
cybersecurity in aviation.

Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Troy, for your testimony.
I now recognize Mr. Dickinson--Mr. Dickerson--excuse me--to
summarize his statement for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT DICKERSON, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, MARITIME
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM INFORMATION SHARING AND ANALYSIS CENTER

Mr. Dickerson. Thank you, Chairwomen, Ranking Members, and
Members of the subcommittees. My name is Scott Dickerson, and I
serve as the executive director of the nonprofit Maritime
Transportation System Information Sharing and Analysis Center,
the MTS-ISAC. A decade ago, helped create the Coast Guard Cyber
Command, before serving in other civilian roles and supporting
private-sector cybersecurity programs. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify before the subcommittees today.
The MTS-ISAC is made up of public and private-sector
stakeholders, including port authorities, vessel and terminal
owners and operators, cruise lines, energy facilities, ferry
operators, and other members of the maritime community. We
focus on actionable, relevant, and timely cyber threat
information sharing. We have supported cybersecurity guidelines
on-board vessels, as well as cybersecurity guidelines for ports
and port facilities, both of which are recognized by the U.N.'s
International Maritime Organization.
Our efforts have resulted in significantly more
cybersecurity advisories being distributed to our maritime
community than those released by the 20-plus Federal Government
organizations with the responsibility for maritime security
combined. A key reason for the level of sharing we see is the
anonymization of identities and the trust that this reinforces
with the maritime community. Others may tell you we need
billions of dollars in cybersecurity investment across the
critical infrastructure sectors. We do need investment, but
taxpayers may currently be overpaying for the results the
critical infrastructure community is receiving from the Federal
Government.
I want to share with you three common challenges I
regularly hear from industry stakeholders related to the
Federal Government's approach to cybersecurity and public-
private partnership. First is the concern of redundant Federal
cybersecurity efforts. Because of the critical intermodal
connections that ports, terminals, and a variety of facilities
have, some of our stakeholders are subject to multiple
regulatory requirements, including the Maritime Transportation
Security Act of 2002, as well as TSA's pipeline and soon-to-be-
finalized rail security directives.
As a result, limited resources are often spent on redundant
checklists, meetings, reports, audits, et cetera, as opposed to
actively managing cyber risks to critical infrastructure. It
seems like every time we turn around, there is a new effort
unveiled by a Government agency, and often it seems to be
repackaging the elements of an older program with a new name.
The latest example is JCDC, elements of which have been in
place for several years.
Second, there is a lack of trust with the Federal
Government related to cyber incident reporting. Trust is
critical when fostering collaboration and information sharing.
The maritime community's trust in Federal agencies was yet
again recently shaken in the aftermath of an incident at a
port. This is because of three things.
No. 1, immediately following the incident, the 3 Federal
Government agencies involved did not want industry-sharing
actionable information for almost 3 weeks as zero-day
vulnerabilities were actively being exploited. Of note, during
this 3-week period, none of those agencies collaborated with
the MTS-ISAC or the maritime industry writ large.
No. 2, CISA publicly released the name of the victim, with
no prior coordination or notice to the victim. This may have
been in violation of the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act
of 2015, and undermine trust.
No. 3, a Government agency for-official-use-only technical
report with details surrounding the incident was leaked to the
press, but it was not shared amongst maritime community
members.
These were 3 distinct ways industry trust was undermined
with just this one incident, and, unfortunately, incidents are
occurring regularly.
Third, resource investments in people are needed.
Experienced cybersecurity specialists are in short supply in
all industries. Please review opportunities for partnering with
ISACs for real-world hands-on cybersecurity training,
internships, and educational opportunities. Also, Federal
employees need to better understand the various cybersecurity
funding opportunities the Government provides to align with
their agency mission sets.
As an example, cybersecurity was the highest-stated
priority for FEMA's 2020 Port Security Grant Program. Yet many
stakeholder requests for cybersecurity investments were turned
down by U.S. Coast Guard captains of the port, resulting in
only about 12 percent of the $100 million program being
invested in cybersecurity, the No. 1 priority.
MTS-ISAC and the stakeholders are hopeful that we can more
effectively partner with the Federal Government to safeguard
our National interests. I kindly request you include, support,
and protect the mechanisms safeguarding trusted, anonymous
information sharing, incident reporting, and other critical
infrastructure cybersecurity efforts performed by ISACs and
their communities in legislation.
Of note, CISA of 2015 remains significantly underutilized.
Although it has been implemented, there remains resistance to
fully trusting and using the provisions of the legislation.
Perhaps we should focus on some of these underutilized efforts
rather than creating some new ones.
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide this
testimony, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dickerson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Scott Dickerson
October 26, 2021
i. background
Ranking Member Garbarino, Ranking Member Gimenez, and Members of
the subcommittee: My name is Scott Dickerson and I serve as the
executive director of the Maritime Transportation System Information
Sharing and Analysis Center Institute (MTS-ISAC). Thank you for the
opportunity to testify before the committee today.
The Maritime Transportation System ISAC was formed as a nonprofit
by a group of U.S. maritime critical infrastructure stakeholders. Our
primary mission is to more effectively share information focused on
cyber threats and cybersecurity best practices within a trusted
community of stakeholders to help make the maritime community more
resilient to cyber attacks. Our stakeholders include port authorities,
vessel owners and operators, terminal owners and operators, cruise
lines, energy facilities, ferry operators, and other members of the
public and private-sector maritime critical infrastructure community.
On a daily basis, our stakeholders are sharing actionable, timely, and
relevant cyber threat information with their public and private-sector
peers. They formed the MTS-ISAC out of a need to quickly share relevant
cyber threat information and have quickly shown how effective their
ISAC model is working to do just that.
MTS-ISAC stakeholders exchange information every day about the
attacks they are seeing. The MTS-ISAC provides anonymization of
identities, which when combined with the Cybersecurity Information
Sharing Act of 2015 (CISA 2015), fosters community trust and enables
peer-to-peer collaboration. This peer-to-peer collaboration is
extremely valuable because it allows stakeholders to better understand
threats targeting the maritime sector and implement cybersecurity
strategies more effectively to counter those attacks. This private-
sector sharing has resulted in more maritime industry-focused cyber
threat intelligence advisories being distributed to our stakeholders
since our inception than those released by the more than 20 Federal
Government organizations with a responsibility for maritime security
\1\ combined. As an example, we have produced over 80 Cybersecurity
Advisories this year and to our knowledge the U.S. Coast Guard has
released 5 cybersecurity threat reports. The MTS-ISAC has not received
any cyber threat or incident reporting from MARAD, Department of
Energy, TSA, USTRANSCOM, NOAA, ODNI's National Maritime Intelligence-
Integration Office (NMIO), and or other maritime-focused Governmental
organizations. We have created over 500 Indicator Bulletins sourced
from stakeholder shares, which I believe is roughly on par with the
whole of CISA. We do this on a nonprofit budget that runs in the low 6
figures annually.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ National Maritime Cybersecurity Plan--https://www.hsdl.org/
?abstract&did=848704.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our stakeholders believe that cybersecurity is a core element of
risk management that allows their organizations to operate in a safe
and secure manner. Because of the critical intermodal connections and
relationships that ports, terminals, and a variety of facilities have,
some of our stakeholders are subject to a variety of regulations and
security directives, including the Maritime Transportation Security Act
of 2002 as well as TSA's Pipeline and soon to be finalized Rail
Security Directives. This is in addition to a variety of other
cybersecurity-related requirements that can include safeguarding
various types of information including HIPAA, PCI, PII, and other
cybersecurity frameworks and requirements. I say this not to be glib,
but to say the maritime sector faces a highly complex intersection of
requirements, and maritime companies understand how to operate in this
environment. Cyber incidents need to be handled extremely delicately
since they can have major impact across supply chains, for customers,
stakeholders, and shareholders. Legal departments and auditors within
an organization help work these details in closed door sessions to
ensure compliance and legal issues are addressed properly.
Additionally, those with cyber insurance coverage will be directed by
their insurance how and with whom to share information. It would be
beneficial for the Federal Government to consult with stakeholders
before new cybersecurity laws, security directives, or similar facets
of oversight are finalized to fully understand the implications of
drafts so that the desired risk management outcomes can be met in a
manner appropriate for the complexities of this industry without
creating undue burdens or unintended consequences.
In addition to sharing cyber threat information, our nonprofit is
also working with numerous industry stakeholders to improve industry
cybersecurity guidelines. We have provided inputs to drafts for updates
to the International Association of Classification Societies'
Recommendations on Cyber Resilience. The MTS-ISAC also contributed
content to the following maritime industry cybersecurity references:

The Guidelines on Cyber Security Onboard Ships (V4) and

IAPH Cybersecurity Guidelines for Ports and Port Facilities
(Version 1.0).
ii. current challenges with federal cybersecurity approaches
There are currently multiple cybersecurity challenges impacting
critical infrastructure cyber resiliency. Of particular interest from
an ISAC perspective are the following:
Overlapping Efforts

Redundant, and sometimes conflicting cyber regulations and
enforcement or interpretation differences across Government
roles and responsibilities.

Multiple agencies are involved with duplicative efforts.
Redundant tracking, outreach, reporting, and mitigation
efforts are a detriment to securing critical infrastructure
as the time of limited resources is spent on redundant
efforts.

Inconsistent standards often impact multiple sectors and
cause confusion.

Federal Government focus on ``leading'', rather than
partnering to support private-sector efforts. The private
sector predominantly owns and operates critical infrastructure,
and the Federal Government should support effective solutions
rather than lead ineffective solutions.

Private sector understands where the challenges lie;
multiple Governmental agencies try to ``solve the problem''
in silos rather than in partnership.
Information & Intelligence Sharing

There is currently a Federal Government focus on cyber
incident reporting, rather than exchanging timely threat
information that could minimize potential impacts.

Lack of consistent and clear definitions for suspicious
activity, incidents, etc.--this needs to be remedied and
should be in partnership with industry.

CISA should be the Federal agency hub for information
sharing, and that needs to be reflected in all regulations,
Security Directives, etc. Having a single touchpoint will
streamline processes and should allow for more cross-sector
critical infrastructure correlations to be made that are
currently being missed.

Similarly, there are concerns with USCG being both a
regulator and pushing for threat intel sharing outside of the
required reporting mandates. Providing non-mandatory event
reporting to a regulator is a cause for concern for some in the
private sector. This should be voluntary (and based on trust),
but again it would be better to have a single point of contact
for all critical infrastructure sector reporting, which for
maritime can then be provided to the 20+ Federal Government
organizations with a responsibility for maritime security.

Repeated misinformation that private sector does not share
information with each other or with Governmental agencies.

Greater Federal resource emphasis on granting security
clearances to private-sector stakeholders, who remain
constrained on acting on Classified information.

Agency and media inaccurate claims that certain sectors are
better or worse in cybersecurity protections pit private
industry as competitors, not collaborators.
Cybersecurity Resourcing

Experienced cybersecurity specialists are in short supply in
all sectors and across the public and private sectors.

Federal funding of cybersecurity efforts remains
inconsistent across sectors and sometimes competes with
private-sector cybersecurity efforts, which confuses and
frustrates maritime stakeholders.
In addition to these, there are numerous other cybersecurity
challenges that also need addressing, but others that are notable
include:

Risks related to foreign investment and/or reliance within
U.S. marine critical infrastructure;

A heavy focus on check-box style types of regulation;

Recent TSA Pipeline Security Directive did not include a
mechanism for review and feedback from the stakeholders this
will impact. As a result, some challenges may be arising that
could have been avoided if some language was changed. For
example, requiring to inform the Government within 7 days of
personnel that will be designated to be available 24/7 to the
Government for any reason. There are several H.R. implications
for this, including the potential need to reclassify positions,
renegotiate contracts, etc. for the personnel in those roles;
and

Lack of funding for voluntary CISA cybersecurity programs,
including CISA Risk and Vulnerability Assessments (RVA),
Validated Architecture Design Reviews (VADR), and similar
efforts within the Coast Guard, such as their outstanding Cyber
Protection Team.
III. Recent Example of Post-Incident Response
A recent incident at a critical port is an example of a post
incident response that highlights some of the above challenges and how
the Federal Government is currently handling critical infrastructure
cybersecurity.
Summary
A port quickly identified and responded to a cyber attack
exploiting a zero-day vulnerability. The port confirmed the incident
with their security vendor, who was able to identify other clients in
other critical infrastructure sectors also experiencing the same
attack. The port notified CISA, USCG, FBI and MTS-ISAC. The MTS-ISAC
shared information with stakeholders and with other members of the
National Council of ISACs the same day.
The Federal agencies worked with the vendor on a patch but stated
they did not want vulnerability information shared broadly across
critical infrastructure sectors until the patch was made available.
Rather than engage in public-private partnership, these Federal
agencies unilaterally decided to leave U.S. critical infrastructure
owners and operators with limited visibility and awareness to on-going,
active attacks exploiting a 0-day vulnerability. However, indicators
that could have helped cyber defenders (for example hashes of files
related to the attack) could have aided critical infrastructure to
identify if they were under attack and take response actions. This
could be done without leaking sensitive information that could lead to
additional threat actors exploiting the vulnerability. Critical
infrastructure protection and resiliency did not appear to be the
priority for these agencies.
Finally, almost 3 weeks later, vulnerability and patch information
was released as TLP:WHITE information along with a TLP:AMBER Joint
Cybersecurity Advisory with information related to the attack. Then
over a week later, similar information was released as TLP:WHITE. Then
after another week went by, without coordinating or notifying the
victim organization ahead of time, CISA personnel named the victim in a
public Senate hearing and a USCG TLP:AMBER Technical Report was leaked
to the press. During this time no Federal agency contacted or
collaborated with the MTS-ISAC or other National Council of ISAC
members. However, the MTS-ISAC regularly shares Cybersecurity
Advisories with personnel at all 3 agencies and is a member of CISA's
Cyber Information Sharing and Collaboration Program (CISCP).
Trust is critical when fostering collaboration and information
sharing, which we absolutely need to create a more cyber resilient
critical infrastructure community. The maritime community's trust in
Federal agencies was shaken following this incident because:
1. Immediately following the incident, the Federal Government
delayed information sharing for 3 weeks while the critical
infrastructure community was ready to share this information
immediately.
2. CISA released the name of the victim which may have been in
violation of the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015
(CISA 2015) and perhaps the Federal Government should research
whether this should lead to sanctions. ``Section
1504(a)(3)(C)(ii) requires that procedures ensure there are
appropriate sanctions in place for officers, employees, or
agents of a Federal entity who knowingly and willfully conduct
activities under CISA 2015 in an unauthorized manner.''\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/publications/
Cybersecurity%20Information%20- Sharing%20Act%20of%202015.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. A USCG For Official Use Only Technical Report with details
surrounding the incident was leaked to the press. The MTS-ISAC
did not receive this report nor did other maritime
stakeholders. If the report was intended solely for the victim,
then how did the press receive it? Some industry stakeholders
are wondering if this was ``leaked'' as part of a political
agenda. No matter how or why, several stakeholders have
expressed concerns with reporting incidents to the government
as a result.
To be honest, the most common refrain I hear from private-sector
stakeholders when it comes to information sharing with the Federal
Government can be boiled down to a lack of trust in how the Government
will handle the information. I hate to hear this having served on
active duty and as a Federal Government civilian, but there are some
legitimate concerns that should be recognized. I thought about whether
to bring this challenge up in my testimony, but nothing will improve by
not bringing this up. At some point conversations about how Federal
Government actions are undermining the trust of the critical
infrastructure community would be healthy, in my opinion.
iv. opportunities for improvement
There are opportunities for the Federal Government to effectively
partner with the MTS-ISAC and public and private-sector maritime
stakeholders:
Improve Efficiencies

Leverage ISACs and other forums to reduce redundant efforts
and join private-sector stakeholders in their chosen
collaboration mechanisms. The MTS-ISAC has non-voting seats for
CISA, Coast Guard, and the Department of Energy representatives
which remain unfilled by these agencies.

Support private-sector stakeholder solutions that already
address Federal Governmental needs and have proven
effective for critical infrastructure.

A great example is also the Information Exchanges being
created that include port authorities, USCG, CISA, other
agencies and public and private local Maritime stakeholders
working with the MTS-ISAC at a community level to define and
foster trust while sharing actionable, relevant, and timely
threat information.
Information & Intelligence Sharing

CISA 2015 remains significantly underutilized. Although it
has been implemented, there remains resistance to fully
trusting and using the provisions of the legislation by both
Federal and private partnership programs.

Prioritize on-going bi-directional exchange of unclassified
threat information between the public and private sectors, not
just incident reporting.

Holistic sharing of threat information, best practices,
and lessons learned is more beneficial for improving cyber
resilience than focused incident reporting.

Improve training of Government personnel on proper
information classification procedures and how to more
effectively mark information to allow for sharing.

Focus additional Federal resources toward information
declassification efforts.
Resource Investments

Ensure requirements are in place to raise awareness of
Federal employees of cybersecurity funding opportunities that
align with agency mission sets.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ As an example, cybersecurity was the highest stated priority
for FEMA's 2020 Port Security Grant Program. Yet many stakeholder
requests for cybersecurity investments were turned down by USCG
Captains of the Port in favor of physical security efforts, resulting
in only roughly $12 million out of the $100 million program being
invested in the highest priority area.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Review opportunities for partnering with ISACs for hands-on
cybersecurity training, internships, and educational
opportunities.

CISA should consider funding ISAC analyst positions at CISA
Central to better facilitate the bi-directional flow of
information across critical infrastructure.

Multiple maritime stakeholders are partnering with Computer
Science, Cybersecurity or other closely-related college
programs to provide students with real-world experiences that
they might not otherwise have exposure to for several years.
These programs would benefit from further support and
resourcing.

Increase funding for voluntary programs such as RVAs, VADR,
and CPTs; wait lists and backlogs for these efforts should not
be reaching 18+ months as they have in the past. The Coast
Guard has an outstanding Cyber Protection Team, but there is a
need for regional cyber incident response teams. There are not
enough to adequately provide assistance should there be even a
mild demand. CISA was not able to respond in a timely manner to
produce meaningful input to a recent attack on a port
authority.
v. conclusion
The MTS-ISAC is hopeful that the maritime critical infrastructure
community and the Federal Government can more effectively partner with
each other to safeguard our National interests. Sharing cyber threat
information is a key element to improving our resiliency, and that will
work best if industry and ISACs are engaged as envisioned by CISA 2015.
Whether it is related to incident response or proactive threat
information sharing, we need true collaboration between the Federal
Government and other public and private-sector organizations. Currently
this is not an effective system of public-private partnership and
collaboration. It feels like industry is being threatened with
additional regulation and security directives rather than being treated
as the partners who own and operate the vast majority of critical
infrastructure. I kindly request you consider the beneficial role that
ISACs play daily in facilitating trusted, anonymous, information
sharing for the improved resiliency of critical infrastructure across
our country in the face of on-going cyber attacks. Please include, and
protect the mechanisms safeguarding, the ISAC communities in
legislation related to critical infrastructure cybersecurity efforts.
Any bill associated with critical infrastructure cybersecurity efforts
that does not reflect the positive, critical, and irreplaceable role
that ISACs and industry representatives and stakeholders provide to our
critical infrastructure communities, and does not include provisions
requiring Federal agencies to effectively collaborate with them, should
be opposed. Thank you again for the opportunity to provide this
testimony.

Ms. Clarke. I thank you, Mr. Dickerson, for your testimony
here today.
I thank all of our witnesses for their testimony.
Pursuant to today's order, the Chair declares the
committees in recess, subject to the call of the Chair. Members
will be given notification prior to reconvening after votes.
[Recess.]
[3:59 p.m.].
Ms. Clarke. Let me, first of all, thank all of our
witnesses for your indulgence today. Just so happened that we
had one of those rare or common conflicts of having votes in
the middle of our hearing. So I truly appreciate your
willingness to remain tuned in, and we will move forward now
with questioning.
I will remind the subcommittees that we will each have 5
minutes to question the panel.
I will now recognize myself for questions. My first
question is directed to Ms. Spaulding.
Ms. Spaulding, for many years, the Federal Government has
relied on voluntary partnerships and programs to improve
cybersecurity for critical infrastructure. Recent cyber attacks
like Colonial Pipeline have forced a new conversation about
whether that voluntary partnership model is sufficient for
today's threat landscape.
As the former under secretary for CISA's predecessor
organization, could you talk about the limitations of the
voluntary framework and the challenge of regulation in an area
as dynamic as cybersecurity?
Ms. Spaulding. Absolutely, Madam Chairwoman. Thank you.
Both your points are very well taken. We are in a situation now
where we have both the capability--I think we have reached a
level of maturity in Government and in industry in
understanding some of the basic things that really must be done
and can be done to significantly raise the level of
cybersecurity. So we are in a better position than we have been
in the past in knowing what kinds of mandates to put in place.
So that is one thing.
Then we do have a threat environment that continues to grow
more and more grave with each passing day, and there is lots of
evidence of this. We don't have access to the intelligence that
the Government or TSA may have, although I think that TSA has
briefed some of the companies about the intelligence that they
are seeing that gives them that sense of urgency.
But even with what we see in open source in the media every
day, it is very clear that our adversaries are very focused on
our industrial control systems, on operational technology, and
understanding that so that they can be in a position to disrupt
it, and that criminal gangs are getting increasingly brazen in
their targets with respect to ransomware, for example. But you
can see it is grave.
Ms. Clarke. So in your testimony--yes. So in your
testimony, you mention that you are thinking it changed about
the need to move from a voluntary to regulatory framework. What
role do you see CISA playing as the long-time voluntary partner
and civilian hub for cyber expertise in this shift?
Ms. Spaulding. Yes. So CISA is thought to be, for example,
the repository of mandatory reporting information that comes
in. We need to have a place in Government that takes that
information and adds value to it and makes sure that it is
anonymous, but that it is analyzed, put in context, and then
shared broadly, very quickly, so that everyone can use that
information to better defend their networks.
CISA brings a couple decades now of expertise on
cybersecurity and on these infrastructure sectors, and work in
close collaboration with sector-specific agencies like TSA can
really leverage that cybersecurity expertise to help the sector
experts to find the right path forward in close collaboration
and partnership with industry.
Ms. Clarke. So this is to all of our witnesses, and I only
have a minute and some change left, so if I don't get to you,
if you would just submit something to us in writing, that will
be helpful as well. But many of you mentioned the importance of
mandatory cyber incident reporting as a way to grow visibility
around cyber threats and improve the quality of bidirectional
information sharing with the private sector. As you know, this
is a top priority of mine.
Ms. Spaulding, if a mandatory cyber incident reporting
regime had been in place at CISA since you were under
secretary, what security gains might have been made since that
time?
Ms. Spaulding. So two things I would point to. That
information can be shared more broadly so that all network
defenders have a better sense of the tactics, techniques, and
procedures they are defending against. No. 2, it would help to
calculate a return on security investment so that CISOs at
companies all across the country can make the case more
effectively for that investment. So I do believe it would have
raised our cybersecurity posture.
Ms. Clarke. Ms. Cogswell, can you elaborate on how cyber
incident reporting could be used to improve security for
industrial control systems across sectors?
Ms. Cogswell. One of the most important things I have seen
is that ability to bring information, like mandatory cyber
reporting information, with your industry experts and to be
able to use and engage with that information in a way that
helps you propose a next level of solutions. The additional
reporting, the ability to see how it operates in one area, how
therefore it might appear in another area in advance of that
area being a target can be really quite powerful. I have seen a
lot of really great work when you have Government and industry
sitting together engaging with that type of data.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Garbarino, of the
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure, and Innovation,
the gentleman from New York, for questions at this time.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Chairwoman. Thank you to the
people testifying today, the witnesses.
My first question is for Mr. Dickerson. Can you please
discuss the unique complications of the maritime environment
and how ports must often comply with multiple regulations and
requirements from the Coast Guard, TSA, and others? Can you
describe some of the specific challenges when it comes to
securing ports?
Mr. Dickerson. Thank you, Congressman Garbarino, for that
question. It is highly complex environment where, because of
the intermodal aspects of the maritime sector, you will have
port authorities, for example, owning the last mile of rail. So
then they need to comply with TSA's upcoming rail security
directive.
Similarly, they will also own pipelines. So now it becomes
a question of, OK, are we reporting this information to TSA, to
the U.S. Coast Guard, CISA? Do we need to involve FBI? Some of
these might require CBP reporting due to goods coming into the
ports. It becomes a mesh of Federal agencies that then need
that required reporting.
Again, as I mentioned earlier in my testimony, that can
lead to a lot of redundant efforts and really pulling the cyber
defenders away from incident response to now answering multiple
questions from multiple agencies at a time when they really
need to be focused on those response actions.
Mr. Garbarino. OK. So maybe for you and the--all the
panelists. So what recommendations in detail do you have to
better harmonize these requirements?
Mr. Dickerson. I think one of the things----
Mr. Garbarino. I mean, one--so it is not so--not just so
that it works with industry, so it is not a high burden on
industry, but also--but still sets a high cybersecurity
standard.
Mr. Dickerson. Right. So I think part of the question is,
is there a centralized point, belly button, for that reporting?
If that is formally the NCIC on the SIOC, CISA central, and you
have representatives from those agencies there, or if you have
CISA representatives at those agencies, I think there is
options for either way to then correlate some of that
information, make sure it gets to all of the right agencies and
partners, but that then you are not having to report the same
information, answer the same questions over and over, if that
helps, sir.
Mr. Garbarino. Nope, that does.
Anything else from any other panelists, or I can go to my
next question? Anybody want to add anything?
All right. If nothing, this is pretty much for everybody,
so jump in when you want. As the Federal Government sets the
standards for industrial control systems' cybersecurity in
collaboration with the critical infrastructure community, there
will inevitably be requirements for companies to validate the
controls in place, as we saw in the TSA security directive.
What is the most effective way to, in a scalable manner,
have these validations take place? Should TSA conduct them,
CISA? Or can DHS, TSA, and the industry agree on what comprises
a cybersecurity validation and have private companies do it?
That is--and whoever wants to jump in first if you have----
Ms. Cogswell. I will be happy to start. I will say that I
think this is an environment where there are a number of
opportunities to engage across the board. As you noted, there
are existing protocols by which TSA and CISA partner for the
validated architecture reviews, but at the same time, there are
models under which regulatorily you can create the opportunity
for third-party entities who are off an improved list, clearly
qualified and found to be--to meet various standards who can
also perform those types of services.
As I noted in my opening statement, one such model that TSA
has actually used before is the third-party canine program,
where they create an approved list of canine operators who can
be used in screening operations. They therefore can regulate
both the entity that is providing the service as well as the
entity who is using it, to make sure that the goals and
outcomes are reaching everybody's desired end-state.
This is an area I think that should be explored. I think
there is huge opportunity, frankly, to expand the number of
entities who can participate, which helps all of us, so that
you are not worried so much about necessarily limited resources
at any one point, or, frankly, you know, every company not
having to come up to speed on every nuance of cyber, which may
be more difficult given the difficulties in hiring cyber talent
these days in particular.
Mr. Garbarino. Yes. Difficulties and expense.
OK. I appreciate it. So we would be better off doing a
third party. I appreciate your answer.
If nobody else has anything else back, I do yield--has
anything else to say, I do yield back to the Chairwoman.
Ms. Clarke. I thank you, Ranking Member Garbarino.
I now recognize the Chairwoman of the Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security, the gentlelady from New
Jersey, Mrs. Watson Coleman, for her questions at this time.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Chairwoman. Thank you to
all of our witnesses.
In 2001, terrorists needed to make it onto the planes and
into the cockpit in order to execute the 9/11 attack. However,
in 2021, we must also consider the possibility that a terrorist
or hostile nation could hijack a flight by hacking it, without
ever passing through TSA checkpoints or stepping foot on that
plane.
Mr. Troy, Ms. Spaulding, and Ms. Cogswell, would you
comment on this: As aircraft become increasingly connected and
automated, how do we prevent hackers from hijacking planes and,
in worst-case scenario, if a hijacker obtained operational
control, what redundancies should we have in place to ensure
that a real pilot can regain control? What role do you see TSA
and CISA, in concert with FAA, ensuring the security of
aircraft operational control and navigational systems?
I will start with you, Mr. Troy, Ms. Spaulding, and then
Ms. Cogswell, please.
Mr. Troy. Thank you. Excellent question. So the aviation
industry has an incredible safety record based on strong
engineering design and continuous enhancement, and the aviation
industry does recognize cybersecurity as a critical part of
aviation safety. So the industry has an incredible safety
record, and it is the result of careful incorporation of
functionality and strong secure system design. The airplane
design is based on careful system integration and system
isolation as appropriate and redundancy for critical systems.
So safety critical systems are highly protected and
hardened against attacks, but we are continuously evaluating
the changing cyber threat space and trying to incorporate then
improvements to anticipate threats. So the systems are
separated from cyber and system engineering reasons as well.
With respect to your question about a hacker obtaining
operational control. As I stated above, the planes are designed
with redundant systems such that if a system is not operating
as designed, another system can be engaged to perform the
function. Pilots are trained as well to address system failures
and, ultimately, pilots are a critical layer of protection for
continued safe flight and landing.
With respect to the question on TSA and CISA and their
roles, as well as FAA, they are all stakeholders in the safety
of aircraft, as are airlines, and, you know, being operators of
the aircraft. These Government agencies should be working with
the manufacturers to obtain assurance that the aircraft, as
designed, are periodically assessed against threats. These
Government agencies are also incredibly helpful in sharing
threat intelligence information.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
Ms. Spaulding.
Ms. Spaulding. Yes. I can vouch for my days at DHS that the
industry takes this threat very seriously and that there is
close interagency cooperation. Of course, DHS and FAA and DOD
are all members of the Aviation Cybersecurity Initiative
working closely with industry.
I do think it is something that requires constant
reassessment, constant monitoring, to make sure that the design
basis that Jeff talks about is up-to-date, is keeping up with
everything that we know about the nature of the threat, and
that that industry-Government collaboration continue to be very
strong. This is a very dynamic field.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
Ms. Cogswell.
Ms. Cogswell. Thank you very much. As you know, the
Transportation Security Administration actually started as part
of the Department of Transportation. As such, we have very
close, strong ties with the FAA and other sister entities
within the Department of Transportation that continue to this
day. On any given day, talk 12, 15 times, conduct regular
exercises, share information on threats.
I will say one of the things that I want to highlight that
Suzanne noted is that continuing focus on looking at what is
next on the horizon and how do we best make sure that we use
our compatible authorities, safety and security, to take the
best action with these threats.
I will say, during my time at TSA, we also worked very
closely together and then with industry on those problems where
we saw a nexus crossing over between the agencies.
Similarly, CISA, given their membership in DHS as a strong
partner from that front, proved valuable in a number of these
conversations to help articulate and describe different angles
against which we should be looking at that threat. I feel
confident these conversations continue.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Ms. Clarke. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member of
the Subcommittee on Transportation, Maritime--and Maritime
Subcommittee, the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Gimenez.
Let me just state that, going forward, Mrs. Watson Coleman
will be presiding on the balance of our hearing this afternoon.
Thank you very much.
I yield to the gentleman from Florida.
I assume that the gentleman from Florida has not returned
as of yet, so I am going to turn the meeting over--the hearing
over to my colleague, if she is ready at this time.
Mrs. Watson Coleman [presiding.] Thank you, Madam
Chairwoman.
I am trying to see who is next. I believe it is
Representative Jackson Lee from Texas. I am sorry, I am getting
this information in live time.
Ms. Clarke. OK.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Representative Jackson Lee.
Ms. Clarke. She is--I think she is trying to unmute.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. The staff has to do so. Thank
you, Madam Chair. We can't self--under the Webex Cisco, we
cannot self-unmute ourselves.
But let me thank both of you and the Ranking Member for
these important messages that we have been gathering today, and
I am going to ask a question of all.
I think it was, Mr. Troy, your testimony, I think,
suggested there was a lot of layering with respect to
Governmental regulation and addition, and your point would be
that we need to find a way to be more specific and pointed.
Am I correct, Mr. Troy? Was that your testimony, or Mr.
Dickerson?
Mr. Dickerson. Congresswoman Jackson Lee, I had some
comments on those lines. This is Mr. Dickerson.
Ms. Jackson Lee. OK. So would you expand on how we can be
more effective regulators first? Then I have one or two other
questions. But can you quickly respond to how we can be more
effective in our work? This is important work and important
infrastructure that needs to be secured. So, Mr. Troy?
Mr. Troy. So I believe that one of the things that is
really important as we look at putting out mandatory reporting
and regulations on the industry is that we use a phased
approach. A phased approach basically is one that ensures that
all of the people who are going to fall under these
requirements can achieve the success of getting these
requirements in place.
When we look at what they have done, for example, on the
Department of Defense with the defense contractors, there has
been, you know, a ramp-up of increased cybersecurity maturity
requirements of all the defense contractors. I think a lot of
great lessons have been learned from that process, and by
establishing baseline controls and then continuing to evaluate
the ability of industry to meet those and then challenge them
and bring them up higher is an effective process.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me ask--thank you so very much. Let me
ask further witnesses.
Ms. Spaulding, I want to focus on trains--trains in the
Eastern Corridor, trains that go really into neighborhoods. I
really think that we have been on the edge of good luck, in all
honesty, in terms of dealing with trains that--purposefully so,
they were meant to go almost up to your front door. They go
behind homes. These are interstate trains. Homes are built
right on the back side of trains. They are in mountains, they
are in valleys, they are in dangerous places, and they are
Amtrak.
What are special efforts that specifically look at trains
and the cyber system dealing with ultimately--if I could use
the terminology--the massive train wreck that could come from a
cyber failure on our train systems? There is interstate train
system and then obviously the computer--excuse me--the commuter
train. Would you care to comment on that?
Ms. Spaulding. Absolutely, Congresswoman. Your points about
the potential risks that come with our rail system across the
country is exactly right. The good news is that the rail
industry has worked closely with DHS for many years. When I was
the under secretary at DHS, the Rail Sector Coordinating
Council was very active, and they have done a lot, both in the
physical safety arena and security arena, and cybersecurity.
But as you point out, it is a complex system, and we now
know what are the basic things that really need to be done
across the board to protect and defend and make more resilient
these critical assets and systems. Sometimes you have got to
issue a mandate in order to make sure that everyone, not just
those who are actively involved, but that everyone that is
controlling, owning, and operating sensitive assets comes up to
at least that basic standard of care, and then, very
importantly, has plans in place to deal with any incident that
might arise to reduce the impact and the harm to the American
public and to our economy.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Let me just quickly, on the--combine pipeline and planes
together and just say, one of the things that we have looked at
over the years is the apron, the back side of the airport,
which, at that time, there was intrusion by uninvited guests,
potential terrorists, because it was so vulnerable in the back.
But there are also the apron of a cybersecurity system as
relates to flights, maybe even as it relates to the air traffic
arena, but also the airlines that sort of run their own
systems, and they have a cyber system now far different than
this----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. The gentlelady's time has expired. I
will let you finish your comment, though. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Thank you so very much.
So, in the future, if you could answer the question about
that back side of the airport, and then as well, to tie the
pipeline question into my rail question, which is pipelines are
everywhere as well and do we have the adequate cyber protection
for pipelines that wind up in our backyards?
I would yield back. If Madam Chair--I don't know if someone
can answer it in very short period. I don't know. I would
welcome that. Thank you. If anyone can answer those.
Mr. Troy. Yes. Very quickly, when you mention a back side
of the airport, it makes me think so, really, the operational
technologies that help an airport run.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Right.
Mr. Troy. That is a very big focus of the airlines and the
airports right now as they look at both the common suppliers to
those particular types of technologies and the potential
vulnerabilities as well.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Troy.
Thank you, Ms. Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. I now recognize Mr. Clyde of Georgia.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I appreciate that.
My question is for Mr. Troy. As you well know, if the
aviation sector were to experience a cyber attack, it could
very well have a devastating impact on the security of our
Nation and our economy. So, in your opinion, what is the
greatest area of cyber threat in aviation? If I could have your
opinion on that.
Is it the airport itself? Is it the--I mean, you talked a
little bit about the planes. I think Madam Chairwoman discussed
that. Then you also have the airlines themselves with, indeed,
their own systems. You know, any part of that could shut down
air travel across the United States in various different
sectors.
What is your opinion, what is our greatest cyber threat
when it comes to the aviation side?
Mr. Troy. That is a great question, and it is very
difficult to answer because of the interconnectivity of the
aviation system. It is really an ecosystem.
So if I am running an airline, I am very concerned that if
I land my planes into my hub airport and that airport can't
function, that creates a problem for me. If I am that airport,
and I have the same problem if all those airlines are parked at
my gates and they can't move because of some function that they
are unable to perform.
So I am not trying to cop out on your question, but I
really think it speaks exactly to why our industry needs to
work so well together, because of this shared risk within
supply chain and the industry segments that make up the
aviation ecosystem.
Mr. Clyde. OK. That is kind-of the area I am going to here
because, looking at aviation, I just see that as a--you know,
such a low-hanging fruit, because, as of yet, I have not really
heard of a cyber attack on aviation that really had any effect.
You know, it is a fantastic thing, and that is wonderful, but
that means it just hasn't showed up yet.
So would any of our other witnesses want to chime in on
what the aviation industry is doing or what the greatest
vulnerability might be and how we could assist in mitigating
that vulnerability?
Ms. Cogswell. I am happy to sort-of build on the answer
that was presented, which I completely agree with. I think one
of the most undervalued points that has come from all of this
is understanding how an impact to one part of a system can
ripple across and affect the system as a whole. Taking that
information and going back into the various individual company
systems and those interconnected systems and better assessing
what would that look like, and how do we make sure that we are
quickly able to contain it and mitigate it should we see that
start to occur.
Not the same at all, but I will draw a comparison to when
Gatwick was actually shut down for several days because of
unmanned aerial systems flying overhead. As you recall, they
didn't actually harm anything, but they had periodic events
where they just kept coming into the area. That clearly made it
unsafe to fly, right? So they grounded all of the planes in the
airport. It shut down that airport. It shut down flow to
connecting airport.
Exactly as my colleague just said, big ripple effects, even
for something that was not actually a kinetic, physical
accident or disruption that they might think of seeing
otherwise. Truly important for us as a model to understand that
kind of interconnected model and how we can collectively work
to defend our systems.
Mr. Clyde. Well, thank you. Thank you very much. I
appreciate your comments, Ms. Cogswell.
That is my great concern, and I appreciate each of you
bringing your ideas to light.
With that, Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you very much.
The gentlelady from New York, Miss Rice, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Miss Rice. Thank you so much, Madam Chair. I am so grateful
for this hearing.
You know, listening to this conversation brings me back to
9/11. As a New Yorker, we felt the pain of that attack very
intimately. I remember, in the days and weeks and months after
9/11, you know, which basically shut down the aviation industry
for some time, and I remember wondering whether we are ever
going to come back. Are people ever going to feel comfortable
flying again?
Of course they did. But during that interim period, there
was thoughts in, you know, law enforcement that what is going
to be next? Like, what--the terrorists showed how they could
attack us here on American soil and do it in a way that shut
down an entire industry that had an enormous economic impact on
our country for a long time.
And I remember, you know, talking to my friends in law
enforcement in New York at that time, and they were thinking,
gosh, do we have to worry about someone just walking into a
mall, 3 or 4 different malls across this country? You want to
talk about shutting down day-to-day economic activity. Make
people afraid to even leave their homes.
I think what we are--the subject matter of today's hearing
brings me to that--again to that issue of how we get people
around safely and efficiently and all those things that our
economy can hum, but we also do it in a way that keeps people
safe.
So, Ms. Spaulding, I mean, I think it is pretty obvious why
a mass transit system would be of interest to a foreign
adversary. Up to this point, we haven't seen one that has had a
massive safety impact, you know, but I guess my question is:
How do we--you know, I worry about these transportation
systems, because some of them are run by Governmental agencies
and others are privately-run.
So when you are looking to come up with a system of
protocols to keep us safe and prevent, whether it is cyber
attacks or any other kind of attack, on our transportation
system, how do we set up a system that can apply equally and
effectively--as effectively to both the public and private
sector?
Ms. Spaulding. Yes, it is a great question. Your point
about, you know, the aviation industry in the wake of 9/11, you
know, is a reminder that--of the way in which an incident one
place, in one part of an industry can destroy public trust in
the entire industry. Again, one of the reasons that, you know,
it is in these sectors' best interests to ensure that all of
the players owning and operating key assets are brought up to a
baseline level of cybersecurity to protect the public trust in
that entire industry.
In terms of Government, you know, are you--our critical
infrastructure is, we always say, owned 85 percent by the
private sector. Nobody knows what the exact percentage is, but
that means that other percent is publicly-owned. There are a
number of ways in which industry and Government come together.
There are--for Government-owned utilities as well as private
sector.
There is a multi-State ISAC that is for the States to come
together to share best practices, including around operational
technology they own. There is a Government coordinating council
that includes State and local and territorial and Tribal
government for governments to come together to talk about the
things that they own. All of the various sectors that have
coordinating committees have a Government counterpart.
So the mechanisms are there. You are absolutely right; as
with every other area, we need to make sure we are harmonizing
the requirements and that we are looking across these
industries regardless of who owns them, because our adversaries
are doing exactly that.
Miss Rice. Absolutely. You know, I know this is going to
sound like a political pitch. It really is not meant to be,
but, you know, our transportation security, there is a cyber--
certainly a very profound cybersecurity aspect to it, but there
is also an infrastructure aspect to it as well.
Do we have the--are our transportation systems as up-to-
date and resilient and safe as they need to be? I know my
Republican colleagues on this call feel the same way that I do,
that, you know, major investment in our infrastructure shows
not just Americans that they should be able to travel safely
and feel confident in the way that they travel around this
country and around the world, but it sends a very clear message
to our adversaries that we are investing in our infrastructure
and so they should beware.
So thank you all so much for coming today. It is a great
conversation.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. I thank the gentlelady.
I now recognize the gentleman and Ranking Member from
Florida, Mr. Gimenez, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I am going to kind-of focus in on an area that has got me
concerned.
Mr. Dickerson, do you have, off the top of your head,
either the correct number or maybe a guesstimate of the
percentage of cranes that are utilized by U.S. ports that are
made in China?
Mr. Dickerson. Thank you, Congressman Gimenez. I do not
have that, but it is a pretty significant number for those
ship-to-shore gantry cranes that we rely on to move the goods
from ships to shore and vice versa.
Mr. Gimenez. I have two concerns about that. No. 1, I know
that in the Port of Miami, we do have some Chinese cranes, and
we know that we had concerns about embedded in the software
that came with the cranes was malware that was meant to
penetrate the port systems and do whatever it was that the
Chinese wanted to do with our port operating systems. That is
one concern.
The other concern that I have is that, whenever the Chinese
want, they can cut off our supply of spare parts, which means
that a significant portion of our ability to load and offload
ships will be compromised if that were the case.
Do you know--do you have any thoughts on how we can
mitigate the risk of infiltration into our port systems via
these cranes and other either new or existing, you know,
technologies at ports and infrastructure that ports need?
Mr. Dickerson. Thank you again, sir. I think there is a few
things, and those are very valid concerns. One is the ability
to be able to conduct risk assessments immediately on that
equipment. So CISA has the vulnerability architecture
designer's views, data, program. But, quite honestly, often
that is perhaps a 12- to 18-month waiting list period before
you can actually conduct that review. In those cases, we need
that equipment operational immediately upon arrival. There is
not necessarily that time to waste.
So then it is an opportunity to perhaps engage in, as was
mentioned earlier, some prequalified private-sector vendors
that might be able to help augment CISA's functionality to
conduct those reviews so that they can be done in a timely
manner, and we can then identify if there is any
vulnerabilities that need to be addressed.
Mr. Gimenez. Well, do you think that maybe we need to wean
ourselves off of this dependence on Chinese technology that,
again, comes from a sole source that could be our adversary?
I actually believe that it is the biggest threat that we
have, is the ascendancy of China, that they could basically cut
off our supply of spare parts and grind this country to a halt
in terms of its import and export capabilities. So, in light of
that, I am going to be introducing some legislation about that.
We need other sources that are either allies or friendly
nations and not so much of it coming from one source with
China.
I understand what China did. They undercut everybody else
in the world, and basically they are the sole provider of
cranes around the world, which makes them a--I think it is a
very, very dangerous practice and a very, very dangerous
situation we have in the United States.
Would you agree with that?
Mr. Dickerson. Yes, sir. I think there is some undercutting
of the market taking place, and so having alternative sources
and then being able to augment that with perhaps some grant
programs that could allow then the private sector to make those
investments reasonably would be helpful.
Mr. Gimenez. OK. Like I said, I will be introducing some
legislation to try and wean us off of these Chinese cranes and
other infrastructure needs at our ports that may be coming from
adversary nations.
With that, my time is up, and thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I yield back.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Las Vegas, Ms. Titus.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Madam Chairman. A very interesting--
--
Mrs. Watson Coleman. From Nevada. I am sorry. Nevada.
Ms. Titus. Nevada.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. I shouldn't be so myopic.
Ms. Titus. That is all right. We answer to just about
anything.
I wanted to address this question to Ms. Spaulding. You
know, McCarran Airport in my district, Las Vegas, sees just
thousands of passengers every year. We are probably the only
airport that has got slot machines, so a lot of them are
playing slot machines. But a lot of them are working on their
computers while they are waiting for their flights.
I just wonder if you would address the need for security on
those airport WiFis, because a lot of personal data is being
floated around that we don't know if that is safe or not.
Furthermore, when they get on the plane, they use the plane's
WiFi. One of the biggest complaints is when the flight
attendant says, ``Our WiFi is down,'' you can hear all the
groans and the Candy Crush players and all of that.
But could you address the issue of securing that kind of
WiFi, either in the airport or on the planes where people are
connecting to it and exposing a lot of personal data?
Ms. Spaulding. Yes. Congresswoman, you are exactly right.
We have all known that those public WiFi--free public WiFi
availability in places like airports is completely insecure,
and certainly have advised the public as best we can to be
aware of that and not to use those.
But, realistically, they are going to continue to take
advantage of the connectivity that is available to them. I
think it is a very good point that those systems ought to be
more secured. It is very difficult to have something that is
open to a very transient population, right, coming and going,
where you cannot use the security protocols that you can with a
work force that is more stationary. So I don't mean to minimize
the challenge, but I think it is something that we should be
moving toward.
In the mean time, I hope that the public is watching and
hearing how, at the moment, how unsecure those networks are.
Ms. Titus. Well, thank you. I hope so too. I wish people
were just reading books instead of playing computer games, but
that is just my practice.
Along those same lines, a number of the airports have
vendors that take your very personal data, and we see a lot of
that at McCarran, like with the prevetting of customers. They
take eyes--you know, you look in and you see your eyes and
biometric data, and so I would think they would need some
pretty high standards of cybersecurity.
I don't know if they are doing that. If you can comment on
that, you and Ms. Cogswell, and how TSA is dealing with that.
Ms. Spaulding. So I know that Patricia will have some
insights on this as well. I am familiar with some of those
vendors that are providing some of that vetting before you
board the plane, for example, to speed you through the lines.
They know that--how absolutely vital it is that they keep that
information secure. That is very personal information. So my
sense is they take cybersecurity very seriously. But I will see
if Patricia has more to add.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
Ms. Cogswell. Thank you very much for the question. I have
actually been spending quite a bit of time on this since my
departure from Government, working with--across the industry--
airlines, airports, technology vendors, associations, and
others about how we can encourage, frankly, an environment that
holistically supports innovation for aviation passenger
experience, making it, frankly, from couch to gate, a more
pleasant experience, one that offers many different
opportunities.
You are exactly right that there is a strong recognition
that we need to embed several key things along the way, one of
which is that cybersecurity protection so that people feel
confident and comfortable about what is happening with their
data. Along with that is the press also to make sure that there
is a better recognition and a better way to have these vendors
tell people what are they collecting, who are they sending it
to, are they storing it, and how is it being used?
So all of these, I think, will form a core that we are
hoping to continue to look to progress in this environment.
There are standards that are used today. CBP has published a
standard that is used by CBP and TSA for a number of those
pilots that you are talking about where the biometric is
collected and transmitted to use either for access to a lounge
or to board the plane or go through security.
There are also additional new emerging standards, such as
the mobile driver's license recently announced by TSA and Apple
that also are coming through in these areas.
Across the board, you are seeing an emphasis on that
cybersecurity. I expect that to continue to evolve.
Your earlier point, given that all of these are operating
in that WiFi-connected area, that also matters, that they need
to look at it as a zero-trust environment where the network
itself is not secure and, therefore, the information needs to
be secure while it is in transmission.
Ms. Titus. Well, thank you so much.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Maybe we can look into this.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you very much.
I now recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Van
Drew.
Mr. Van Drew. Thank you, Madam Chair. It is good to see
you.
This is a question for Mr. Dickerson. Mr. Dickerson, as you
may know, roughly 5.4 trillion flows through the Maritime
Transportation System each and every year, which compromises
about 25--comprises, rather, about 25 percent of the United
States' gross domestic product.
The MTS consists of an intricate network of waterways,
ships, ports, and terminals, and intermodal landline
connections, which allow various modes of transportation to
move goods and to move people. The Coast Guard is the lead
Federal agency for regulation of the MTS, and it currently has
the relationships, the regulatory authority, and the response
capabilities to prevent and respond to threats throughout the
system.
So my first question for you is: How can we best use the
Coast Guard's existing relationships at the port level to
improve our ability to manage cyber risk with the MTS?
Mr. Dickerson. Thank you, Congressman Van Drew. There is a
couple of things that can be done. We already have the Area
Maritime Security Committees that are active in almost all the
captain of the port areas with a cybersecurity subcommittee
that addresses risks. Currently, those are supported by a
variety of folks with different skill levels when it comes to
cybersecurity and knowledge levels at the Coast Guard level.
But they are trying to hire more MTS cyber specialists into
each captain of the port area which could then support those
Area Maritime Security Committees.
With those committees, you have both public and private-
sector stakeholders that are engaged, and they can be involved
in risk planning, exercises, et cetera. One of the things the
MTS-ISAC is doing, we have formed a number of information
exchanges with those local stakeholders to make sure the public
and private sectors are really aware of the day-to-day cyber
threat activity that is targeting them.
So that helps bridge that gap between the AMSC, which might
be more at a strategic level than the actual operational and
tactical levels of cybersecurity that go on day-to-day. But
that is definitely an area of focus that can be improved.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Van Drew. Good. I think the Coast Guard can be very
essential in this entire process, and as we move on and times
change and things change, so does their role, and I think this
is an area we really should focus on as well. I appreciate your
answer.
I have another question for you. Members of the committee
have received feedback that public-private partnerships are,
unfortunately, sometimes turning into situations in which
companies do give their information, as they should, to the
Government, but they are not receiving anything meaningful in
return. In other words, that collaboration that we want to see
back and forth, I have heard, does not always exist. It should,
because this is a very larger-than-life foe that we have to
deal with here, and we all need to work together.
I was wondering what your thoughts on that were and how we
can do better with that.
Mr. Dickerson. Thank you, Congressman, again. Public-
private partnerships are absolutely critical. This is--cyber is
a team sport, and we all need to work together, absolutely. We
need to work together cross-sector-wise as well, which is why
the MTS-ISAC is part of the National Council of ISACs.
But when it comes to partnering with the Coast Guard, yes,
we have received that feedback many times. Coast Guard receives
the information, but then it might be months before any
information is released from the Coast Guard back to the
industry community.
I think closer partnerships--and I am in multiple
conversations with a number of Coast Guard leaders, and we are
working on improving that public-private partnership, making
sure that we can mature those procedures that are in place, to
analyze the information, enrich it, and get it back from the
Government in a more timely manner.
Mr. Van Drew. I think they want to do that. I think there
is really unexplored areas there that we can really do great
things together. Coast Guard is a great agency, as you know,
and I think they really can offer a great deal if we are
working in tandem, if we are working in partnership. I thank
you for your answers.
I yield back, Madam Chair.
Mr. Dickerson. I completely agree. Thank you, sir.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Van Drew. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Torres,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Torres. Thank you, Madam Chair.
You know, I have concerns that the United States for far
too long has been complacent about cybersecurity instead of
proactively securing critical infrastructure from cyber
threats. The Federal Government is largely reacting to events.
Colonial Pipeline is exhibit A. Before the breach of Colonial
Pipeline, there were virtually no rules mandating pipeline
cybersecurity. Only after the Colonial breach did the TSA
finally issue security directives.
So as far as I am concerned, the breach of Colonial
Pipeline demonstrates the laissez-faire approach to
cybersecurity that the Federal Government has taken has been an
abject failure.
My first question is for Ms. Spaulding about TSA. Instead
of only issuing a security directive for each mode of
transportation, should the TSA promulgate universal
cybersecurity standards for all modes of critical
transportation?
Ms. Spaulding. It is a good question, Congressman. First of
all, I think the security directives are a first step from TSA,
and DHS has indicated that it is very likely to move to
regulations. The security directives have a limited life span,
and within a year or so, they have to be replaced. DHS has
indicated it is likely to move to regulations.
That will allow for a formal notice and comment period. I
think it is really important that there be some harmonization
across sectors, as a number of the witnesses have noted. That
is really important, particularly for companies that have
assets that cross sectors. But I think there should be room--
there may be need for some specialized requirements depending
on the nature of the operations.
Mr. Torres. I don't mean to--if I can interject for a
moment. Obviously, there is a need for sector-specific
standards, but there are best practices in cybersecurity that
all individuals and institutions should adopt in both the
public and private sector, whether it is the appointment of a
CISO or multifactorial authentication or software updates or
password updates or contingency planning.
So if we all--if those are universally agreed-upon best
practices in cybersecurity, why not mandate them for all
operators and owners of critical transportation infrastructure?
Ms. Spaulding. Yes. You are absolutely right, Congressman.
There is some basic cyber hygiene, we call it, that should be
universal. I think the admonition that one of the witnesses
made earlier, to do this in a phased approach makes sense. I
think identifying what DHS has indicated is they are going to
start with the most critical assets. I think that makes a lot
of sense, to get the Government and industry to learn lessons
about how to do this in terms of mandatory compliance with
directives, how to monitor that, how to enforce that mandatory
reporting.
But, yes, you are absolutely right, there is a baseline of
cybersecurity that ought to be universal.
Mr. Torres. You mentioned reporting. The policy of cyber
incident reporting raises the question, what exactly qualifies
as a significant cyber incident, and there is a lack of clarity
about the definition.
So take as an example the Colonial Pipeline. As you know,
the breach of the pipeline led to the shutdown for a 5,500-mile
pipeline that made up nearly half of the fuel supplies of the
East Coast. It had economic effects that were felt on the
ground: The closing of gas stations, panic buying, long lines.
Despite those effects, the Federal Government did not
designate the Colonial breach as a significant cyber incident.
Like, in what universe does that make sense? It seems strange
to me.
Ms. Spaulding. So the designation of a significant cyber
incident is more of a signal to the Government about the need
for an interagency, White House-led meeting to deal with the
response, right? I think there is a legitimate question about
what--where you should set the threshold, for example, for
mandatory reporting, but ransomware, it seems to me, is an easy
threshold to set.
Mr. Torres. So do you agree with the Federal Government's
decision not to designate the Colonial breach as a significant
cyber incident? Because, I mean, that situation, I mean, did
implicate a number of agencies. It even reached the attention
of the President himself. So it would seem to have all the
hallmarks of a significant cyber incident.
Ms. Spaulding. You know, Congressman, I am inclined to
agree with you, is that the level of interagency meeting that
was probably happening at the White House, it strikes me as
probably very much the same as a significant cyber incident. I
do think that should be separated from the thresholds that are
set for mandatory reporting.
Mr. Torres. I just feel like we need a greater sense of
urgency and more common sense when it comes to cybersecurity
policy in the Federal Government. So I will leave it at that.
Thank you.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Torres.
I would like to recognize Mr. Langevin from Rhode Island
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Madam Chair. I have been on and
off the hearing, so in between the meeting, so I thank you and
the other Members for hosting the hearing. I really want to
thank our witnesses for their testimony.
If I could start with Ms. Spaulding. First of all, Ms.
Spaulding, I greatly appreciate your contributions to cyber and
our National security writ large, both in your role at DHS and,
of course, as one of our fellow commissioners on the Cyberspace
Solarium Commission.
But let me just start with this. On October 19, several of
the Senators sent a letter to TSA Administrator Pekoske
encouraging him to reconsider using emergency authority for new
transportation cybersecurity regulations in--and I quote, ``the
absence of an immediate threat.''
So I am not sure if my colleagues were watching the news in
May, but the Colonial Pipeline incident obviously disrupted the
delivery of approximately half of the East Coast's fuel supply.
Ransomware or other cyber intrusion against an air traffic
control station or a mass transit system could be equally
debilitating.
So I wanted to ask, if I could, do you believe TSA's new
cybersecurity requirements on the rail--rail transit and
aviation industries was warranted given the imminent threats
that we face?
Ms. Spaulding. Congressman, first, thank you for your kind
words. Most importantly, thank you for your leadership over
many years in cybersecurity, and it has been an honor to serve
with you on the Cyberspace Solarium Commission.
I do believe that there is an emergency here, a sense of
urgency. We are fortunate that TSA has this authority to be
able to move quickly and that it has exercised that authority.
I think it is probably fair to say that, on May 6, Colonial
Pipeline was not thinking that this was an urgent threat. In
fact, there are reports that they had been putting off their
vulnerability architecture design review. They just weren't
getting around to it. That is the kind-of, you know, September
10 mindset that we are trying to avoid here.
We have so much evidence of this emergency, between the
attacks in 2017 on safety systems that were clearly designed to
be ready to inflict physical harm on people by disabling safety
systems and operations. The Florida water treatment--the attack
on the Florida water treatment facility, putting toxic levels
of chemicals--trying to put toxic levels of chemicals into
water. I think the sense of urgency should be palpable and felt
by everyone by now.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. I would agree.
Let me turn to another line of questioning on third-party
auditing. So again to you, the TSA pipeline security directives
require baseline cybersecurity procedures such as reporting
incidents, implementing multifactorial authentication, and
developing and testing cyber contingency response plans. So in
my view, these requirements are a good start, but more,
candidly, should be done. I also believe that TSA should
implement auditing of the cybersecurity controls covered
entities have put in place.
So an impartial third-party auditor, such as a certified
private-sector company or even CISA, would have both the
impartiality and the on-network testing personnel necessary to
ensure covered entities properly implement cybersecurity
controls.
So from your experience and your perspective, do you
believe TSA should incorporate third-party auditing into future
cybersecurity requirements and why, if you could?
Ms. Spaulding. I do, Congressman. As you point out, we have
numerous other places throughout the Government where third
parties help to scale an effort that is put in place by the
Government. My colleague here today, Patricia Cogswell, has
made that comparison to the third party--the role of third
parties in canine certification, for example.
So there is precedent for this, and I think it is an
important way to scale. Our industry witnesses have talked
about the need for speed in some of these certifications and
for the Government to do the things it needs to do, and we know
that CISA's resources are stretched.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you very much.
I see my time has expired, so I am not going to add to my
other two questions. But maybe I can submit them for the
record, one on exploiting TSA regulations in other--to other
sectors. The other one was on Government-sponsored testing of
critical technologies. So I will submit those for the record,
Madam Chair. Thank you. I yield back.
Thank you for your answers too, Suzanne, and to all our
witnesses too. Thank you.
Madam Chair, you are on mute.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Langevin. Thank you
very much.
I want to thank the witnesses, not only for your very
important expert testimony, but your forbearance during our
delay. Thank you. We appreciate it.
Thank the Members for all of their questions today.
The Members of the subcommittees may have additional
questions--as Mr. Langevin has noted he will--for you, and we
ask that you respond expeditiously in writing to those
questions. The Chair reminds the Members of the subcommittees
that the committee's records will remain open for 10 days.
And so, with that, without objection, the subcommittees
stand adjourned. Good day.
[Whereupon, at 5:01 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

[all]
