- EXAMINING DHS'S EFFORTS TO IMPROVE PROCESSING FOR INTERNATIONAL VISITORS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING DHS'S EFFORTS TO IMPROVE
PROCESSING FOR INTERNATIONAL VISITORS

=======================================================================
FIELD HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 24, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-57

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-473 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            John Katko, New York
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island      Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Clay Higgins, Louisiana
J. Luis Correa, California           Michael Guest, Mississippi
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri            Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Al Green, Texas                      Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Yvette D. Clarke, New York           Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
Eric Swalwell, California            Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Dina Titus, Nevada                   Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey    Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Val Butler Demings, Florida          Peter Meijer, Michigan
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California    Kat Cammack, Florida
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          August Pfluger, Texas
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey
Ritchie Torres, New York
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Daniel Kroese, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS

The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable Dina Titus, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Nevada:
Oral Statement.................................................     2
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................     5

WITNESSES
Panel I

Mr. Carlos Martel, Director of Field Operations, Los Angeles
Field Office, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, U.S.
Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     7
Prepared Statement.............................................     9
Ms. Karen R. Burke, Federal Security Director, Nevada,
Transportation Security Administration, U.S. Department of
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    16

Panel II

Ms. Kate Wik, Chief Marketing Officer, Las Vegas Convention and
Visitors Authority:
Oral Statement.................................................    29
Prepared Statement.............................................    31
Ms. Rosemary A. Vassiliadis, Director of Aviation, Clark County
Department of Aviation:
Oral Statement.................................................    34
Prepared Statement.............................................    37

EXAMINING DHS'S EFFORTS TO IMPROVE PROCESSING FOR INTERNATIONAL
VISITORS

----------

Tuesday, May 24, 2022

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Las Vegas, NV.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 12:04 p.m.,
Commissioners Meeting Room, Harry Reid International Airport,
Hon. Bennie G. Thompson [Chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Thompson, Jackson Lee, Correa,
Cleaver, Titus, Watson Coleman, Demings, and Langevin.
Chairman Thompson. The Committee on Homeland Security will
be in order.
The committee is meeting today to receive testimony on
examining DHS's efforts to improve processing for international
visitors.
Without objection the Chair is authorized to declare the
committee in recess at any point.
Good morning. I want to begin this hearing by thanking
Congresswoman Dina Titus for bringing the committee to Las
Vegas to examine how the Department of Homeland Security can
improve visitor processing. Congresswoman Titus is a leader in
Congress on this issue and a champion for Las Vegas tourism
because she knows how critical it is to this community and its
economy.
Las Vegas received over 42 million visitors in 2019. After
dropping off due to the pandemic, the numbers of visitors is on
the upswing. Harry Reid International Airport saw a 66 percent
increase in passenger volume from March 2021 to March of this
year. The number of international passengers increased 800
percent during that time, though it remains below pre-pandemic
numbers.
As travel continues to resume, it is essential to let
visitors know that America is ready and welcomes their return.
Yesterday I had the opportunity to see first-hand some of
the good work TSA is doing here at Harry Reid International
Airport to develop new innovative technologies for its
checkpoints. I also observed some of the engagement CBP has
made in recent years to strengthen and facilitate international
visitor processing. Improvements like these are essential to
not only strengthening security and serving as a force
multiplier for TSA and CBP personnel, but also improving the
passenger experience. A good experience at the airport gets a
visitor's trip off on the right foot and makes them more likely
to want to return.
I hope to hear from our TSA and CBP witnesses today about
the progress they have made and what more can be done as travel
rebounds from the pandemic. I also look forward to hearing from
our airport and Las Vegas and Convention and Visitors Authority
witnesses about what the Federal Government can do to help.
Finally, I want to commend the men and women of TSA and
CBP, Harry Reid International Airport, and all those who have
worked tirelessly under extraordinarily difficult conditions
while during the pandemic to keep the traveling public safe and
secure. We appreciate your hard work today and every day and
recognize that without you American travel and tourism would
not be possible.
[The statement of Chairman Thompson follows:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
May 24, 2022
I want to begin the hearing by thanking Congresswoman Dina Titus
for bringing the committee to Las Vegas to examine how the Department
of Homeland Security can improve visitor processing. Congresswoman
Titus is a leader in Congress on this issue and a champion for Las
Vegas tourism because she knows how critical it is to this community
and its economy.
Las Vegas received over 42 million visitors in 2019. After dropping
off due to the pandemic, the number of visitors is on the upswing.
Harry Reid International Airport saw a 66 percent increase in passenger
volume from March 2021 to March of this year. The number of
international passengers increased 800 percent during that time, though
it remains below pre-pandemic numbers. As travel continues to resume,
it is essential to let visitors know that America is ready and
welcoming their return.
Yesterday, I had the opportunity to see first-hand some of the good
work TSA is doing here at Harry Reid International Airport to develop
new, innovative technology for its checkpoints. I also observed some of
the enhancements CBP has made in recent years to strengthen and
facilitate international visitor processing. Improvements like these
are essential to not only strengthening security and serving as a force
multiplier for TSA and CBP personnel, but also improving the passenger
experience. A good experience at the airport gets a visitor's trip off
on the right foot and makes them more likely to want to return.
I hope to hear from our TSA and CBP witnesses today about the
progress they have made and what more can be done as travel rebounds
from the pandemic. I also look forward to hearing from our airport and
Las Vegas and Convention and Visitors Authority witnesses about what
the Federal Government can do to help.
Finally, I want to commend the men and women of TSA and CBP, Harry
Reid International Airport, and all those who have worked tirelessly
under extraordinarily difficult conditions during the pandemic to keep
the traveling public safe and secure. We appreciate your hard work
today and every day and recognize that without you, American travel and
tourism would not be possible.

Chairman Thompson. With that, I thank the airport for
hosting us today and recognize the gentlewoman from Nevada, Ms.
Titus, a tireless advocate for the people of Las Vegas on this
committee and in Congress, for any opening remarks she may
have.
Ms. Titus. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for bringing your committee here. I know you have a lot to do
with the other committee that you are chairing where we always
see you on TV, but we know also you are quite a champion for
TSA and what goes on in homeland security.
Thank you, Reverend Cleaver, for coming from St. Louis,
Missouri and that part of--central part of the country to join
us today in Las Vegas. I really appreciate it. I am glad to
have you here because you will get to hear directly from the
people at the airport and know that what I have been telling
you all this time is really true, because you will hear it
straight from them. The work that they do here to help our
hospitality industry is just incredible. I was glad you got to
have that behind the scenes tour of the new security system
here at the airport because we are really leading the way with
that technology.
You know, when I used to go through this airport to
Washington on the weekends, every 3 or 4 people on the plane,
it was just very eerie. Now air travel is really making a
comeback. But we still have a way to go. With the 191
international passengers just last month, we want to be able to
meet the challenge. So that is why we want to be sure we have
enough people, enough technology, and are ready to say welcome.
In 2020 CBP introduced simplified arrival processing with
biometric technology. That is one of the ways that we are kind-
of leading in the field. But unfortunately when travelers get
here and the numbers spike, CBP we realized lacks the personnel
needed. We believe there is a shortage of about 900 CBP
officers across ports of entry. So we need to do everything we
can to strengthen the work force by hiring more personnel and
working to mitigate these shortfalls.
As you will hear from our witnesses, as the trend increases
and more tourists come to our city, their trip does begin at
the airport. If you have a bad experience there, it kind-of
tempers the way you feel about the rest of the trip. So we are
proud to host the Nation's only TSA innovation checkpoint, and
that has again got the latest technology. So we are doing all
the right things, but we know we need to do more, and so that
is why we are having this hearing.
The President has recognized this increasing demand, and
you see that reflected in his new budget. I am also pleased
that there is a great increase from last year of $1.4 billion.
So that will certainly be helpful. That includes $105 million
for checkpoint property screening systems and $19 million for
own-person screening algorithm development--whatever that is. I
am sure we will find out.
In Congress this past month I was proud to vote in favor of
a TSA work force bill led by our Chairman recognizing all the
service that we get from TSA and improving their conditions and
pay and benefits. So I think we have a great partnership here.
I want the committee to hear about it, and we want to learn
from you ways that we can make it even better.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
[The statement of Honorable Titus follows:]
Statement of Congresswoman Dina Titus
May 24, 2022
Thank you to Chairman Thompson and to all the committee staff for
ensuring this important field hearing could take place. I am so pleased
to have you all in my district to discuss the important work Customs
and Border Protection (CBP) and the Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) are doing to encourage international travel to and
from the United States while bolstering the security of aviation
travel.
This field hearing is a great opportunity for our members to get a
behind-the-scenes look at the exciting new security technologies these
travel agencies are using to facilitate seamless processing. As we
bounce back from the economic downturn of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is
critical that we ensure no tourist or visitor is discouraged from
traveling to our country because of processing delays or long wait
times.
Despite low travel rates due to the pandemic, air travel is making
a significant comeback, particularly as we approach the summer months.
Visitation trajectories from March of this year are 50 percent above
what they were in March 2021, bringing the number travelers and
tourists to over 3 million in March of this year. Just last month, the
Las Vegas Airport had nearly 191,000 international air passengers.
CBP officers ensure that international travelers coming into the
United States are screened properly before enjoying the many
attractions Las Vegas has to offer. In 2020, CBP introduced Simplified
Arrival processing using biometric technology--a privacy-protective,
efficient, and secure way to utilize new technologies for enhanced
screening. Initiatives like these are what will catapult our airport
security efforts into the future while meeting increased travel
demands.
Unfortunately, as travel numbers spike, CBP still lacks the
personnel needed to meet this demand, with a shortage of at least 900
CBP officers across ports of entry. CBP should do everything possible
to strengthen its workforce by hiring more personnel and working to
mitigate these shortfalls with automated technologies. We now have an
optimistic traveler forecast as we move toward the next phase of this
pandemic--let's take that opportunity to augment CBP capabilities and
meet the need.
As the witnesses from our tourism authorities will tell you today,
this positive trend is expected to increase. We must continue to
support our travel agencies so that tourists come to our city with
positive travel experiences, a sense of trust in our security
processing, and a desire to come visit again.
Here at Las Vegas Airport, we are proud to host the Nation's only
TSA Innovation Checkpoint, which features the latest upgrades in
technology to improve security and the passenger screening experience.
I understand Chairman Thompson was able to tour the Innovation
Checkpoint yesterday and I hope some of you will be able to take a walk
through before you head home back to your districts.
Since its establishment in 2019, the Innovation Checkpoint at
Terminal 3 has allowed TSA employees to observe and evaluate new
technologies in a real-time, lab-like environment. It includes four
Automated Screening Lanes integrated with Computed Tomography scanners,
allowing for uninterrupted screening of carry-on luggage. TSA is also
testing a CT scan unit designed to recognize coding and divert bags
that need follow-up screening.
Given our diverse and varied passenger profile utilizing our
airport, the Innovation Checkpoint serves as the perfect opportunity to
pilot new security technologies without sacrificing reliability or
efficiency.
In the 9 years prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, Las Vegas set a
record for annual passenger volume, with 51.5 million travelers
visiting our city in 2019 via the airport. In recognizing increasing
demand, President Biden has laid out a fiscal year 2023 budget to
improve TSA security capabilities and ensure employees are better paid,
valued, and eligible for well-deserved benefits.
I am pleased that the President's fiscal year 2023 budget requests
$9.7 billion for TSA, a $1.4 billion increase from last year's funding
level. This number includes $105 million for the Checkpoint Property
Screening System program and $19 million for On-Person Screening
Algorithm Development to improve screening capabilities, intended to
improve detection of treats in an ever-evolving landscape.
In Congress, I was proud to vote this month in favor of a TSA
workforce bill which improves conditions, pay, and benefits for all
60,000 employees so that they feel empowered to do their job to keep
air travel safe. Supporting this workforce is an essential part of the
homeland security goals that this committee has advocated for.
Thank you again to all of you for being here today. I look forward
to hearing from our witnesses and I yield back.

Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
In my other life, when I used to come to Vegas before I was
a Member of Congress, I enjoyed myself. After becoming a Member
of Congress, I was given what was called back of the house tour
at the casinos to kind-of show me how things operate. So I was
privileged yesterday to see the back of the house tour here at
Harry Reid International Airport. I must say, not as many bells
and whistles at the casino, but you get it right. So I was very
impressed with what I saw and obviously I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses today on exactly what is going on.
So other Members of the committee are reminded that under
the committee rules opening statements may be submitted for the
record.
[The statement of Honorable Jackson Lee follows:]
Statement of Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee
May 24, 2022
Chairman Thompson, and Ranking Member Katko thank you for this
opportunity to hear from the Department of Homeland Security on DHS
representatives on initiatives that facilitate travel for international
visitors to the United States, as well as steps taken at airports to
protect the traveling public and DHS personnel from COVID-19.
I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses:
PANEL 1:
Mr. Carlos Martel, director of field operations, Los Angeles Field
Office, U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP);
Ms. Karen Burke, Federal security director for Nevada,
Transportation Security Administration (TSA).
PANEL 2:
Ms. Kate Mik, chief marketing officer, Las Vegas Convention and
Visitors Authority (LVCVA); and
Ms. Rosemary Vassiliadis, director of aviation, Clark County
Department of Aviation.
I view the work of the Transportation Security Administration (TSA)
and Customs and Border Protection (CBP) as vital to our Nation's
homeland security.
These agencies share the mission of protecting the Nation's
transportation systems and border entry into the United States to
ensure freedom of movement for people and commerce.
The Committee on Homeland Security provides the needed policy
guidance and funding to ensure that the TSA and CBP have what they need
to create and sustain the most effective transportation security as a
high-performing counterterrorism organization.
This hearing affords Members of the committee the opportunity to
hear from DHS representatives on initiatives that facilitate travel for
international visitors to the United States, as well as steps taken at
airports to protect the traveling public and DHS personnel from COVID-
19. Witnesses will also discuss the importance of efficient processing
for tourism.
The work of the TSA is a front-line Department of Homeland
Security, and it is not easy--it can in fact be very dangerous.
Like many of my colleagues, I recall the shooting incident at LAX
that killed Gerardo Hernandez, who became the first TSA officer killed
in the line of duty; and the machete attack at the Louis Armstrong New
Orleans International Airport that resulted in injuries to Senior
Transportation Security Officer Carol Richel.
These incidents only highlight the difficult work that the men and
women of the TSA must perform each day to keep our Nation's airports
and flights safe.
Following terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, there was
urgency to have a whole-of-Government response to secure the Nation's
commercial aviation.
On that day nearly 3,000 people were killed in a series of
coordinated terrorist attacks in New York, Pennsylvania, and Virginia.
The attacks resulted in the creation of DHS, which was designed to
prevent similar attacks in the future by removing the responsibility
for transportation and border security from private entities.
The work of DHS has evolved to include other threats such as the
global pandemic caused by COVID-19.
The COVID-19 pandemic and various travel restrictions resulted in
significantly decreased air passenger volume Nation-wide.
CBP processed more than 44 million travelers in fiscal year 2021,
which is a decrease from 62.1 million in fiscal year 2020 and 135.7
million fiscal year 2019.
Despite the decline in air travel, DHS has expedited the inspection
process for millions of international travelers during the pandemic.
As COVID-19 restrictions ease, the Harry Reid International Airport
is seeing significant passenger growth.
In March 2022, the airport recorded more than 4.2 million
passengers, which is a 66 percent increase from March 2021.
With respect to international passengers, the airport recorded more
than 154,000 international passengers in March 2022, which is an 800
percent increase from March 2021.
However, numbers are still well below March 2019, when the airport
recorded 305,000 international travelers.
According to the Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority
Research Center, Las Vegas received more than 42 million visitors in
2019; 19 million visitors in 2020; and 32 million visitors in 2021.
International visitors comprise about 3 percent of Las Vegas's
visitors.
DHS uses biometric technology, automated kiosks, preclearance, and
trusted traveler programs to streamline the processing of international
travelers.
CBP has enhanced the traditional inspection process to expedite
processing and reduce airport wait times.
An airport's infrastructure, size, and layout determine which
travel initiatives can be implemented.
Some travel initiatives, like preclearance and biometric exit, are
implemented via private-public partnerships, and these also depend on
the airport stakeholders' ability to fund the initiatives. CBP's
initiatives include:

Simplified Arrival.--CBP uses biometric facial comparison
technology to complete their inspection process in seconds.

Global Entry.--Global Entry allows expedited inspection for
pre-approved, low-risk travelers to the United States.
U.S. citizens, along with citizens of 12 countries, are eligible
for membership if they pass a rigorous background check
process.
Members use Global Entry kiosks, submit their fingerprints for
scanning, and complete a customs declaration. Global Entry
kiosks are available at 14 preclearance locations and 61 U.S.
airports, including the Harry Reid International Airport.
In fiscal year 2021, Global Entry membership grew by 4.1 percent
making total membership to 7.4 million people.
To keep up with growing membership, CBP launched facial comparison
pilots at Dallas and Los Angeles airports to reduce the time
needed for processing at Global Entry kiosks.
The facial comparison transaction takes 5 seconds versus the 40-45
seconds at legacy kiosks.

Automated Passport Control (APC).--Instead of filling out
paper customs forms, international visitors can use APC kiosks
to scan their passport, take a photograph, submit biometrics,
and answer CBP inspection-related questions.

Mobile Passport Control (MPC).--The Mobile Passport Control
(MPC) application allows U.S. citizens and Canadian travelers
to use their smartphone to enter their personal information for
inspection.
After travelers submit their passport information, self-photo, and
answers CBP's inspection questions, they receive an Encrypted
Quick Response (QR) code, which they present to a CBP officer
for final inspection. MPC is currently available at 31 U.S.
international airports, but not yet available at the Harry Reid
International Airport.

Preclearance.--Through CBP's preclearance program, CBP
personnel at foreign airports inspect travelers prior to
boarding U.S.-bound flights.
Travelers then bypass TSA and CBP inspections upon arriving to the
United States and proceed to their destination or connecting
flight.
Currently, CBP operates 16 preclearance sites in the Caribbean,
Canada, Ireland, and the United Arab Emirates. More than 2.9
million air travelers, representing over 6.5 percent of all
commercial air travel to the United States, were precleared in
fiscal year 2021.
These advancements in passenger screening and admittance into the
United States have requirements that may touch on international
cooperation regarding how DHS sufficiently allay E.U. governments
concerns regarding their citizens data which is collected, retained,
and used for travel purposes.
U.S. citizens participating in Global Entry has been well-received
by the business community and frequent international travelers because
of the time savings it has brought to their travel.
However, Global Entry has presented challenges especially when the
credential is granted and later revoked without explanation to the
traveler.
This does present privacy considerations as outlined by the Fair
Information Practices guidance that is enacted by the Federal Privacy
Act, and the Administrative Procedures Act that require an agency to
provide due process to citizens when a benefit if revoked or denied.
This should be especially true because the FBI decided in 2004 to
not pursue accuracy as a requirement for the National Crime Information
Center database.
Today's hearing is important, and we should focus attention on the
issue of database accuracy especially for systems of record intended to
approve or disapprove persons for special considerations in public
travel.
Thank you.

Chairman Thompson. Members are also reminded that the
committee will operate according to the guidelines laid out by
the Chairman and Ranking Member in our February 3, 2021
colloquy regarding remote procedures.
I now welcome our first panel of witnesses.
Mr. Carlos Martel is the director of field operations for
U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Los Angeles field office.
In that capacity he oversees all CBP operations in the greater
Los Angeles and Las Vegas area, including here at Harry Reid
International Airport.
Ms. Karen Burke is a Transportation Security
Administration's Federal security director for Nevada. In that
role she is responsible for ensuring the deployment,
management, and oversight of people, processes, and technology
to improve security operations, including here at Harry Reid
International.
Without objection, the witnesses' full statements will be
inserted in the record.
I now ask Mr. Martel to summarize his statement for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF CARLOS MARTEL, DIRECTOR OF FIELD OPERATIONS, LOS
ANGELES FIELD OFFICE, U.S. CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Martel. Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Katko, and
distinguished Members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to be here today to discuss U.S. Customers and
Border Protections efforts to facilitate international traveler
processing.
Facilitating safe and legitimate travel is one of CBP's
core mission objectives and is carried out by CBP's office of
field operations. At 328 ports of entry Nation-wide and 16
preclearance locations internationally, our role is not only a
critical component of National security, but also a significant
driving force of the country's economic prosperity.
The global pandemic caused significant damage to multiple
private and Government entities that depend on international
travel. Travel restrictions to minimize transmission along with
traveler fears caused by the pandemic resulted in 2 consecutive
years of international travel decline. Today, both commercial
and personal travel across our southwest land border have
returned to pre-pandemic levels. Travel across the northern
land border continues to increase, but is still only about half
of pre-pandemic levels. In the air environment, as of May 1,
international travel remains 29 percent lower than this time in
2019.
The pandemic's impact on CBP operations has been
substantial. Limited travel sharply reduced our collection of
user fees, a key resource supporting the cost of CBP personnel.
Thanks to the funds provided by Congress in fiscal year 2021
and 2022, CBP has been able to sustain our critical travel
operations.
U.S. COVID-19 travel restrictions have been replaced with a
vaccination requirement for non-U.S. citizens and non-immigrant
travelers, an action that is contributing to increasing
international travel. As this trend continues, CBP stands ready
to welcome visitors back to the United States.
As part of our preparation efforts, CBP has been
accelerating the implementation of several initiatives to
maintain the highest standards of security while transforming
the international arrivals process to attract visitors,
increased travel confidence and safety, and provide a
streamlined travel experience. I would like to highlight some
of these efforts for you today.
First, CBP continues to leverage pre-departure screening
capabilities and programs. Traveler screening at the earliest
moments of potential travel is important for CBP to identify
and prevent inadmissible individuals or persons who pose a risk
to the United States from reaching our physical border.
Second, the ability to identify and separate low-risk
travelers from those who may require additional scrutiny is a
key element in CBP's effort to facilitate and secure
international travel. CBP's Trusted Travel programs, namely
NEXUS, SENTRI, FAST, and Global Entry, provide expedited
processing upon arrival into the United States for pre-approved
low-risk participants through secure technology, exclusive
lines, and automated kiosks. CBP's Trusted Traveler membership
topped 10 million in March of this year, with nearly 8 million
enrolled in Global Entry. To support growing membership, CBP
continues to improve the enrollment process and member
experience. We have recently implemented remote interviews for
renewal of Global Entry membership and expanded enrollment on
arrival.
Since October 1 of 2021 CBP has completed 52,000 remote
interviews and 160,000 enrollment on arrival interviews and is
working to accommodate increased demand for these options.
Third, CBP has been integrating biometric facial
comparison, touchless and mobile technologies into its entry
processes, including Global Entry kiosks and simplified arrival
to verify identity and streamline processing, mitigate pathogen
transmission, enhance security, and protect the privacy of all
travelers. CBP also offers automated passport control and
mobile passport control that allow travelers to enter their
biographic and travel-related information prior to inspection,
either via a kiosk or mobile app to streamline processing.
Additionally, the CBP One mobile application enables
foreign travelers entering the United States by land to apply
for a 984 prior to arrival, review their travel history, and
check their I94 expiration date on a mobile device. In the air
environment, a new CBP One feature offers air travelers the
ability to provide advanced information regarding hand-carry of
biological materials and/or live pets, streamlining required
document and inspection processes.
Finally, CBP continues to strengthen our partnerships with
industry. For example, in 2020 CBP at Harry Reid International
partnered with Clark County Department of Aviation to establish
and promote the Tussle Initiative, aimed at providing a faster
more secure travel experience and restoring public confidence
in air travel.
Together these initiatives, processes, partnerships, and
technological innovation streamline the arrival experience and
promote the public health of travelers while simultaneously
advancing CBP's ability to facilitate legitimate trade and
travel and identify those individuals who might present a risk.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Martel follows:]
Prepared Statement of Carlos Martel
May 24, 2022
introduction
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Katko, and distinguished Members
of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear today to
discuss U.S. Customs and Border Protection's (CBP) efforts to
facilitate post-pandemic international travel.
CBP's mission of protecting the borders of the United States and
facilitating safe and legitimate trade and travel is not only a
critical component of National security, but also a significant driving
force of the country's economic prosperity. The Office of Field
Operations (OFO) is the law enforcement entity within CBP responsible
for carrying out CBP's complex and demanding mission at 328 ports of
entry (POE) Nation-wide and 16 preclearance locations internationally.
The global coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19) caused significant
damage to multiple private industries and Government entities that
depend on international travel. The United States and other countries
around the world took swift and deliberate actions to limit travel.
These actions were essential to minimize the risk of COVID-19
transmission; however, because of these restrictions along with
traveler fears caused by the pandemic, international travel volume
decreased for 2 consecutive years. In fiscal year 2020, international
travel to the United States in all modes decreased 42 percent from
fiscal year 2019 levels. In the air environment, the decrease was 54
percent compared to the previous year.\1\ In fiscal year 2021,
international travel to the United States decreased 25 percent overall,
and decreased 29 percent in the air environment, compared to the
previous fiscal year.\2\ As of May 1, 2022, travel in the air
environment remains 29 percent lower than this same time in 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/assets/documents/2021-
Feb/CBP-FY2020-Trade-and-Travel-Report.pdf.
\2\ https://www.cbp.gov/document/annual-report/cbp-trade-and-
travel-fiscal-year-2021-report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Revenue from user fees, 94 percent of which are paid for by
international air passengers, support budgets for multiple offices
across CBP. The pandemic caused a reduction of more than a $1.5 billion
in CBP user fee collections for fiscal year 2021 and a projected $669
million reduction for fiscal year 2022, impacting multiple offices
across CBP. This had a significant impact on OFO, for which user fees
make up 40 percent of its $6.5 billion budget. Travel and associated
user fee collections are gradually recovering but are not projected to
return to pre-pandemic levels in fiscal year 2023. CBP is closely
monitoring travel and its impact on fee collections as traveler volumes
continue to increase.
In October 2021, President Biden ended the United States' country-
based travel restrictions \3\ and replaced them with a global
vaccination requirement for non-U.S. citizen, nonimmigrant travelers.
Today, as vaccines are more widely available and travel restrictions
continue to ease, CBP stands ready to welcome visitors back to the
United States. As part of our preparation efforts, CBP has been
accelerating the implementation of several initiatives to maintain the
highest standards of security while transforming the international
arrivals process to attract visitors, increase traveler confidence and
safety, and provide a streamlined travel experience.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ On October 25, 2021, President Biden announced PP 10294,
effective November 8, 2021, ending the travel restrictions under
Presidential Proclamations 9984, 9992, 10143, and 10199 as they relate
to the suspension of entry into the United States of persons recently
physically present in Brazil, China, India, Iran, Ireland, the Schengen
Area, South Africa, and the United Kingdom.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In anticipation of increased travel, CBP is leveraging pre-
departure travel programs, expanding Trusted Traveler Programs,
streamlining processes, and integrating advanced technologies that
support CBP's dual responsibilities of moving low-risk, vetted
travelers through the arrivals inspection process quickly while
increasing security measures.
pre-departure travel operations
For CBP, the activities involved with international air traveler
screening and processing often begin long before the traveler
physically arrives at a POE. They start when an individual applies for
U.S. travel documents and continue as the individual reserves or
purchases an airline ticket, checks in at an airport, and is en route
to their destination. Traveler screening at the earliest moments of
potential travel is important for CBP to identify and prevent dangerous
persons from obtaining visas, travel authorizations, and boarding
passes.
Visas and Travel Authorization Security
Before boarding a flight destined for the United States, most
foreign nationals must obtain a visa issued by a U.S. embassy or
consulate, or, if they are eligible to travel under the Visa Waiver
Program (VWP),\4\ they must apply for a travel authorization through
CBP's Electronic System for Travel Authorization (ESTA).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ The VWP allows citizens from 40 designated countries to travel
to the United States for business or pleasure for 90 days or less
without obtaining a visa.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Through ESTA, CBP conducts advance screening of VWP applicants to
determine their eligibility to travel to the United States without a
visa. This includes screening through the National Vetting Center (NVC)
against Classified and Sensitive information from intelligence
community and law enforcement partners. ESTA denies tens of thousands
of applications every year--an average of 0.85 percent over the past 3
years \5\--demonstrating the importance of advance traveler data and
ESTA's valuable role in CBP's travel security operations. As expected
with the overall decrease in travel, CBP processed 6.4 million ESTA
applications in fiscal year 2020 and 1.3 million applications in fiscal
year 2021, a more than 91 percent decrease from the nearly 15.3 million
applications processed in fiscal year 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ In fiscal year 2018, CBP denied .56 percent of ESTA
applications; in fiscal year 2019, CBP denied .80 percent of ESTA
applications; in fiscal year 2020, CBP denied 1.18 percent of ESTA
applications. The increase in denial rate can potentially be attributed
to the decrease in total number of applications.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Through the publication of an interim rule, CBP is expanding the
requirement for an approved ESTA to land POEs.\6\ Specifically, it
extends the electronic collection of the information requested on paper
Form I-94W to VWP travelers who intend to travel to the United States
by land. CBP is currently in the process of implementing this
requirement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/04/01/2022-
06366/implementation-of-the-electronic-system-for-travel-authorization-
esta-at-us-land-borders.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ESTA personnel work closely with the National Targeting Center
(NTC) and other CBP personnel to conduct screening of travelers before
they depart for the United States.
Pre-Departure Targeting
When a traveler purchases a ticket for travel to, from, or through
the United States, a Passenger Name Record (PNR) \7\ is generated in
the airline's reservation system, which includes information on
itineraries, co-travelers, changes to the reservation, and payment
information. CBP receives PNR data from commercial air carriers at
operationally-determined intervals from 96 hours prior to departure to
scheduled departure time to prevent, detect, investigate, and prosecute
terrorist offenses and related crimes and certain other transnational
crimes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Collection of PNR information from air carriers is authorized
by 49 U.S.C.  44909(c)(3) and its implementing regulations at 19
C.F.R.  122.49d.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, Advance Passenger Information System (APIS) regulations
require commercial air carriers to transmit all required passenger and
crew manifest information before departure prior to securing the
aircraft doors. CBP vets APIS information, which includes passenger
biographic data and travel document information, on all international
flights to and from the United States against terrorist screening
information, criminal history information, records of lost or stolen
passports, and prior immigration or customs violations and visa
refusals. CBP uses APIS and PNR data to identify known or suspected
threats before they arrive at U.S. POEs.
Using advance information from the NTC, CBP plainclothes officers
assigned to the Immigration Advisory Program (IAP) and Joint Security
Program (JSP) partner with host country law enforcement agencies at
major airports to identify passengers likely to be inadmissible upon
arrival in United States.\8\ Using mobile technology, IAP and JSP
officers conduct database queries and coordinate with the NTC to
confirm whether or not a traveler presents a risk.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ IAP officers are posted in Western Europe and the Middle East.
JSP officers are posted in Mexico, South and Central America.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The IAP and JSP programs are based on the cooperation of the
airlines and the host government. IAP and JSP officers do not have the
legal authority that CBP officers have at U.S. POEs to compel air
carrier or traveler compliance. Nevertheless, an IAP or JSP officer's
no-board recommendations to an air carrier regarding inadmissible
travelers are generally accepted and followed by airlines. Providing
coverage of non-IAP airports, Regional Carrier Liaison Groups (RCLGs)
are staffed by CBP officers and use established relationships with the
commercial airlines to prevent passengers who may pose a security
threat, have fraudulent documents, or are otherwise inadmissible from
boarding flights to the United States.
CBP's use of advance information, our pre-departure targeting
operations, and our overseas programs are critical parts of CBP's
multi-layered security strategy to address many concerns long before
inadmissible individuals, or individuals who pose a risk to the United
States, reach our physical border. Upon arrival in the United States or
to a preclearance facility, all travelers are subject to inspection by
CBP officers. CBP officers review entry documents, query CBP and other
law enforcement databases for derogatory information, collect
biometrics,\9\ and interview each traveler to determine the purpose and
intent of their travel, and whether any further inspection is necessary
based on, among other things, National security, admissibility,
customs, or agriculture concerns.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ The 1996 Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant
Responsibility Act (Pub. L. 104-208) authorized the U.S. Government to
use an automated system to record arrivals and departures of non-U.S.
citizens at all air, sea, and land ports of entry. CBP is also
authorized to collect biometric entry and exit information pursuant to
numerous laws, including the 2002 Enhanced Border Security and Visa
Entry Reform Act (Pub. L. 107-173), the Intelligence Reform and
Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (Pub. L. 108-458), and the
Implementing Recommendations of the 9/11 Commission Act of 2007 (Pub.
L. 110-53).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Uniting for Ukraine--Seeking Parole at the Port of Entry
On April 21, 2022, President Biden announced Uniting for
Ukraine,\10\ a new streamlined process to provide certain Ukrainian
citizens who have fled Russia's unprovoked war of aggression
opportunities to travel to the United States. Uniting for Ukraine
provides a pathway for Ukrainian citizens and their immediate family
members who are outside the United States and have a U.S.-based
financial supporter to apply for advance authorization to travel to the
United States and seek parole, generally for a period of up to 2 years.
After eligibility is determined by U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services (USCIS).\11\ Ukrainians undergo additional screening, to
include biographic vetting with the NVC. Upon their arrival at a POE,
each individual is inspected by CBP. Anyone determined to pose a
National security or public safety threat is referred to U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement. If parole is determined to be
appropriate, the individual will generally be paroled for a period of
up to 2 years and may have conditions placed on their parole.\12\ All
individuals 2 years of age or older will need to complete a medical
screening for tuberculosis, including an Interferon-Gamma Release
Assays (IGRA) test, within 2 weeks of arrival to the United States.
Currently, Ukrainians who present at U.S. land POEs without a valid
visa or without pre-authorization to travel to the United States
through Uniting for Ukraine may be denied entry and referred to apply
through this program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ https://www.dhs.gov/news/2022/04/21/president-biden-announce-
uniting-ukraine-new-streamlined-process-welcome-ukrainians.
\11\ https://www.dhs.gov/ukraine.
\12\ https://www.dhs.gov/ukraine.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As new requirements are added, the processing of a traveler
requires an increasing amount of data entry and verifications. To
balance our important safety and security mission with the facilitation
of legitimate travel and trade that feed our Nation's economy, CBP is
exploring ways that we can work with the public and our travel industry
stakeholders to modernize and improve our processes by expanding
Trusted Traveler Programs and investing in automated and mobile
processing technology that streamlines the arrival experience.
programs to facilitate legitimate travel
Identifying and separating low-risk travelers from those who may
require additional scrutiny is a key element in CBP's efforts to
facilitate and secure international travel. CBP's Trusted Traveler
Programs--NEXUS, SENTRI, FAST, and Global Entry--provide expedited
processing upon arrival in the United States for pre-approved, low-risk
participants through secure technology, exclusive lines, and automated
kiosks.\13\ Membership requires travelers complete an application,
submit to a screening process, and complete an interview.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ CBP operates four risk-based Trusted Traveler Programs that
facilitate the entry of pre-approved travelers in the United States.
The programs are Global Entry, NEXUS, SENTRI, and FAST. All of the
programs improve security and provide streamlined member processing,
but each program is unique in its location and mode of transportation
for the traveler.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CBP's Trusted Traveler Programs membership topped 10 million in
March 2022. Global Entry is CBP's largest Trusted Traveler Program with
7.7 million members and availability at 62 U.S. airports and 14
international preclearance locations. CBP also has full partnership
agreements with 13 countries that allow their citizens to apply for
Global Entry and experience the expedited travel benefits.\14\ Global
Entry members can also receive reciprocal benefits with several
countries including Australia, Germany, New Zealand, Panama, South
Korea, and Taiwan. In addition, Global Entry membership includes access
to TSA PreCheck, a Transportation Security Administration (TSA)
Trusted Traveler Program that allows low-risk passengers to access
expedited screening for domestic air travel.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Additionally, there are four countries [names?] participating
in pilot programs with the goal of reaching full partnership
agreements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Improving Access to Enrollment Options
As part of CBP's commitment to increase traveler confidence and
promote visitation to the United States, CBP continues to invest in
innovative efforts to improve the Global Entry membership enrollment
process and member experience. Most recent enhancements include the
implementation of remote interviews for renewal of Global Entry
memberships and the expansion of enrollment on arrival. The Global
Entry remote interview process enables certain qualified renewal
applicants to complete their interview virtually with a CBP officer
using a secure video connection. The enrollment on arrival processing
enables conditionally-approved applicants to complete the interview
process with an officer upon arrival at one of 66 participating
airports. Since October 1, 2021, CBP has completed 52,000 remote
interviews and 160,000 enrollments on arrival interviews and is working
to accommodate increased demand for these options.
Biometric Facial Comparison Technology
To better facilitate the growing volume of Global Entry travelers,
and in anticipation of increasing travel volumes generally, CBP has
been integrating biometric facial comparison technology into its entry
and exit processes to verify identity, mitigate pathogen transmission,
enhance security, and protect the privacy of all travelers.
Furthermore, CBP is leading efforts, consistent with U.S. law, to
streamline the travel process by providing industry stakeholders with
biometric facial comparison technology to better identify and match
travelers to the gallery of biometric identifiers. This biometric
technology transforms how travelers interact with CBP, airports,
airlines, cruise lines, and other Government agencies with security
functions such as TSA, creating a seamless travel process that is both
reliable and secure.
CBP is committed to its privacy obligations and has taken all
available steps to safeguard the privacy of all travelers.\15\ CBP
utilizes strong technical security safeguards and reduces the amount of
personally identifiable information required in the facial biometric
identification process. U.S. citizens who do not wish to submit to
facial photo capture pursuant to these processes may request
alternative processing, which typically involves a manual review of
their travel documents. Furthermore, if a traveler cannot be matched by
the facial comparison process, the individual must present the
appropriate travel documents to a CBP officer or airline representative
for manual review or inspection.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ For additional information on CBP's privacy protection
efforts, see the Traveler Verification Service Privacy Impact
Assessment, available at: https://www.dhs.gov/publication/dhscbppia-
056-traveler-verification-service.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The pandemic quickly revealed the health and safety benefits of
touchless identity verification processes in the travel industry.
Starting in fiscal year 2021, CBP began accelerating the deployment of
Simplified Arrival, an enhanced international arrival process that
quickly and reliably verifies a traveler's identity biometrically and
retrieves traveler data from CBP systems, providing a touchless
experience. This process reduces multiple touch points for Trusted
Traveler Program members and saves time during the traditional
inspection process. To date, CBP has deployed Simplified Arrival to 199
airports, including 14 preclearance locations.
CBP's biometric facial comparison technology has also been
integrated in all CBP's legacy Global Entry kiosks, reducing kiosk
processing time by 85 percent.\16\ Furthermore, after successful
testing at Los Angeles International Airport (LAX), CBP plans to deploy
its new Global Entry Touchless Portals at other locations around the
country. These new kiosks utilize secure biometric facial comparison
technology, are completely touch-free, and decrease processing time by
94 percent to approximately 3.5 seconds per traveler.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ When compared to CBP legacy Global Entry kiosks without
biometric facial comparison technology.
\17\ When compared to CBP legacy Global Entry kiosks without
biometric facial comparison technology.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Automated and Mobile Technology
Trusted Traveler Program membership and Simplified Arrival are only
two of the ways travelers can streamline CBP processes upon entry in
the United States. CBP also offers Automated Passport Control (APC) and
Mobile Passport Control (MPC) that allow travelers to enter their
biographic information and answer travel-related questions needed prior
to inspection either via a kiosk or mobile app. APC kiosks are
available for use at 22 locations, including most major U.S.
international airports and preclearance locations. The MPC mobile app
is available to U.S. citizens and Canadian visitors at 34 POEs (30
airports and 4 seaports). In fiscal year 2021, more than 3 million
travelers used APC kiosks and approximately 1.1 million trips were
processed using MPC, accounting for almost 2.8 percent of all air
travelers entering the United States.
Since its release in October 2020, the CBP One mobile application
has offered several benefits for travelers. While the use of CBP One
was limited while travel was limited during the pandemic, the app
enables foreign travelers entering the United States via land to apply
for an I-94 prior to arrival, review their past travel history, and
check their I-94 expiration date on their mobile device. When travelers
who use the I-94 feature arrive at most POEs, they no longer need to be
referred to a secondary processing area for processing. Since the
resumption of travel in the land environment in November 2021, there
have been more than 140,000 provisional
I-94s processed through CBP One. Additionally, CBP recently developed a
bus manifest functionality that allows bus companies to submit their
travel manifest to CBP electronically through the CBP One app,
streamlining the entry process. In the air environment, CBP recently
announced a new capability that offers air travelers the ability to
provide advance information regarding the hand-carry of biological
materials or live pets that require the review of permits and other
documentation, as well as the need for their footwear to be sanitized.
When they arrive, CBP agriculture specialists are alerted of their
arrival, have already completed their review of the documentation,
prepared sanitization procedures, if necessary, and can expedite their
clearance.
With all traveler processing technology, CBP is committed to its
privacy obligations and protecting the privacy of all travelers.\18\
These innovations streamline the arrival experience and promote the
public health of travelers by decreasing touch points in the travel
continuum. These technological capabilities simultaneously advance
CBP's ability to quickly and reliably identify those who may be
inadmissible for entry or ineligible for expedited processing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ For additional information on CBP's privacy protection
efforts, see the APC and MPC Privacy Impact Assessments, available at:
https://www.dhs.gov/publication/dhscbppia-051-automated-passport-
control-apc-and-mobile-passport-control-mpc, and CBP One Privacy Impact
Assessment at https://www.dhs.gov/publication/dhscbppia-068-cbp-one-
mobile-application.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
cbp staffing to facilitate and secure international travel
Reduced travel due to COVID-19 sharply decreased CBP's collection
of user fees, a key resource supporting the cost of CBP personnel at
our Nation's 328 POEs. Thanks to the funds provided by Congress in
fiscal year 2021 and 2022, CBP has been able to sustain our security
and facilitation postures at POEs across the Nation and beyond at
preclearance facilities, ensuring international travel processing at
the highest levels of safety and security. Your support helped avoid
significant damage to the U.S. economy and ensured that CBP will have
adequate personnel in place to facilitate increasing volumes of
international travel.
OFO's Workload Staffing Model (WSM) is a valuable data analysis
tool to help calculate the estimated number of CBP officers needed to
optimally carry out the CBP mission at each air, land, and sea POE in
the United States, to include each preclearance location.\19\ The
methodology captures future staffing requirements for new or enhanced
facilities, technology deployments, and anticipated growth in trade and
travel, and it can be adjusted according to changing priorities, risks,
and threats. CBP continues to evaluate and optimize its workforce
requirements and business processes and will continue to explore
innovative transformation initiatives to assist our workforce in
accomplishing our mission more effectively and efficiently.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ The DHS Office of Inspector General audited the WSM in 2013/
2014. The audit concluded that the model has a ``sound methodology''
for determining staffing needs and identifying staffing shortages.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
conclusion
As international travel continues to return to normal, travelers
will encounter new and updated technology and will be offered new
opportunities to streamline and simplify their travel experience
entering and exiting the United States. CBP is committed to educating
the public about its new innovative technologies and initiatives so
that all travelers can benefit from the multitude of ways we make the
international travel experience simple, fast, and safe. CBP hosted four
virtual roundtables with media partners earlier this year and continues
to share programmatic and operational updates through the web, social
media, and our invaluable travel industry partners. For travelers who
are interested in Trusted Traveler Programs, our website has
interactive tools that guide applicants to the best program for their
travel needs.
CBP's biometric facial comparison technology will be a key aspect
of the travel industry's ability to restore consumer confidence in the
safety of travel. Through appropriate use of biometric technology, air
and sea partners can streamline check-in, security, and boarding
processes that involve long lines, heavy personal interaction, and the
handling of travel documents. Facial biometric technology encourages
contactless travel that involves minimal physical contact, which
increases the safety of travelers, CBP officers, and port personnel.
Security is our core mission at CBP. CBP's extensive screening
standards and facial comparison technologies enhance officer ability to
identify and respond to threats, while protecting traveler privacy. We
leverage these initiatives to the greatest extent possible to
facilitate legitimate travel while identifying those individuals who
might present a risk.
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Katko, and Members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I look
forward to answering your questions.

Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
I now ask Ms. Burke to summarize her statement for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF KAREN R. BURKE, FEDERAL SECURITY DIRECTOR, NEVADA,
TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY

Ms. Burke [Audio malfunction]. Transportation Security
Administration has taken and continues to take in three key
areas.
No. 1, to improve the passenger experience, No. 2, to
enhance security while travel volumes are increasing, and No.
3, to foster collaboration, innovation, and acceleration of
action through the innovation checkpoint here in Las Vegas.
As you all know, airports throughout the United States are
often the engines that drive tourism, business activity, and
the local economy. That fact makes ensuring airports function
effectively and efficiently and securely all the more
essential.
To be successful in that endeavor requires strong
partnerships with our public and private stakeholders. Our
panels today are representative of those very partners and we
are proud of the work we have done together to make this
airport successful in serving the traveling public.
During the calendar year 2021 TSA screened 858 million
travelers, about 1.6 million per day, which represented 69
percent of the pre-COVID pandemic levels. Las Vegas has
recovered even faster, at 78 percent. As those volumes return,
enhancing security and the passenger experience is really
essential. TSA is focused on strengthening checkpoint
operations through ensuring we have both the personnel and the
technology needed to counter the ever-changing threat
landscape.
TSA is grateful for Congressional support, for its
investment in personnel and innovative technologies to improve
the effectiveness and efficiency of its operations while
improving the passenger experience. Some examples of key
technology that helped achieve this: First, computer
topography, or CTs, which produce high-quality 3D images that
can be rotated 360 degrees for a more thorough visual analysis
of a carry-on bag content. These CTs are frequently housed
within automated screening lanes, or ASLs. They provide key
process automation capabilities that enhance the security
checkpoint experience. These features allow for higher
throughput and fewer bag jams and improved passenger
experience.
Second, advanced imaging technology, or AIT. This equipment
safely screens passengers for both metallic and non-metallic
threats, such as weapons and explosives, without physical
contact. Enhancements to the threat detection algorithms lower
the false alarm rate, which is exciting because it means fewer
passengers are going to have pat-downs and there will be less
false alarm rates, which will improve throughput and the
customer experience.
Next, credential authentication technology, or the CAT
machine. Many of you probably experienced that already. It
automatically verifies identification documents presented by
the passenger and confirms the passenger's flight information
without having to look at the boarding pass.
All these pieces of equipment, and more, are housed in the
innovation checkpoint. The innovation checkpoint was
established in September 2019 and unveiled in Terminal 3 here
at Las Vegas. The innovation checkpoint, which some of you had
the opportunity to visit yesterday, is an excellent example of
public and private sectors working together in tandem.
Partnerships with our airport director and the Clark County
Department of Aviation, as well as local industry, continued to
make this checkpoint one of TSA's best options for continuously
improving screening technology and procedures to advance both
the passenger experience and security effectiveness.
The innovation checkpoint is a one-of-a-kind checkpoint
that serves as the demonstration site for TSA to assess
multiple processes and technology requirements within a live
checkpoint environment. It truly is one-of-a-kind I think in
the United States and maybe even the world.
In closing, we are grateful for the support of Congress
that has enabled us to continue to advance and improve
technology and the tools that we are able to provide to our
TSOs and the work force that ensures the secure and efficient
screening of passengers.
Thank you and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Burke follows:]
Prepared Statement of Karen R. Burke
May 24, 2022
Good morning, Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Katko, and
distinguished Members of the committee. I appreciate the opportunity to
appear before you today and to provide updates on steps the
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) is taking to enhance
security while travel volumes increase, our plans to improve the
passenger experience, and on-going initiatives being carried out at our
innovation checkpoint.
Within the aviation network, TSA is responsible for the security of
more than 430 Federalized airports with screening services forecasted
this summer servicing over 24,000 domestic flights and nearly 3,300
outbound international flights per day. Nation-wide, TSA routinely
screens more than 2 million passengers and 1.4 million checked items
daily for explosives and other dangerous items. During calendar year
2021, TSA screened 585.3 million travelers, an average of about 1.6
million passengers per day, which represents 69 percent of pre-COVID-19
pandemic levels in 2019. On average, 97.6 percent of non-TSA PreCheck
passengers waited less than 20 minutes at airport security checkpoints,
while 96.2 percent of TSA PreCheck passengers waited less than 5
minutes in those lanes. We enrolled 7 new airlines and 1.8 million
individuals in the TSA PreCheck expedited screening program, bringing
the total number of Known Traveler Number holders to more than 27
million.
Locally, during calendar year 2021, TSA Harry Reid International
Airport (LAS) screened 18.6 million travelers, or about 51,000 each
day, which represents 78 percent of pre-COVID pandemic levels in 2019.
On average, 98.2 percent of non-TSA PreCheck passengers waited less
than 20 minutes at airport security checkpoints, while 99.9 percent of
TSA PreCheck passengers waited less than 5 minutes in those lanes.
During the period of January 1 to May 1, 2022, TSA personnel have
prevented more than 1,900 firearms (85 percent were loaded) from being
carried into airplane passenger cabins or the secure area of airports.
Since July 2021, TSA has trained almost 1,500 flight crew members in
Crew Member Self-Defense training to address increasing trends in
unruly passengers. TSA also partnered with the Federal Aviation
Administration to rescind TSA PreCheck eligibility for passengers who
are disruptive aboard flights or during security screening process.
TSA has continued deployment of Credential Authentication
Technology (CAT) with 101 additional units (total 1,621 in the field)
and deployed an additional 52 (total of 357 in the field) Computed
Tomography (CT) scanners, which significantly improves detection while
also allowing travelers to proceed through security screening with
reduced physical contact. TSA is also very focused on strengthening
checkpoint operations through the development and acquisition of new
technology in order to counter the ever-changing threat. The fiscal
year 2023 President's budget request, if enacted, will enable TSA to
continue investing in innovative technologies and processes to improve
the effectiveness of its operations. This includes requesting funding
for the Checkpoint Property Screening System (CPSS) program for
checkpoint CT investments and the On-Person Screening (OPS) Algorithm
Development to reduce false alarms.
TSA continues to evaluate new and emerging technologies that
increase security while improving the customer experience for all
travelers. Technology that we are currently deploying to checkpoints
includes CTs, which enables 3D imaging for enhanced visual
interpretation of a carry-on bag. This imaging technology allows
Transportation Security Officers to get a better view of the contents
of the bag without having to physically open it to determine if there
is a threat. As the checkpoint CT algorithms improve, not only will
there be better detection but also fewer false alarms, ultimately
providing improved checkpoint operations.
Checkpoint CT systems with Automated Screening Lanes, or ASLs,
provide key process automation capabilities that enhance the security
checkpoint experience. Allowing multiple locations for travelers to
place their items and automated return of bins back to the front of the
lane. ASLs have integrated sensors throughout the system to maintain
positive bag control, allowing the officer to remain focused on
screening. The ASL also makes diverting bags for secondary search
easier and smoother. These features will allow for higher throughput,
fewer bag jams, and overall improved passenger experience.
Advanced Imaging Technology, or AIT, safely screens passengers for
both metallic and non-metallic threats such as weapons and explosives
without physical contact. As far as next generation equipment for on-
person screening, TSA is pushing the envelope on algorithm development,
lowering the false alarm rates, developing gender-neutral algorithms,
and making progress on deploying Advanced Imaging Technology (AIT)
systems with new capabilities that offer a more natural hands-down
experience. The improved threat detection algorithms coupled with lower
false alarm rates means fewer passenger pat-downs, which improves
throughput and the overall customer experience.
TSA is also technologically improving the entry point to the
checkpoint, referred to as the Travel Document Checker (TDC). These
investments look to enhance CAT machines with biometric, digital
identity, and self-service capabilities in response to COVID-19 and the
growing availability of identity solutions in the market. These
upgrades to CAT include biometric 1:1 (one to one) facial matching
capabilities that compares a live image capture against to the image on
a credential (e.g., passport or ID photo). TSA is also evaluating a
biometric electronic gate form factor, AutoCAT, that provides
additional self-service and queue management capabilities. TSA is
currently updating all CAT units in preparation for REAL ID
implementation in May 2023.
Other notable advancements include work to establish an overarching
checkpoint built on Open Architecture principles of open data formats
and open interfaces. TSA sees this as the future to diversify the
transportation security marketplace and rapidly respond to emerging
threats.
To support these activities, TSA established the Advancing the
Checkpoint Environment (ACE) mission to provide an operational lab
space that allows new technologies and processes to be assessed
concurrently, to drive decision making with data, and showcase the art
of the possible. On September 3, 2019, TSA unveiled the ACE Innovation
Checkpoint, a collaborative effort between TSA's Innovation Task Force
(ITF), LAS, LAS local TSA, and the Clark County Department of Aviation
in Las Vegas. The Innovation Checkpoint is an excellent example of the
public and private sectors working in tandem to support the travel
experience and as of March 2021, Innovation Checkpoint stakeholders
have hosted 27 tours with various public and private-sector entities.
The Innovation Checkpoint was also the opening event for the Future
Travel Experience, one of LAS' largest conferences, where over 250
people were in attendance. The continued partnership with the Clark
County Department of Aviation is paramount in the success of TSA's
mission at the Innovation Checkpoint.
The Innovation Checkpoint located in Terminal 3 at LAS allows for
side-by-side assessment and evaluation of emerging security
technologies in a live checkpoint environment. Data collected from
these demonstrations is intended to help develop requirements for
future innovative capabilities.
The Innovation Checkpoint showcases several technologies that
enhance checkpoint security and enhance the passenger experience. There
are currently four fully operational security lanes in this one-of-a-
kind checkpoint that serves as a demonstration site for TSA to assess
multiple people, process, and technology enhancements within a live
checkpoint environment. It allows ITF and RCA Capability Managers to
test an entire network of unique capabilities at the same time without
interrupting airport operations and provides an enhanced professional
experience for TSOs. The technologies being tested at the Innovation
Checkpoint are designed to work in sync with each other to avoid an
inefficient security experience.
Three of the current demonstrations at the Innovation Checkpoint
are centered around Customer Movement Analytics. These technologies
currently in the queue, on Lane 1 and Lane 3, provide increased
visibility into day-to-day checkpoint operations and foster local TSA's
ability to optimize the available resources.
TSA is also testing an integrated Ultraviolet-C (UV-C) light
sanitization system, which is designed to disinfect bins as they go
through the ASL's automated bin return system. Bins pass through an
enclosed, metal box where they are exposed to a high-dose of UV-C light
proven to inactivate bacteria and viruses, including COVID-19.
The Innovation Checkpoint Lane 3 and 4 host an Enhanced Advanced
Imaging Technology (eAIT) scanner which screens travelers with their
arms at their side instead of having to lift them over their head while
being screened and displays an on-screen prompt if the traveler is
improperly positioned, allowing officers to provide corrective
feedback.
Finally, LAS is also using digital signage totems at the Innovation
Checkpoint. These totems, which are completely programmable and can be
populated with any approved information, currently display checkpoint
wait times and divestment instructions to enhance both communication
and the passenger experience.
TSA's Capital Investment Plan seeks to continue to invest in
technology that can increase passenger throughput, meet current
detection standards, and connect to a secure network. We will also
invest in research and development for next-generation technologies.
TSA is dedicated to enhancing security and improving the passenger
experience as travel increases to pre-pandemic levels. Through its
consistent assessments of technologies, policies, and processes, TSA is
able to ensure that we can effectively carry out our mission of
protecting the Nation's transportation systems and ensuring freedom of
movement for people and commerce. We are grateful for the support of
Congress that has enabled us to continue to advance and improve the
technology and tools we provide our front-line workforce to ensure the
secure and efficient screening of passengers.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I look forward to
answering your questions.

Chairman Thompson. I thank the witnesses for their
testimony.
I will remind each Member that he or she will have 5
minutes to question the witnesses.
I now recognize myself for questions.
Let me say, the tour I had yesterday was quite informative.
As I kind-of commented, some of us remember the pat-downs, the
puffer, the backscatter, and you know, we have come a long way.
The innovation center was wonderful, the seamless processes
between the airlines and CBP for passenger border, tremendous.
So I compliment the whole team here at Harry Reid for the job
you are doing.
So the question is, are there some other things, Ms. Burke,
that you think Members of Congress could do to enhance this
continued technological development as you see fit?
Ms. Burke. Yes. I think there are two things. Maybe most
important at this point is the issue of pay equity for our
employees because of the fact that we are struggling trying to
hire. It is very important for us to have a very professional
work force that is well-compensated. I would tell you Nevada is
probably a good example. Here in Las Vegas we have been able to
hire to the number that we have needed, but in Reno I have not
been able to hire almost a single person, and we have been
working for probably the last 8 months in order to try to
recruit. It is because of the competition from companies that
have established themselves in Reno that pay $3 or $4 more an
hour, that have benefits as good as the Government and also--
you know, Tesla would be an example--even provide stock
options. So to compete against that is very difficult. Across
our system I know we are having some of the same problems.
So your bill, H.R. 903, would be excellent for us in order
to be able to continue to move forward.
In addition to that, of course yesterday I showed you that
we have lots of great technology that we need to continue to
fund to be able to be able to roll out and refine. Some of the
money that has been approved will allow us to make some of that
equipment just be even better than it is right now. With that
support I believe there is no stopping. The passenger
processing in the airport will be very exciting as opposed to
people sometimes not wanting to go through.
Chairman Thompson. Well, thank you much. You will be happy
to know that all the Members on the panel voted for H.R. 903 so
that our TSOs cannot just become a part of the Federal system
per se in terms of pay scale, but we need to treat them like we
do the majority of other Federal employees. This would be a way
to do. They would receive a 30 percent increase in pay right
off the bat if that bill passes. That challenge you are having
in Reno might not--your member here, Ms. Titus, has been very,
very helpful to us in that situation. But it is the right thing
to do. I was impressed with how the TSOs took pride in
explaining the technology.
Ms. Burke. Yes.
Chairman Thompson. You know, I felt kind-of bad saying but
we really ought to be paying you a little more.
Ms. Burke. Mm-hmm.
Chairman Thompson. So, you know, that is how you really
appreciate an employee, you pay them. So I--we all support
that.
Mr. Martel, COVID-19 has affected the ability to process
international travels. How has CBP addressed those challenges?
Mr. Martel. Sir, internally, this CBP has worked very
closely with DHS and with HHS to establish protocols in terms
of keeping our employees safe, keeping our employees well-
informed on social distancing protocols, acquiring personal
protective equipment, hand sanitizer, that all the employees
operating within airports, sea ports, and land/border part have
the equipment that they need to not only keep themselves safe
but to keep travelers safe. We have also worked with port
authorities, with facility managers in disinfecting our work
spaces, especially doing more redundant and more frequent
disinfections in high-traffic areas, like our secondary
admissibility areas.
We have has a robust campaign in educating the staff in
terms of keeping themselves safe, not only at work but at home.
We continue to do that as we are progressing through the
pandemic and as we see the various iterations of the variants
that spike, occasionally spike in different cities. But we have
a very robust platform, a very robust response for ensuring
that we are adhering to all of the recommended guidance from
the CDC, keeping our employees safe and ensuring that the
general public understand that we are here to protect them as
well.
Chairman Thompson. Well, thank you very much. Thank both of
your for your responses.
I now recognize the gentleman from California for 5
minutes, Mr. Correa.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank my
colleague, Ms. Titus, for inviting us to her district.
I must say that there is an allegation that before I got to
Congress I also had a life and I may have visited your city way
too many times. So I probably--I can imagine a lot of those
bricks that built these buildings probably have my name on
them.
But I represent southern California--Anaheim Angels,
Anaheim Ducks, and Disneyland. Our lifeblood in my district is
tourism. Disneyland by itself accounts for about 20,000 direct
jobs, 99 percent of them being union. So COVID really
devastated our economy.
Mr. Martel, your testimony, you stated the facts, which are
we have gone from travel restrictions based on country to
global vaccination requirements for non-U.S. citizens coming to
the United States. As we move to a possible spike in the summer
season of COVID-19, what can we do first of all to keep our
employees, our travelers safe in terms of coming into the
United States? What else can we do as the Federal Government?
No. 2, how can we get the message out to the rest of the
world that we continue to employ very safe standards when it
comes to COVID-19 and that we continue to be open for business?
Mr. Martel. Sir, thank you for your question.
Again, to reiterate, I think that we--I believe that we
have implemented robust protocols internally in concert with
CDC in keeping our employees safe. I think that for purposes of
communicating that to the public, we will continue to have a
messaging campaign to ensure that the public is well aware of
what the requirements are. It is an unknown as to how COVID-19
or its variants will affect us in the immediate future, but we
do not anticipate any reversal--or I am not aware of any
reversal, any change to the current vaccination policy. So I
don't see us reverting back to previous travel restrictions.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Martel, if I can interrupt your answer, the
majority--the No. 1 international source of travel through my
district is through Mexico. I get a lot of phone calls from
people from outside the country saying can we travel, what do
we need to do. So there is still a lot of, you know,
apprehension about coming to the United States as tourists
because folks are not quite sure that even if they have a visa
if they are going to be able to get past the border to get into
the United States.
So I am trying to figure out how we can help you help our
industry, tourist industry, get the message out that if you
have your vaccinations you can come to the United States.
Mr. Martel. Sir, I believe that that can be done in concert
with DHS, CBP, and the Department of State and all of the
agencies that are involved in granting visas or in fostering,
encouraging travel, getting the message out that essential and
non-essential travel is allowable from Mexico so long as----
Mr. Correa. And other----
Mr. Martel [continuing]. Travelers have vaccinations. I
think it would be a messaging campaign that we could do
internally with the consulates, the affected consulates, but I
think there could be a broader messaging campaign that perhaps
Members of Congress could support.
Mr. Correa. Would you say there is a role there too for
private entities, like the U.S. Travel Association, Vegas
Travel Association, oversea travel to have a coordinated
message to makes sense to folks wanting to come to the United
States and enjoy what we have to offer?
Mr. Martel. Yes, sir. I believe that would be beneficial.
Mr. Correa. Do I have any time left?
Chairman Thompson. One more question.
Mr. Correa. Ms. Burke, just wanted to thank you very much
for putting out the obvious, which is pay equity is important
for our employees. I say that because of hiring--not only
hiring, but retention. We want the best trained, the most
experienced work force taking care of our society and
protecting us. Beyond pay equity, is there anything else we can
do to make sure you can retain your workers?
Ms. Burke. I believe some of the technology that we have
talked about and we showed off yesterday, if you were able to
yesterday hear some of the TSOs speak about the experience that
they have with passengers as they are going through equipment
that makes the process easy, quite seamless, they are excited
because the passengers are happy. So their environment will be
improved significantly in working with our public if the
equipment is continued to be procured and able to be
distributed. It is a game-changing situation that we have got
with the improved technology and it is not going to be that
long a period of time before we are able to truly change the
experience that the passenger has.
So I think if you had pay equity and you also had what I
would call an improved working environment because your
passengers are happy, that is probably the very best formula we
have.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Ms. Burke.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Chairman Thompson. The gentleman yields.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Cleaver, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Well, let me first of all thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for this hearing. I am excited about it and I have to
control my excitement because I have so many questions I want
to raise. I thank our colleague, Ms. Titus, for inviting us
here.
I did a wedding in Mexico Friday and I came back yesterday
and landed at DFW. But before I left Mexico I had to take a
COVID shot--I mean--I am sorry, a COVID exam, but when I landed
in Dallas nobody asked me for anything. I just--I walked just
right through after I went through Customs. Customs did not ask
for anything. Is that--did I miss something or is this--or did
somebody mess up? Because there were 7 people in my party and
none of us were asked to give the paperwork. I don't--I mean I
am--you are not responsible, I am just--I am just trying to
find out what is required and what is not.
Mr. Martel. Sir, thank you for your question.
I do not believe you missed anything. Our current travel
policy, the airlines are responsible for adjudicating
vaccinations. So upon your arrival our officers would not
necessarily ask you whether or not you have been--if you have
had a COVID shot.
Mr. Cleaver. OK. Thank you. I feel better.
Now, look, I am not Fred Flinstone, I am not troglodytic,
but, you know, the biometric technology is amazing when I read
about it. Are you hearing any apprehensions about the same
thing we heard about taking the COVID shot, that this is an
invasion of my privacy, I ought to be able to do what I want to
do, and so forth? When somebody--you know, voice recognition, I
think visual recognition--and probably something else I can't
even remember--are there any concerns or complaints as we move
into this biotechnology era? Either one.
Mr. Martel. Sir, from the CBP side of the house, not a lot
of apprehension or concern. Obviously there are travelers that
opt out and decide that they do not want to subject themselves
to facial comparison, but for the most part and based on my
experience within my field office, the traveling public have
been very receptive. In fact they actually like the ease with
which they can be processed through facial comparison as
opposed to having to go through the administrative process of
presenting documents or having to pull identifications out. We
have heard nothing but good things from the traveling public as
well as stakeholders and airlines on the efficiency that
biometric technology has done to improve air travel.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you.
I am wondering--I mean this is obviously a high-traffic
airport. We are opening up a new airport in Kansas City
hopefully. It seems like we have been working on it for 36
years, but I think we are scheduled to open next year. I am
hoping at least that we are thinking futuristically and how can
we make this one of the most secure airports in the country. If
someone asks you some suggestions on technology that would make
it a smoother place through which travelers went, what would
you suggest, Ms. Burke?
Ms. Burke. Well, there have been several airports that have
had major renovations or new airports. We are able to really
have, for instance, airport directors, come here to visit. We
put them through the innovation checkpoint so they can look at
all the new technology. Now, it depends upon how big your purse
is, but if you have the ability, for instance, to purchase some
ASLs to go along with the CTs, or AITs that are more advanced,
you can donate those TSA and be able to install them in your
airport. We at this point don't have all the funding available
to be able to do that in every place, but the airports can take
that initiative and many of them have, whether it be at Salt
Lake or LaGuardia or other places that have very new
facilities. They have been able to develop funding and be able
to donate that equipment at the highest technology that we
have.
Mr. Cleaver. Do you happen to know whether KCI has come
through?
Ms. Burke. They have not been through here yet, but I
certainly invite them and would love to have anybody who is
interested in getting a tour, because I think it is so
marvelous to see the kind of progress that we have been able to
make and the opportunity that is there.
Mr. Cleaver. I will make sure to make the request and I
will come back with them. Try to get us scheduled at time when
the Temptations are going to be in a show.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Langevin from Rhode Island for 5
minutes.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank our
witnesses for their testimony today.
I will begin with Mr. Martel if I could. CBP reported a 97
percent match rate for biometric processing in fiscal year
2021. I wanted to know, what are the false positive and false
negative rates of biometric identifications systems used at
U.S. airports? Are there certain factors that cause these rates
to increase with certain passenger groups?
Thank you for holding this very important hearing, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Martel. Sir, with regard to your question, I would have
to defer to the subject-matter experts to provide a technical
response with match rates and what goes into how people match
versus how we have mismatches. We can certainly get back to you
at that, sir.
Mr. Langevin. OK. I look forward to those responses. I
think understanding those false positive and false negative
rates are very important to a confidence that the system is
working as it should.
But, Mr. Martel or Ms. Burke, for what duration and with
what security controls are in place does DHS store biometric
passenger data?
Ms. Burke. Well, TSA has a policy with regard to any of the
information from biometric processing that we, as soon as the
passenger leaves, that TDC position, we delete the information.
So we do not maintain it at all, which from a privacy
standpoint we felt was the best position to be able to take to
make sure there was no concern.
Mr. Langevin. I see. So no storing of data whatsoever?
Ms. Burke. No.
Mr. Langevin. OK. Well, that answers my question. That is
something else that is very important. The privacy concerns, as
well as--I thought this was going to be a cybersecurity risk
here and I wanted to understand the level of risk and that we
were taking extraordinary steps to protect the information. But
if we are not storing it, all the better.
Mr. Chairman, I think those are my questions for right now,
so I will yield back the balance of my time.
Again I thank our witnesses for their testimony today and
for the work that they are doing on behalf of the country.
Mr. Chairman, again, thank you for--and the Ranking Member
for holding this hearing.
I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
Mr. Martel, did you want to respond to the other half of
that?
Mr. Martel. Yes, sir. Thank you.
Sir, I would say for U.S. citizens the images that go into
the cloud are deleted in short order or immediately, but they
are kept no longer than 12 hours by policy. For visitors, it is
the same accord, but they are kept no longer than 14 days.
We have protocols in place to ensure that these images are
being deleted from our systems. We have audits in place to
ensure that that process is being done not only internally but
by the carriers that may possess that information, you know,
for purposes of boarding people biometrically.
We have conducted and have privacy risk assessments to
ensure that we have all the proper encryption, security
protocols in place to ensure the privacy of international
travelers.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes our host Congress Member, Ms. Titus,
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
witnesses.
All this technology is great. I think I am a Luddite. I am
not sure about the Reverend, but I am low-tech. So I appreciate
what all you all do. But I want to take a step back before you
encounter the technology. With international travelers, here at
Harry Reid, they often land--these planes land in the middle of
the night and then the people are left on the tarmac because
there is nobody to receive them, nobody to check their papers.
They wait for hours. This is not a good experience as we try to
increase international tourism.
I think that you will from the convention center, they have
even offered to pay overtime to get some of the officers there
so people could be processed sooner.
Is there any way, I would ask you, Mr. Martel, to have some
kind of collaborative agreement so we can get people to be
there and check people in? Then they can take advantage of all
this technology. But we have got to get them off the plane
first to have somebody there to greet them.
Mr. Martel. Ma'am, thank you for your question.
Yes, we work very closely with the airlines as well as the
convention center to ensure that any air carriers or flights
that are coming in not only have approved landing rights, but
that we are coordinating the arrival times so that no one is
left waiting on board and people are allowed to come into the
Federal inspection service area. We historically have adjusted
our hours when requested to help accommodate that. But we have
also established the Reimbursable Services Program here at
Harry Reid so in the even that a flight is arriving well before
or well after hours, outside of our normal operating hours,
there is a mechanism in which the airline, through the Port
Authority, can pay for the staffing that is needed to clear the
flight.
Again, we do our best to try to do that on shift or with
our own resources, but when--in situations were we need to, we
will rely on the RSP program.
Ms. Titus. Anything to add to that, Ms. Burke?
Ms. Burke. I believe with arrivals we actually staff 24
hours a day and we look at the flight schedules before-hand so
that we know exactly what carrier arrival patterns are so that
we are in a position to be able to have people available to do
any processing. Perhaps an internal group has a connection and
they are going on to another destination, we will always have
the staffing available because of the fact that we do staff 24
hours a day. It is far more limited in the wee hours of the
morning to have passengers to process, but that is certainly
one of the things we take great pride in working with the
airlines closely to make sure we know those schedules and if
there is any deviation, they notify our coordination centers so
that we can adjust and make sure that we have adequate people.
Ms. Titus. As we try to get more international flights into
Las Vegas, I think that will be important. Maybe look at those
arrangements, if we can enhance them anyway.
I know that TSA works well with PreCheck and all, but we
have heard more complaints about Global Entry. One of the
problems seems to be the backlog in the application process.
Some of that was COVID, some I don't know. Maybe you can
address it.
Mr. Martel, are you trying to do anything about that
backlog? Have you gotten it down? How can we help?
Mr. Martel. Yes, ma'am. Thank you for the question.
CBP has been working on addressing the backlog. We have
done this through remote interviews for Global Entry renewals,
we have been advocating enrollment on arrival at over 100
airports. So as I said earlier, we process roughly 160,000
travelers that way. But we are also expanding our enrollment
centers, we are opening up new enrollment centers at different
locations. Within my AOR we are opening up two new enrollment
centers to help adjudicate and reduce the backlog.
So we are actively involved. That is happening across the
Nation at different ports of entry.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
One last question, going back to Mr. Langevin, talking
about the privacy and the technology. It is often whack-a-mole,
you come up with a new technology and then the criminal
elements learn how to take advantage of it and then you have
got to keep moving.
Have you had this experience? How do you deal with it? Is
it a problem? Both of you.
Ms. Burke. I was going to say, for TSA we continually test.
In fact, an example that we gave yesterday was we had law
enforcement come with a bag full of fake credentials, and some
of them very sophisticated, and the equipment that we have and
the software caught every one of them. So the ability to be
accurate has gotten to be very sophisticated and very limited
opportunity for people to be able to access with fake
credentials.
Mr. Martel. Ma'am, on the CBP side I agree with Ms. Burke.
Our technology actually has improved our ability to detect
imposters, to detect false documents. The facial comparison
technology is phenomenal and it rules out the human error part.
So I would say, if anything, this technology has been put in
place to enhance security and to ensure that we are addressing
those very same concerns.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from New Jersey, Ms.
Watson Coleman.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
Rep. Titus for inviting us. I wish I were there. I wish I had
the opportunity to see all of the things that you are talking
about because I don't have that technical vision in my head. So
I need to see it for myself.
But I do have a couple of quick questions.
Mr. Martel, when I first got on this committee, Mr.
Thompson used to raise this question of biometrics and
inaccuracy as related to identifying people of color, as to who
they are. Have things changed so that there is less error?
Because I haven't heard Mr. Thompson ask about this question
today. I am just wondering, has something remarkably improved
so that that is not an issue or a complaint?
Mr. Martel.
Mr. Martel. Ma'am, I am not entirely informed or
knowledgeable on that particular issue. I can certainly look
into it and get back to you on if there has been any
differences with regard to how the technology works based on
color.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
What about you, Ms. Burke?
Ms. Burke. I also would have to refer to the technical
issues and the experts and would be glad to get back to you
with some information.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
Mr. Martel, Mr. Cleaver asked you a question, he said that
when he returned from Mexico no one queried him as to whether
or not he has his COVID vaccines or a COVID test. You commented
that people come on international flight have to be vaccinated.
But that didn't happen in this case. Is that because he is an
American citizen? Or did I misunderstand your answer to his
question?
Mr. Martel. No, you did not, ma'am. That is correct.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. So if you are an American----
Mr. Martel. He is----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. I am sorry. What is correct?
Mr. Martel. Ma'am, the vaccination requirement at airports,
they are--the responsibility is placed on the airline to ensure
that any documents that are required are in order. They do that
in consultation with the CDC. So upon arrival in the air
environment we would not necessarily ask for that information.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. So even international travelers that
you said must be vaccinated in order to come into our country,
you don't ask that. By the mere fact that they came in on that
airplane, that airline has already taken care of that issue? Is
that what you are saying?
Mr. Martel. That is correct, ma'am.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. OK. Last kind-of question I have is--
and that is for both of you--are you both really under--are you
really, really understaffed? If so, to what degree? I want to
know how to be helpful.
Mr. Martel. Ma'am, from the CBP----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Are you down 500, are you down 900,
are you down--what?
Mr. Martel. On the CBP side, ma'am, in terms of the
staffing, the actual vacancies, I would have to get back to you
with those actual numbers. What I can say is that although we
support the President's budget, as international travel resumes
and as passenger counts meet or exceed pre-pandemic levels, CBP
could certainly or can always use additional staffing.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
Ms. Burke, could you respond?
Ms. Burke. Yes. First, I would respond locally to say that,
again, what we did was to overhire at McCarran so that we could
loan people to Reno.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Mm-hmm.
Ms. Burke. So we have balanced out between our State the
resources that we need to be fully staffed.
From a system standpoint, and I could not give you an exact
number, but we have many large cities that have had many of the
problems others are having in trying to hire. So we are under
what would be an ideal amount of manpower and we are doing our
best to spread the resources, as I have done in Nevada, across
the entire country. So we may have--somebody has an overage, we
may share that with another airport in order to bring them up
to a higher level of staffing. That is kind-of our mitigation
plan as we go into this summer. But solving that problem----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Yes, we would have to pay additional
costs associated with moving that employee, right?
Ms. Burke. Yes. You would have an additional cost for that
period. It is a short-term solution and hopefully we will find
the longer-term solution with the bill that has been proposed
by Chairman Thompson.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. I certainly am within
support of that bill.
Thank you. I think my time is up.
I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The gentlelady
yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Florida, Mrs.
Demings, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Demings. Well, thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Look,
as a former police chief, I won't confirm or deny how many
times I have been to Las Vegas, but I do appreciate Ms. Titus
for hosting us today and so appreciate our witnesses. Chairman,
as always, thank you for your leadership.
I too represent Orlando, Florida, one of the busiest
airports. I was also assigned to Orlando International for
several years as a police captain. I was assigned during 9/11,
so I have certainly had an opportunity to work with CBP as well
as involved in the formulation discussions and plans for the
TSA. So this subject is of course very, very important to me.
You know, we are so excited about the technologies. It
certainly has changed the way that we now do business in terms
of employees being able to be much more efficient, I think
effective, but also in terms of our level of security. But I
certainly believe that our most important resource is and
always will be the boots on the ground, the men and women who
do the job.
Ms. Burke, I have heard you talk about some of the
challenges in terms of pay, with some of the private
corporations that are much more enticing. I understand that. In
Orlando, like Las Vegas and Los Angeles, the cost of living has
certainly increased and the general schedule locality pay has
failed to reflect local market conditions. So I would think
that as persons are looking where they are going to work or
where they are going to live, that certainly comes into play.
So I would love to hear from both of you how that has
affected your ability to recruit, but I would also like to hear
a little bit more about your attrition rates and what are some
of the other reasons that the men and women of your various
agencies will stay or leave.
Ms. Burke. [Audio malfunction] California, it is much
higher. So sometimes we pull people from California that want
to work in Nevada and the advantage--one advantage we have, it
doesn't match the California rate, but we don't have State tax
here. So every State is unique with what it has to offer in the
way of a total compensation package. But we found that most of
our workers we hire locally, they are established in Las Vegas,
they intend to stay here.
We have with the rates of pay being a challenge found that
our turnover rate has been up over 25 percent in a number of
months this year. It goes in spurts. But we have been able--we
are a service-oriented kind of city, and so we do have a number
of workers who are anxious to be hired by the government. We
still have very strong benefits to offer compared to some other
of the casinos, et cetera, in comparison.
So I think that is why we have been a little more
successful here in being able to hire, just because our
packages can be quite good. But other cities, that is not true.
So, again, the bigger problem, it really has to be addressed in
a different way than just the individual situation here in
Nevada.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you.
Mr. Martel.
Mr. Martel. Thank you for the question, ma'am.
Well, I could tell you from my experience in the Los
Angeles field office, you know, we did struggle many years ago
with hiring individuals into Los Angeles on these National
announcements that recruited people from other States. About
2\1/2\-3 years ago we began a local campaign to hire Angelinos,
or people who reside in California as opposed to doing National
announcements and in addition to that we also began heavy
recruiting of veterans through our veteran recruitment
announcements. I can say that that really turned our vacancy
rate and offset our attrition rates tremendously. We carried an
attrition rate years before of 10 percent, sometimes more,
based on our inability to hire people because of the cost of
living in Los Angeles. I am happy to say that today I am fully
staffed, and not only fully staffed because of the local
efforts by the men and women of the Los Angeles field office
who are involved in our recruitment methods, but we have a very
healthy and robust pipeline for, you know, the coming months,
the coming year in terms of people who are ready, available,
and have passed, you know, our preliminary requirements for
employment.
But to your point, ma'am that does continue to be a
challenge Nation-wide. I think that each field office does
things differently. But from the Los Angeles perspective, we
have really taken a local approach to not only recruit people
from the greater Los Angeles area, but also capitalize on the
men and women who have proudly served our country in our Armed
Forces.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much.
Mr. Chairman, I believe my time is up. Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. The gentlelady yields.
Let me thank our first panel of witnesses. You have been
thoughtful, you have laid it out. Thank you very much for the
work you do on a daily basis. As I said, I saw first-hand the
good work and I look forward to that good work continuing. Our
committee feels very strongly about your missions. Let me say
that the question both the last two individuals kind-of asked,
and you gave the right answer, but--you know, they said do you
have everything you need personnel-wise and money-wise, and you
did a two-step, just like we expected you to do. But we
understand. But we have to ask the question. I appreciate your
answer. The two-step gives us exactly what we need to know. Our
commitment to you is to give you exactly what you need to do
your job. I assure you that we will continue to do that.
Thank you very much.
At this time I will excuse you and we will ask our second
panel of witnesses to come forward. After they assemble we will
get the gentlelady from Nevada, Ms. Titus, an opportunity to
introduce them.
Thank you very much.
The gentlelady from Nevada is recognized.
Ms. Titus. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
It is a real pleasure for me to introduce to you these next
two witnesses.
First we have Kate Wik, who is the chief marketing officer
for the Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority, LVCVA. In
this capacity she is responsible for directing and overseeing
efforts to promote travel to the world's most desirable city,
Las Vegas, for leisure and business travel. Previously Ms. Wik
spent nearly a decade with MGM Resorts International to develop
their global brand strategy and consumer outreach. So I am
eager to hear from her about how the Convention Authority is
positioning itself to begin this renewed push for travel
internationally and Nationally.
Our other panelist is Rosemary Vassiliadis--you met
yesterday--who is the amazing director of aviation for Clark
County. This is a role she has held since 2013. She oversees
all operations at the airport as well as four general aviation
airports in North Las Vegas, Henderson, Jean, and Overton.
Notably, she is the first woman to hold this director position.
She has been deeply involved in aviation activities in and
around Las Vegas for years, including serving as an appointee
to Nevada's Homeland Security Commission. As a member of the
Homeland Security Commission she has had an inside look at how
we do things in Nevada, and especially in the aviation space.
So I think it will be very worthwhile for this committee to
hear from her.
So I present to you Ms. Wik and Ms. Vassiliadis.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you. Without objection, the
witnesses' full statements will be inserted in the record.
I now ask Ms. Wik to summarize her statement for 5 minutes.
Ms. Wik. Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. Ms. Wik.
Ms. Wik. Yes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF KATE WIK, CHIEF MARKETING OFFICER, LAS VEGAS
CONVENTION AND VISITORS AUTHORITY

Ms. Wik. Chairman Thompson, Representative Titus, and
distinguished Members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to share relevant information on Las Vegas tourism
as an input to your larger review.
I serve as the chief marketing officer for the Convention
and Visitors Authority here. Our mission is to attract visitors
from all over the globe by promoting Las Vegas as the world's
most desirable destination for leisure and business travel.
For context about the size and scale of Las Vegas, of the
world's 20 largest hotels, more than half are right here in Las
Vegas. Across the entire destination here, there are
approximately 150,000 rooms to fill, roughly 20,000 more than
Orlando or New York City for context.
Tourism is our No. 1 economic driver. Pre-pandemic, tourism
provided $36.9 billion in direct economic impact and nearly $64
billion in total economic impact per year to our economy. Las
Vegas is more dependent on hospitality employment than any
other large metro area in the Nation. This reality was
magnified over the past 2 years. In the depths of the pandemic
our unemployment rate exceeded twice the National rate at peak.
The pandemic crippled our local economy and crippled our
community and specifically, when visitation does not flow, it
affects the livelihood of the estimated 2.3 million residents.
Managing through the pandemic has been anything but
business as usual and I am happy to report that 2021 occupancy
levels ended the year roughly 20 points higher than the
National average. Visitor volume rebounded in 2021 to 75
percent recovered and as of last month visitation has recovered
to roughly 85 percent of 2019 levels.
Compared to the overall picture, however, the international
segment has been slower to recover. In 2019 we welcomed 5.7
million international visitors, accounting for 13 percent of
our total visitation. Pre-pandemic this resulted in $4.8
billion in direct economic impact and $8.3 billion in total
impact. Preliminary data suggests that international visitation
in 2021 was just over a million travelers. That is about 20
percent less than pre-COVID volumes. Pre-pandemic Las Vegas
regularly hosted more overnight international overnight
visitors than any U.S. city that is not a major port of entry
and ranked as the fifth top U.S. destination for international
visitors.
Providing air service access is critical to the overall
destination health and to realize the full impact of tourism.
As of this June 2022 domestic air service to Las Vegas will be
more than fully recovered. In fact, Las Vegas will soon have 12
more direct domestic flights than June 2019. That said, we
still have more work to do. International air service to Las
Vegas will only be 79 percent recovered in international
capacity and will only recover 70 percent of international
markets.
This continues to be one of our top priorities and there is
a simple reason why. International visitors spend 40 percent
more on average than domestic visitors. International
visitation supports both business and leisure segments for us.
For more than 26 consecutive years Las Vegas hosted the most
top U.S. trade shows, and trade shows are global in scale. As
one example, CES, the Consumer Electronics Show, typically they
welcome over a third of their attendees from international
markets. When these large global trade shows are hosted in Las
Vegas, the destination has benefited from air carriers
scheduling temporary additional flights and larger size
aircraft from select international markets. The flexibility in
collaboration with our DHS counterparts have been vital to
facilitate these flights and accommodate the demand for these
large shows.
On the leisure front, the expanding breadth of sports and
entertainment will continue to draw visitors from across the
globe. In December Las Vegas was awarded and named host city
for Superbowl LVIII in 2024. In March Las Vegas and Formula One
jointly announced a new Las Vegas Grand Prix for the 2023 race
season. As as context, each Grand Prix is comparable to the
size of a Superbowl. With Vegas, Formula One will now have 23
races in 21 different countries. Our event here is expected to
attract over 170,000 visitors from across the globe and drive
additional tourism above and beyond race week.
These marquee and high-profile events not only drive
incremental visitation, they bring a very affluent traveler to
market. These events often drive an increased demand of private
aircraft on already peak travel periods.
In summary, Las Vegas is poised to continue to grow with
domestic visitation well on its way to pre-COVID volumes.
International visitation must be our focus to ensure success
and ultimate recovery. This is a team effort. Our job at the
LVCVA continues to be to drive demand to this incredible
destination and I am thankful that our partners in Congress,
including Congresswoman Titus, are actively engaging to ensure
resources, staffing, and innovative processes and practices
needed allow our Federal partners to keep up with our growing
demand.
The LVCVA works in close partnership with Harry Reid
International Airport and Director Rosemary Vassiliadis. We are
grateful for our partnership and our common goals of not just
returning but growing international visitation. As a united
team, all of us can build the Las Vegas economy back even
better, supporting more visitors, more jobs, and more economic
impact.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wik follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kate Wik
May 24, 2022
introduction and lvcva background
Chairman Thompson, Representative Titus, and distinguished Members
of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear today to
share relevant information on Las Vegas Tourism as an input to your
review of the Department of Homeland Security's efforts to improve
processing for international visitors.
My name is Kate Wik. I serve as the chief marketing officer for the
Las Vegas Convention and Visitor's Authority.
Our mission is to attract visitors from all over the globe by
promoting Las Vegas as the world's most desirable destination for
leisure and business travel.
tourism impact
Tourism is the region's No. 1 economic driver. Pre-pandemic,
tourism provided $36.9 billion in DIRECT economic impact and
contributed nearly $63.6 billion in TOTAL economic impact per year to
our economy.
There are many types of jobs impacted by tourism: Direct and
indirect including induced jobs. We conservatively estimate that 37
percent of Southern Nevada jobs are supported by tourism, representing
more than 376,800 Southern Nevada workers (direct, indirect, and
induced).
Las Vegas is more dependent on leisure and hospitality employment
than any other large metro area in the Nation. And, this reality was
magnified with the pandemic. In the depths of the pandemic, Las Vegas'
unemployment rate exceeded 31 percent, more than twice the National
rate of 14.7 percent.
The shut-down crippled the local economy and crippled our
community. When visitation does not flow, it affects the livelihood of
the estimated 2.3 million Clark County residents.
size and scale of las vegas
Las Vegas was built to operate in high volume. Of the world's
largest 20 hotels, more than half are in Las Vegas alone. And within
the United States, that is only further magnified. Of the United
States' 20 largest hotels, only 3 are NOT in Las Vegas. Las Vegas has
concentrated volume, like no other destination. In a concentrated area
of the 5-mile ``Las Vegas Strip,'' there are 36 hotels with over 1,000
rooms.
Across the entire Las Vegas destination, there are approximately
150,000 rooms to fill, 365 days a year. This is roughly 20K more rooms
than the nearest domestic competitors of Orlando or New York City. For
comparison, the top U.S. cities by number of hotel rooms include:

Orlando, Florida: 137,000

New York, New York: 130,000

Los Angeles, California: 115,000.
And, Las Vegas hotel rooms are occupied at a higher rate than the
National average. Las Vegas occupancy, pre-COVID approached 89 percent
and the U.S. Domestic Average was 66 percent.
The high volume of hotel rooms combined with high occupancy rates
directly translates to high annual visitation. In 2019, Las Vegas
welcomed 42.5 million visitors. And, the first 2 months of 2020, prior
to the pandemic, visitation was already up 4 percent year-over-year,
putting Las Vegas on pace to welcome more than 43 million visitors
during the year.
Las Vegas is able to operate and sustain high visitation because of
the overall mix of segments of business. In 2019, the segment mix was:

Total Visitation: 42.5 million visitors

Leisure: 35.9 million visitors

Business: 6.6 million convention attendees

International: 13 percent or 5.7 million visitors; A core
segment for future growth.
pandemic recovery & air service
Managing through and out of the pandemic is anything but business
as usual. And, Las Vegas leads in pandemic recovery across multiple
measures.
I am happy to report that 2021 occupancy levels ended the year
roughly 20 points higher than the National average. Visitor volume
rebounded to 32.2 million in 2021, 75 percent recovered from the pre-
COVID tally of 42.5 million visitors in 2019 and up dramatically from
19 million in 2020. As of last month, visitation has recovered to
roughly 85 percent of 2019 pre-COVID levels and May and June will see
that recovery trajectory continue to improve.
Compared to the overall picture, however, the international segment
has been slower to recover. In 2019, Las Vegas welcomed 5.7 million
international visitors--accounting for 13 percent of total visitation.
Pre-pandemic, this resulted in $4.8 billion in DIRECT economic impact
and $8.3 billion in TOTAL impact (direct, indirect & induced).
However, preliminary data suggest international visitation to Las
Vegas in 2021 was just over 1.1 million travelers, less than 20 percent
of pre-COVID volumes.
Providing air service access to Las Vegas is critical to the
overall destination health and the full impact of tourism. Pre-
pandemic, visitors accessed Las Vegas almost evenly split between drive
and fly access. For international travelers, the mix is closer to 60
percent arriving by air with 40 percent by ground.
Pre-pandemic, Las Vegas regularly hosted more overnight
international visitors than any U.S. city that is not a major Port of
Entry. Las Vegas ranks as the fifth top U.S. destination for
international visitors. And, only New York City, Los Angeles, Orlando,
and Miami host more annual international travelers.
As of June 2022, domestic air service to Las Vegas has more than
fully recovered, with 127 domestic markets, 110 percent of 2019
service. In fact, Las Vegas will soon have 12 more direct domestic
markets than June 2019.
This recovery is supported in large part by the leadership of our
Congressional delegation, including Congresswoman Titus. She and other
key members of the Nevada delegation worked tirelessly to keep Las
Vegas and its workforce at the table during COVID relief negotiations,
despite political headwinds from other sectors of our Nation's economy.
The Federal funding ultimately provided through the American Rescue
Plan Act, or ARPA, is helping to build infrastructure vital to Nevada's
economic recovery.
That said, we have more work to do. International air service to
Las Vegas will be only 79 percent recovered in international capacity.
And, will have recovered 70 percent of the international markets from
pre-pandemic from 8 out of 10 previous countries.
Las Vegas will enjoy nonstop service from 15 different carriers
from 18 international destinations, including those in Canada, Mexico,
United Kingdom, Germany, Netherlands, Panama, and Switzerland.
Beginning in July 2022, Korean Air will resume flights from Seoul,
South Korea to Las Vegas with a 3x weekly flight schedule.
International recovery continues to be one of our top priorities,
we anticipate being fully recovered by the end of the year and have
begun to focus on international growth due to its importance to
Southern Nevada. There's a simple reason why this is so important to
the Southern Nevada economy: International visitors spend 40 percent on
average more than domestic visitors.
From the period of 2010 through 2019, international visitation to
Las Vegas grew by 29 percent to nearly 5.7 million annual visitors. Las
Vegas continues to be a ``bucket list'' destination for people world-
wide and we expect visitation to continue to grow into the future.
Markets of focus for new growth opportunities include:

Australia.--4th largest foreign point of origin (unserved
today), grew 33 percent in the same 2010 through 2019 time
period.

Japan.--5th largest foreign point of origin (unserved
today), grew 8 percent over the period.

Brazil.--9th largest foreign point of origin (unserved
today), grew 140 percent over the period.

Ireland.--11th largest foreign point of origin (unserved
today), grew 23 percent over the period.
driving full recovery and future growth
Las Vegas is focused on driving growth over pre-pandemic levels. We
drive demand through an unprecedented product (Vegas, baby!), a robust
and growing entertainment calendar, and through a growing convention
and tradeshow segment. All of which appeal to a global audience.
For more than a quarter century, 26 consecutive years, Las Vegas
hosted the most top U.S. trade shows by a wide margin, hosting 42 major
shows, well over our closest competitor at 17 shows. And trade shows
are global in scale, with many attracting substantial international
attendance.
The Consumer Electronics Show, CES, for example, has noted that
upwards of a third (35 percent) of their attendees were international
in 2019 (pre-COVID). Other examples include:

National Assn of Broadcasters.--26 percent int'l in 2019.

SEMA.--24 percent int'l in 2019.

National Hardware.--29 percent int'l in 2019.
When larger trade shows are hosted in Las Vegas, the destination
has benefited from air carriers scheduling temporary added flights and/
or larger-size aircraft from select international markets. The
flexibility and collaboration with our DHS counterparts have been vital
to facilitate these flights.
entertainment, sports & events
Long known as the Entertainment Capital of the World, in recent
years Las Vegas is more accurately known as the Greatest Arena on
Earth. The expanding breadth of evolving sports and entertainment
experiences will continue to draw visitors from across the globe.
With more than 100 showrooms comprising upwards of 130,000 seats
and another 27 stadiums and arenas with combined capacity approaching a
half a million, Las Vegas has more entertainment venues than any other
city in the United States.
With its diversity of venues, Las Vegas can host every type of
headliner or event, from an intimate lounge show featuring Lady Gaga to
an epic music festival like the Electric Daisy Carnival and its 150,000
nightly attendees.
Las Vegas features residencies by the world's most popular artists,
drawn in by our incredible venues, including Allegiant stadium,
completed in 2020, which hosted 19 major concerts and sporting events
just within the second half of 2021.
And, we continue to pitch and secure new events with global appeal.
Three recent examples include:
Concacaf Gold Cup Finals.--Las Vegas was host to the Concacaf Gold
Cup Finals in August 2021 at Allegiant Stadium. The international
soccer tournament features men's national teams from North America,
Central America, and the Caribbean. The tournament is held every 2
years and determines the continental champion and is broadcast across
multiple countries. The 62k tickets for the final event in Las Vegas
sold out in just 90 minutes--a tournament record.
NFL Super Bowl 58.--In December 2021, Las Vegas was awarded and
named host city for the NFL marquee sporting event: Super Bowl 58 to be
held February 2024. While hosting the marquee event is prestigious and
captures major media attention and is the most watched domestic
sporting event, research has shown that the event has created more than
$500 million in total economic impact for the host city, and more than
350,000 room nights.
Formula 1.--In March 2022, Las Vegas and Formula 1 jointly
announced a new Las Vegas Grand Prix for the 2023 Formula 1 race
season. The Las Vegas Grand Prix will be a marquee event on the Formula
1 calendar and establishes a third race location in the United States,
joining Miami and Austin. And, it will be a night race on a street
track on the iconic Las Vegas Strip. The race is an ideal partnership,
bringing the excitement and intensity of Formula 1 to the Greatest
Arena on Earth. Formula 1 is a global sport with a 72-year history. F1
currently races in 21 countries across 5 continents. The Las Vegas
event is projected to result in over $400 million in direct incremental
spend, and over $700 million in total economic impact.
The Las Vegas race will draw a global audience, both in-person and
watching broadcasts of the event around the world. The event is
expected to attract over 170,000 visitors who will occupy over 400,000
room nights. Globally, the average audience per Grand Prix is 87
million; In 2020 the largest TV audience for a race was 103.7 million.
Within the 5 days of the announcement, the news generated an
unprecedented amount of media coverage and social buzz, showcasing the
global interest and momentum for a global audience.
Marque and high-profile events not only drive incremental
visitation, they also bring a very affluent traveler to market. These
events often drive an increased demand of private aircraft to the
airport on already peak travel periods.
in summary
Tourism is a major economic driver for southern Nevada. Las Vegas
is poised to continue to grow coming out of this pandemic. With
domestic visitation to Las Vegas well on its way to pre-COVID volumes,
international visitors should be our focus to assure Las Vegas' success
and ultimate recovery.
This is a team effort. The job of the LVCVA continues to be to
drive demand to this incredible destination, and I am thankful that our
partners in Congress, including Congresswoman Titus, are actively
engaging to provide resources, staffing and the innovative practices
needed to allow our Federal partners to keep up with this growing
demand.
The LVCVA works in close partnership with Harry Reid International
Airport, and Director Rosemary Vassiliadis. We are grateful for our
partnership and our common goals including the recovery and growth of
international visitation.
I know that as a united team, all of us can build the Las Vegas
economy back even better--supporting more visitors, more jobs, and more
indirect economic impact.
Thank you.

Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
I now ask Ms. Vassiliadis to summarize her statement for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROSEMARY A. VASSILIADIS, DIRECTOR OF AVIATION,
CLARK COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF AVIATION

Ms. Vassiliadis. Thank you very much, Chairman Thompson,
Representative Titus, and Members of the committee. Thank you
for this opportunity to share my views on how to improve the
flow of passengers at U.S. airports.
Given my role as director of aviation at Harry Reid
International Airport, or LAS, I will emphasize my experience
with travel in Las Vegas. However, my points will generally
apply to the needs and challenges at airports across the
country.
I also appreciate your willingness to hear testimonies from
my colleagues representing U.S. Customs and Border Protection,
the Transportation Security Administration, and the Las Vegas
Convention and Visitors Authority. Our partnership here in this
town is unprecedented and our continued cooperation is critical
to the success of the travel industry and the millions of
valued customers we each serve.
This is a great time for air travel. A particularly
exciting time for those of us in Las Vegas as so many big
attractions return, as you just heard, or join our communities'
always busy events calendar. Before the pandemic nonstop
international air service was a great success story. To
reiterate the Chairman's opening remarks, passengers flying to
Las Vegas from outside the country increased every year from
2011 through 2019, peaking at nearly 3.8 million flyers, both
in 2018 and 2019. These are remarkable numbers for a point-to-
point destination that differs greatly from traditional U.S.
gateway airports, such as those in Atlanta, Chicago, LA, or New
York.
In 2019 LAS had nonstop service to and from 12 different
countries spread across 4 continents. Then came COVID-19 and
all of that disappeared almost overnight. Thankfully, our
traffic is in recovery. As you heard, we now enjoy non-stops
from Canada, Mexico, Panama, the Netherlands, Great Britain,
Germany, and Switzerland. We will also welcome back South
Korean flights in a few weeks and hope to add more markets
later this year. Last month our final numbers of international
passengers at LAS totaled more than 200,000, a huge jump from
the 31,000 we reported in April 2021.
We do have high hopes for this summer's travel season, but
our success will require active leadership from the Department
of Homeland Security to ensure our guests do not experience
delays caused by staffing shortages. Despite significant
increases to the cost of airfare, traffic at LAS is finally
nearing pre-pandemic levels. We need a full complement of CBP
and TSA staffing for Las Vegas to both recover and further grow
its core economic base.
So to this end I will propose a few specific suggestions.
First, provide funding to increase CBPs staffing levels at
U.S. airports in order to meet current and future needs. I urge
the Congress to pay for new CBP officers to handle expected
growth. Research from the airport's trade association shows
CBP's work load staffing model already reveals a shortage of
nearly 1,000 officers across the system and we anticipate those
staffing shortages can soon worsen.
Separately, LAS is not a 24-hour port. We need CBP to help
us ensure new international service can be accommodated. We
have recently experienced carriers asking to schedule arrivals
outside of CBP's operating hours in order to maximize their
connecting opportunities and fill more seats on U.S.-bound
flights. As LAS looks at new markets in Asia and the South
Pacific, flight patterns into the Western airports suggest we
will receive even more requests to arrive outside current port
hours. As we recover CBP needs more flexibility to accommodate
such requests.
Last, the airports applaud Congressman Titus and the
members of Nevada's delegation for their recent bipartisan
letter to the President, asking him to fully exempt vaccinated
air travelers from pre-flight testing requirements. As already
discussed, we know that once the United States eliminates this
testing, international traffic will jump instantly. This again
begs for CBP officers at U.S. airports and for keeping CBP
airport staff at airports and not the Southern Border.
We also need Congress to provide sufficient funding to
expand biometric exit solution at airports. Pilot programs are
in place at select U.S. airports, as a few of you saw. I am so
proud to report LAS is leading the way in this area. But
airport facilities were not designed for the needs of a fully
biometric exit program, nor does CBP staffing model account for
officers to implement 100 percent biometric exit programs.
Also, I ask Congress to provide dedicated funding for CBP
to expand and promote Global Entry and NEXUS and related tried
and true technologies to improve passenger facilitation and
security. Also provide funding for the number of transportation
security officers, or TSOs, and the technologies needed to
screen passengers and baggage effectively and efficiently.
TSA's resource allocation plan demonstrates thousands of
additional TSOs are needed to provide adequate staffing at both
these critical operational areas.
Also, stop diverting TSA user fees to utilize other Federal
programs is called for in the administration's budget request.
Nine-eleven passenger security fees now go to the Treasury for
other uses. This is money TSA could otherwise use to hire
additional TSOs.
Also ensure TSA has the funding to upgrade or replace
explosive detection systems, or EDSs. Many airport systems are
outdated and must be replaced. Thankfully LAS has already
received Federal money to begin these replacements, for which I
am grateful. Still, I recommend a prohibition to prevent TSA
from redirecting any unused EDS funds toward other programs
until all eligible airports receive full reimbursement.
Believe it or not, finally, ensure TSA continues to staff
airport exit lanes and meet the obligations to that law
enforcement officer, or LEO, reimbursement program, rejecting
the administration's attempt to eliminate these programs and
shift the full burden to airports. We appreciate Congress'
continued effort to ensure TSA abides by the provisions in the
Bipartisan Budget Act of 2013, which specifically directs the
agency to monitor exit lanes. Likewise, as security threats in
public areas continue to evolve and TSA imposes additional
requirements on airport law enforcement officers, we need
Congress to fully support and fund LEO reimbursement programs.
So these are just a few suggestions and I appreciate your
willingness to travel to Las Vegas to hold this hearing at
Harry Reid International. This airport provides a $35 billion
annual economic benefit to the community and supports, directly
and indirectly, nearly 25 percent of all jobs in southern
Nevada.
My peers and I will continue to work together to provide
travelers with the world-class experience each time they fly,
but I truly believe my proposals will allow us to continue our
recent success.
I thank the committee again for this opportunity to
testify.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Vassiliadis follows:]
Prepared Statement of Rosemary A. Vassiliadis
May 24, 2022
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Katko, Rep. Titus, and Members of
the committee, thank you for this opportunity to share my views
regarding ways to improve passenger processing at U.S. airports.
Whether it involves domestic service or international flights,
restoring air travel to pre-pandemic levels and beyond is essential to
the growth and well-being of America's economy.
Given my role as director of aviation at Harry Reid International
Airport (LAS), my remarks will emphasize my experiences and familiarity
with the travel industry here in Las Vegas. However, please know the
points I share today generally apply to the needs and challenges at
airports both large and small, spread all across the country.
I sincerely appreciate your willingness to hear my thoughts, as
well as today's previous testimoneys of my colleagues representing U.S.
Customs and Border Protection; the Transportation Security
Administration; and the Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority.
Our continued cooperation and partnership are critical to the success
of the U.S. air travel industry and the millions of valued customers
our organizations respectively serve.
Prior to the pandemic, nonstop international air service was a
wonderful success story for Las Vegas. The number of passengers who
came to Las Vegas via foreign-flag air carriers increased each year
from 2011 through 2019, topping out at nearly 3.8 million annual
passengers in both 2018 and 2019. These were remarkable numbers for a
point-to-point destination market such as Las Vegas, which differs
greatly from traditional U.S. gateway hub airports such as those in
Atlanta, Chicago, Los Angeles or New York.
Over the course of 2019, LAS enjoyed nonstop service to and from 12
different countries spread over 4 continents. Then came COVID-19, and
all of that disappeared almost overnight.
Thankfully, our international traffic has begun its recovery. Today
at LAS, we enjoy direct non-stop service from Canada, Mexico, Panama,
the Netherlands, Great Britain, Germany, and Switzerland. We'll welcome
back South Korean service in a few weeks, and hope to add more
international markets later this year.
This April, international air passengers at LAS totaled nearly
191,000--a significant jump from the 31,000 air passengers reported in
the same month a year ago. With most of our pre-pandemic markets back
on-line, we have high hopes for the coming summer travel season, and
our success will require active leadership from the Department of
Homeland Security--especially U.S. Customs and Border Protection
(CBP)--to ensure our international guests do not experience significant
delays due to staffing shortages.
First, I want to congratulate the administration for adopting
COVID-19 health and safety protocols that enabled the wide return of
international passengers beginning last fall. These current targeted,
risk-based approaches are a much more effective strategy than the one-
size-fits-all tactics under the prior Presidential Proclamation banning
nearly all non-essential travel between the United States and specific
countries. The need to be vigilant remains; we cannot permit a
reemergence of the virus to again decimate travel to Nevada, nor any
other States. LAS has invested millions in improvements to the airport
to prepare for the safe return of travelers. Notwithstanding the
significant increase in the costs for airfare, passenger levels at LAS
are finally recovering to their pre-pandemic levels. We need a full
complement of CBP and TSA staffing on-site at LAS for Las Vegas to both
recover and further grow its core economic base.
To this end, I would like to propose a few specific suggestions to
boost the industry.
support customs and border protection (cbp) staffing, technology
deployment, and trusted traveler programs as passenger traffic returns
to international airports

Provide funding to increase CBP staffing levels at U.S.
airports to meet current and future needs.--We urge the
Congress to provide funding for new CBP officers so the agency
is prepared to handle an influx of new international
passengers, and support those air service opportunities finally
returning our airports. CBP's latest workload staffing model,
which used data from the height of the COVID-19 pandemic in
2020, still reveals a shortage of nearly 1,000 officers across
the system. Since the model was most recently run, the pandemic
has subsided and international trade and travel volumes are
expected to surpass pre-pandemic levels in many locations.
Current staffing levels already fail to address the growing
demand of travel and trade at our airports-of-entry, and we
anticipate the workload staffing model will indicate
drastically higher CBP staffing shortages in subsequent runs.
Providing additional CBP officers during this time of growth among
international passengers and cargo will reduce lengthy wait
times, and facilitate new economic opportunities in communities
throughout the United States. On top of that, CBP is preparing
a large redeployment of officers from air and sea ports to the
Southern Border, which will further exacerbate staffing and
workload shortfalls at airports. Increasing the overall number
of CBP officers will allow the agency greater flexibility to
maintain its operational capacity at all ports-of-entry.
LAS is not a 24-hour port. We therefore need CBP to work with us as
we seek schedules for returning and new service that fit into
our port's available hours. We have already experienced
international carriers which sought to schedule select LAS
arrivals outside of our port's current operating hours, all in
order to maximize connecting opportunities to fill more seats
on U.S.-bound flights. As LAS looks to new potential markets in
Asia and the South Pacific, existing flight patterns into other
western U.S. destinations likewise suggest we'll receive more
requests for flights to arrive outside of today's port hours.
During a recovery period in which we cannot afford to turn away
visitors, flexibility in staffing availability within the ports
is critical to both our near-term growth, and future expansions
of air service into LAS.
Last, we anticipate when the United States eliminates pre-departure
COVID-19 testing requirement for arriving foreign travelers,
international traffic will jump instantly. Airlines for America
this month shared a survey of its carriers that estimated
dropping existing testing rules would bring in an additional
4.3 million international passengers and $1.7 billion in
incremental revenue--and could result in an incremental 1.075
million foreign visitors and $2.1 billion in visitor spending.
In addition, with the agency's precipitous drop in collected user
fees during the COVID-19 pandemic, airports greatly appreciate
Congress providing supplemental resources to help CBP maintain
its staffing levels and also continue to on-board new officers
during this difficult period.

Provide sufficient funding to advance biometric-exit
solutions at airports.--CBP has begun biometric-exit pilots at
select U.S. airports, and I am proud to report LAS is leading
the way. But numerous infrastructure, process, staffing, and
funding challenges must still be overcome before a full-scale
biometric exit program can be implemented Nation-wide.
Today's airports simply were not designed to accommodate the space,
technology, and connectivity needs of a fully biometric exit
program, and CBP's workforce staffing model does not account
for the number of officers needed to implement fully biometric
exit program at airports. Airports support dedicated CBP
funding for biometric implementation that accounts for the
actual, upfront infrastructure and staffing investments, as
well as for the on-going maintenance and staffing support CBP
needs to administer these programs with minimal disruptions to
the traveling public.

Provide dedicated funding for CBP to expand and promote
Global Entry and NEXUS and related technology to improve
passenger facilitation and security.--Airports support the
Global Entry and NEXUS international trusted traveler programs
to expedite the processing of passengers departing from
Canadian preclearance airports or arriving at airports in the
United States.
These programs are crucial for speeding facilitation, enhancing
security, and helping to mitigate the shortage of CBP officers.
Expanding the availability of trusted traveler programs to
capture more travelers would allow CBP to focus more on
passengers who have not been previously vetted, thus enhancing
security and processing efficiency. Airports will continue to
work with CBP to identify passenger processing technology
efficiencies, and to promote the expansion of its international
trusted traveler programs.
support the transportation security administration's (tsa)
responsibility to provide security screening, assist local law
enforcement, and deploy new technology

Provide funding for the number of Transportation Security
Officers (TSOs) and screening technology necessary to screen
passengers and baggage effectively and efficiently.--With
passenger volumes next year expected to surpass those of 2019,
TSA needs adequate resources to ensure screening checkpoint and
baggage operations keep pace with growing passenger volumes and
security demands. TSA's resource allocation plan demonstrates
that thousands of additional TSOs are necessary to provide
adequate staffing at security checkpoints and baggage screening
locations. These officers would help mitigate vulnerabilities
associated with large groups of passengers waiting in lengthy
queues at TSA passenger screening checkpoints, as well as the
potential for misconnecting checked baggage and passengers to
miss their intended flights.
Additionally, deploying adequate technology to screening
checkpoints would help TSA increase security efficiency and
effectiveness. TSA also should accelerate the on-going testing,
enhancement, and procurement of new technology that will
increase security, produce significant budget savings, and
enhance traveler convenience. Congress could accelerate the
testing and deployment of new technology at security
checkpoints such as:

Enhanced Advanced Imaging Technology (AIT)

Credential Authentication Technology with a camera (CAT-2)

Computed Tomography (CT) integrated with Automated
Screening Lanes (ASLs)

Explosive Detection Systems (EDS).
In accordance with an Aviation Security Advisory Committee
recommendation, establish an airport security-focused grant
program at TSA to support the deployment of perimeter control,
access control, checkpoint screening systems, automated
screening lanes, and other security technology at airports.

End the diversion of TSA user fees to subsidize other
Federal programs, as called for in the administration's budget
request.--Congress established the
9/11 Passenger Security Fee to fund civil aviation security
services, including the salary, benefits, and overtime of
Transportation Security Officers, as well as the acquisition,
operation, and maintenance of screening equipment. However,
over a 14-year period ending in 2027, a total of more than
$18.1 billion in collected TSA user fees will be siphoned off
to offset the National debt. In the near term, this diversion
will cost the TSA $1.5 billion in foregone revenue in each of
fiscal years 2022 and 2023 alone--funds that TSA could
otherwise be using to hire more Transportation Security
Officers, invest in emerging checkpoint screening systems that
detect more complex threat items while increasing efficiency,
upgrade current systems more quickly as new capabilities arise,
and replace outdated baggage screening systems.
With wait times increasing at TSA security checkpoints, the entire
9/11 Passenger Security Fee should be used to adequately fund
TSA technology procurement and for the TSO staffing levels
necessary to screen passengers and their baggage effectively
and efficiently.

Ensure TSA has the funding necessary to purchase new
explosive detection systems (EDS) to replace outdated systems,
and to continue to fulfill its obligation to reimburse eligible
airports for having installed EDS.--As many EDS have or are
rapidly reaching the end of their useful lives, TSA needs
funding to purchase replacement systems. Thankfully, LAS has
already received Federal money to begin these replacements, for
which I am grateful.
Absent necessary funding to widen this effort, TSA will incur
increasing costs to operate and maintain old systems that
routinely break and adversely impact security and airport
operations. We appreciate the Congress providing funding in the
past 3 fiscal years for TSA to reimburse airports for
previously-incurred costs associated with the construction and
deployment of in-line checked baggage screening systems. Since
these airports diverted significant amounts of money from other
important aviation security projects in order to purchase and
install EDS, we encourage Congress to continue to provide
additional funding so TSA can follow through on its commitment
to reimburse airports.
We recommend including a prohibition that prevents TSA from
redirecting any unused EDS funds to other TSA programs until
all eligible airports receive full reimbursement.

Ensure TSA continues to staff airport exit lanes, rejecting
the administration's attempts to eliminate the program and
shift the full burden to airports.--We appreciate Congress's
continued effort to ensure that TSA abides by the provision in
the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2013, which specifically directs
the agency to monitor those exit lanes where it performed the
function on December 1, 2013. Airports remain concerned about
potential security issues and the significant costs associated
with TSA instituting an unfunded mandate for airport operators
to provide staff to monitor these exit lanes.
In addition, we support TSA installing appropriate exit-lane
monitoring technology where feasible and appropriate.

Ensure TSA has the funds necessary to fulfill its obligation
to reimburse airports under the Law Enforcement Officer (LEO)
Reimbursement Program instead of shifting the full burden to
airports.--We appreciate Congress's continued effort to
preserve the LEO Reimbursement Program. TSA created this
program to partially reimburse airports for providing law
enforcement officer staffing at screening checkpoints because
the agency did not have the funding to do so, as required in
Federal law. Over time, many airports have entered into
reimbursable agreements with TSA to provide law enforcement
officers to support TSA screening operations. As security
threats in the public areas of airports continue to evolve--and
TSA imposes additional requirements on airport law enforcement
officers--it is essential for Congress to provide TSA adequate
funding to fully support the LEO Reimbursement Program.
Thank you.

Chairman Thompson. I thank the witnesses for their
testimony.
I will remind each Member that he or she will have 5
minutes to question the witnesses.
I will now recognize myself for questions.
Let me thank both of you ladies for your excitement about
the job you do and the fact that you have pretty much said in
spite of 2\1/2\ years of something, the numbers appear to be
going in the right direction and with a little help from
Congress we can do even more.
So, Ms. Wik, can you explain to the committee and to the
public at large who are viewing this why a good experience at
an airport is important to tourism like a city like Las Vegas?
Ms. Wik. Absolutely. Thank you for your question, Chairman.
A trip begins with the moment that you book the trip. It is
the excitement that builds inside you, that eager, the looking
forward to what is going to happen. It happens the moment you
leave your door and you arrive at the airport to come to Las
Vegas. Making sure that the process is seamless and
frictionless for travel is incredibly important because we want
these visitors to return. We want them to have a great
experience from the moment they leave their house to the moment
they leave their destination. We don't want an amazing trip to
be ruined by a bad experience on their way out of the market.
We want to make sure that it is, again, seamless and
frictionless for every traveler.
Chairman Thompson. Well, so we are at the airport. So, Ms.
Vassiliadis, can you explain how you work here at the airport
to make sure that that is exactly what happens when people come
to this airport?
Ms. Vassiliadis. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate the
question.
Our motto here at the airport is we are the first and last
look of Las Vegas. We are part of that experience that Kate
just mentioned. From the time that door opens from the jet
bridge to the time it closes back, people are choosing to come
to Las Vegas. What we do is we host a discretionary type of
customer. We are not a transfer airport, we are not a big hub
for the large carriers, we are an origin and destination. They
come to Las Vegas, they leave Las Vegas. Most of our visitors
are on the leisure side of the categories. So, again, they
choose to come here. We want that experience from the very get-
go to be the one that they have chosen and strive for, and then
they come back. So we want it smooth, we want it seamless, but
we want it to be part of Vegas.
Chairman Thompson. Well, thank you much.
One of the things we try to do in Congress was to address
the pandemic in a responsible manner to work with State and
locals so that those who did travel would be protected and
those who worked in travel and the entertainment industry, or
just in general, they would be protected also.
So do you think the COVID-19 protocols for Las Vegas proper
worked? Is there anything else that you see that we might
should have done or could do going forward?
Ms. Wik. Thank you for that, Chairman.
Las Vegas worked closely with local and State government to
make sure that we were creating a safe environment to welcome
visitors. Everybody had a different level of comfort traveling
during the pandemic and we wanted to make sure that we were
following CDC guidelines, all scientific recommendations how to
provide that safe experience. We did that. We actively
communicated that. We came out of the pandemic with a stellar
brand reputation of making sure that we were taking all of the
facts into consideration and creating experiences that we knew
our visitors wanted, but wanted to feel safe about having
during this time frame. So it was a challenging 2 years, but we
leaned into it. Through partnership we made sure that we are
actively developing these guidelines and communicating with
them to ensure that our customers knew what to expect when they
arrived.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
Ms. Vassiliadis.
Ms. Vassiliadis. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
We also looked at it as--again, it started here and what we
started with, being that our town was closed for a period of
time, although airports were still open, we still had airline
crews go through, we certainly had medical staff being
transferred around the country, we had PPE coming through our
airport and to our city. We knew we needed to start with our
employees. We thought if our employees feel safe, then when we
open back up and our visitors come back, they are going to--the
visitor is going to feel that. So we had a very, very
comprehensive, very visible visual invisible program of
cleaning and disinfecting. We actually had our own LAS roadway
to recovery and we had it in the different phases of what we
needed to do from messaging--and you probably still see some
stickers on the floor and throughout the terminal. We did it
Vegas style because we knew when people came back they are
choosing to come back to Las Vegas and they want Vegas. So we
did it with a little bit of flair, poker chips, you know, all
the usual identifiable type of things.
But we were ready and I do think that our numbers show that
it worked, because our leisure traveler--for us here at the
airport our leisure traveler has surpassed 2019 leisure
category.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Correa, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, Ms. Titus,
thank you for the important hearing. This information applies
really well to my district. So, again, thank you very much.
Ms. Wik, in your testimony you mentioned that international
travel has lagged behind domestic travel in terms of recovery.
Can you tell me any specific reason?
Ms. Wik. International travel has lagged for multiple
reasons. No. 1, just different states of COVID outbreaks
globally and the roller coaster of the pandemic and where it
has hit at different times.
No. 2, the lack of confidence on getting to a destination,
being stuck in a destination. Just the pandemic created a lot
of unknowns. I think travelers decided to just wait and see and
see what was going to happen.
Mr. Correa. Let me interrupt you.
Ms. Wik. Sure.
Mr. Correa. That lack of confidence, I have seen that at
airports where families are there. For some reason they are
stuck because of the test. The test is too late. You know, it
is 48 hours, they got in 30 hours and they are stuck. It is a
horrible nightmare.
So I am trying to figure out--the prior panel spoke to the
fact that we are moving from a test to a vaccination scenario
where if you are fully vaccinated it is a different situation
altogether. This should help, don't you think?
Ms. Wik. I personally agree with that. I have seen some of
our trade shows adopt that as well where you can show--you can
pre-register for a trade show, initiate that you have your full
vaccination status, and then it is easy for you to come and go
within the trade show.
Mr. Correa. I was here for the Electronics Association a
while ago and I thought that was good. It was just sad that the
turnout was not what it has been in the past. More important,
primarily because of the international participation. But if
that is a fact, if we can make a difference there--again, I am
going to come back to the same question I asked the prior
panel, which is what can we do to get the message out that if
you are fully vaccinated then you shouldn't have issues coming
or leave.
Ms. Wik. Mm-hmm. Partnering with U.S. Travel Association,
partnering with Brand USA, we have international offices that
we are reinstating across the globe to help us actively market
Las Vegas. It comes down to what many of my colleagues here
today have talked about, a messaging campaign. Making sure that
international travelers know we are open, we are open for
business, we are open safely, and they can access us safely.
That is absolutely the message to get across that we are
working on.
Mr. Correa. What are the factors you were gong to elaborate
on before I interrupted you?
Ms. Wik. I don't remember. Sorry.
Mr. Correa. Ms. Vassiliadis, the same question. Glad that
never happens to me.
Ms. Vassiliadis. [Audio malfunction] of fully vaccinated--
thank you--being the overriding requirement I think will help
tremendously. It will be consistent with many other countries
that, you know, that we could go to. That will I think also
give a veil of ease, like we have seen at conventions when
vaccinations are required.
Mr. Correa. Thank you very much.
Ms. Wik, did you recollect any of those factors yet?
Ms. Wik. I support what my colleague spoke about. I think
it is really about identifying what the barriers are for
travel----
Mr. Correa. Consistency.
Ms. Wik [continuing]. And eliminating them.
Mr. Correa. What rules, so to speak.
Ms. Wik. Correct. Consistently and eliminating barriers and
friction. Let us try to make it as seamless as possible for
visitors to get here.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
One of the other things is repeat business, as you look at
this too. My experiences have been when I run into
international visitors, you know, a certain percentage of them
have been here before and they enjoyed the experience and they
came back. I mean so I think that is part of making the
experience positive. We obviously want to make sure that our
Government doesn't participate in not making it a positive
experience. That is why when they get here, you know, go
through, make sure all the protocols for security and other
things are met. But it doesn't--it shouldn't take 2-3 hours for
me to prove who I am and that I have been vaccinated. So I
think that is where technology helps that process so much. So
that, you know, you can get through in a matter of minutes. You
say, woo, I like this. I think that is the wow factor you want
from a visitor.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Cleaver, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you again, Mr. Chair.
I was stunned by your numbers of the world's largest 20
hotels, half of them are in Las Vegas. That is absolutely
amazing. I understand it. But do the hotels, realizing that
their business begins to take root when people land here at
Harry Reid, do they participate in any kind of organization
with the airport--or that is probably not the right word--but
is there an on-going discussion with or request from the hotel
industry and the airport?
Ms. Vassiliadis. Thank you, Congressman.
You know, the last 2\1/2\ years have been very unusual and
unique. What we have normally done unfortunately was paused,
but it is something that is back on our docket to do, which is
we go out and we meet together partnered with the Las Vegas
Convention and Visitors Authority. The airport meets with the
major resort people and give them an update. We did a little
bit of it, you know, virtually. It was really hard though these
past couple of years, but it is something that we are resuming
later on this calendar year.
Mr. Cleaver. This question is probably--the interest
probably almost exclusively in Washington, but, you know, we
survived, albeit with a lot of bad memories and pain and
heartache, but we--I think we are on the other side, although
there is reason to be concerned about this new explosion of new
cases. But this is more of--some of the information from my
colleagues and me, not just this committee, but all over
Congress and that do you believe that the people, the business
leaders in Las Vegas understand where the Payroll Protection
Plan was originated or was it just some--you know, we got some
money from the Government or somewhere to--you know, to do
something? I mean people--the industry was able to continue
even if--even at a lower level because of the PPP program. Do
you think people have any understanding of how that came about
or where the interest in doing something originated?
Ms. Wik. I think they do. Knowing the dependency of tourism
on Las Vegas, all of our resort stakeholders worked very
closely with State government on understanding what resources
were available, how to weather this storm. We are actually
funded--the LVCVA is funded partially by a room tax. So we work
closely with our resort partners to understand what are those
barriers, how do we work together, how do we bring this
pipeline of tourism back.
So I know there was a lot of dialog between State and local
government, along with the resort corridor on how to maximize
all the resources that you guys were fighting for them.
Mr. Cleaver. Mm-hmm. You asked the question, they have a
lot of contact with the State government and probably don't
understand that all the money that went into the State
government was voted on by the people sitting at this table.
Ms. Wik. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Cleaver. We find that that is a problem. I chair the
housing subcommittee and we send money into the State and then
into cities. As a former mayor--I was mayor of Kansas City--
millions and millions and millions of dollars were spent every
year by cities, including Las Vegas, where they received money
as an entitlement city that came through the Federal budget.
People have--all the people who benefit, probably less than 1
percent have any idea where the money originated. I mean many
of them may--well, the State gave it to us or somebody out
there gave it. Then as a mayor I can tell you, mayors call
press conferences and announce big projects and get praise for
something that they had nothing to do with.
OK. I am not upset. But I am just telling you that--you
know, I think the people here saved this country and probably
99 percent of the country has absolutely no idea. So they can
feel comfortable in hating the Federal Government.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. Yes. But it was the right thing to do,
Mr. Cleaver.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes, it was.
Chairman Thompson. So all of us are Americans and clearly
our Government has a responsibility, especially in times like
the pandemic, to step up and do the right thing. So my
conscience is clear that that investment through the PPP
program and others was absolutely necessary. The support we
gave to the travel industry, especially airlines, I mean, you
know, it was--well, it helps them survive. I mean it was tough,
so.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Las Vegas for 5
minutes.
Ms. Titus. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I agree. It was not just the airlines, it was the
restaurants, all the ancillary businesses that we saved. The
restaurants we saved, the shuttered venues. We sent all that
money. Nevada got an awful lot of money, $1 billion more than
we would have because we included unemployment in the formula,
not just population. But I can tell you, there are a lot people
out there cutting ribbons and holding up big checks that they
got from us and they forget to invite us to the party.
But I am kind-of inclined to agree with the preacher.
But back to my questions.
I am really glad, Ms. Vassiliadis, you mentioned about
Global Entry and about the need for more flexibility to get
people there and on off-hours because I thought the answer to
my question was a little optimistic or a little rosier than the
actual situation is. I think we do need to work on that.
Talking about foreign travelers, not just for business, but
we have found here in the west when they stay longer they kind-
of do a loop. They come to Las Vegas, they go to the Grand
Canyon, they go to San Francisco, and then they go visit Mr.
Correa down at Disneyworld. We market----
Mr. Correa. Disneyland, Disneyland.
Ms. Titus. We market ourselves as part of that loop. I
think that is a way to appeal to foreign travelers. I hope that
we are doing some of that.
I want to go to the smaller airports though. Any time there
is a big fight or now a big ball game or a big concert, a lot
of people fly in here on their private jets. Now you oversee
the smaller general aviation airports in addition to Harry
Reid. Can you talk to us about the security there? I know that
they put out some kind of guidelines several years ago. How
does that work? Is it effective? Do we need to take a look at
that?
Ms. Vassiliadis. Thank you, Congresswoman. I appreciate the
question.
The general aviation airports do operate under different
security rules. So being that they are not commercial airports,
it does not have TSA located there. It is a private business
type of operation where you can hire a porter share, people
have their own planes, you can fly on somebody else's, you
know, smaller type of aircraft that is not on a scheduled
bases. So there is security in the system overall per se, but
it is not the same type of check-in, going through a checkpoint
that you see at commercial airports. So the operation is a
little bit different.
But, as you mentioned, with special events it is a whole
new world for us of what type of activity that we are getting
due to special events. So for the Raider games--and really any
professional sports--there are a separate type of security
rules for a team to, you know, come in as they do. Their
aircraft is usually rather large, so they do operate here at
LAS.
Ms. Titus. Those Raiders fans aren't really like your
ballet crowd, are they?
Ms. Vassiliadis. They are very passionate about their team.
Ms. Titus. So are the guidelines that were put out by TSA
several years ago for these smaller airports, are they
adequate? Or with the new scene do we need to look at upgrading
those or?
Ms. Vassiliadis. Thus far they seem to be working. I don't
have any examples of something that got us into a situation.
You know, security is layers. There are all different layers
from a time a person, you know, makes a reservation, you know,
for commercial versus making a reservation for private. There
are measures that are taken and I am happy to report that we
have not had any incidents due to lack of any of those layers.
Ms. Titus. That is good to hear.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Florida, Mrs.
Demings, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Demings. Well, thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you to both of our witnesses for being with us today.
Ms. Wik, I heard you say loud and clear that you have about
20,000 more hotel rooms than Orlando. I represent Orlando and
represent the Orlando International Airport. So what I heard is
we have some work to do in Orlando and we are going to be busy
doing that work.
I just want to talk about, as we talk about trying to get
back to where we once were, and as I heard both of you talk
about the experience and how important it is, of course we say
that the experience begins, as you indicated, Ms. Wik, once you
book your flight. Certainly once you arrive to the Orlando
International Airport, the experience begins there. We have
certainly done a tremendous amount of work to make that happen.
We are currently about 95 percent of our 2019 passenger
volume. So we still have some work to do. I know that, you
know, this is occurring all over the Nation, but you mentioned
there are different states of COVID outbreaks and people find
themselves stuck in particular places. Have you seen, Ms. Wik,
any best practices at various localities or airports that could
be implemented throughout the Nation? Or anything that you have
seen post-COVID.
Ms. Wik. I think the--thank you for that question.
The No. 1 best practice is just communicating up-front,
setting out expectations of what is required from the traveler
and where and how to meet those requirements. That
communication can come directly from air carriers, it can come
from the hotels themselves, and it can come from the
destination. But it is important to make sure that expectations
are clearly communicated in terms of what is required from
travelers.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much for that.
Ms. Vassiliadis--I hope I didn't mess your name up too
badly--but thank you so much for talking about the importance
of the law enforcement reimbursement program and how important
it is to have sworn law enforcement officers at the
checkpoints. I was assigned to Orlando International Airport as
a police captain for a number of years and that particular
position pre-9/11 and certainly post-9/11 is so very critical.
So thank you for that.
But you also talked about the importance of overall
staffing with TSA and CBP and trying to get back again to that
normal place. Have you also seen any particular issues post-
COVID as it pertains to airline staff or airport staff in terms
of helping us move back to, or even exceeding our passenger
loads and creating that experience kind-of environment that we
all need? Any challenges there as well?
Ms. Vassiliadis. Thank you, Congresswoman.
Well, I guess that is my button.
Mrs. Demings. That is your button, yes, ma'am. Designed
just for you.
Ms. Vassiliadis. Tremendous issues. Starting with the
airlines, we read about that every--twice, three times a week
from their pilots and crews, now it has gone down to the people
who--the trainers for pilots and crew members, to all the
ancillary services that airlines must supply. One that comes to
my mind here at this airport is wheelchair pushers. So there is
an FAA mandate that airlines must provide wheelchair and
special needs services and airlines are just not getting people
to be able to fill those positions. It has taken a tremendous
toll on that experience. It has been very, very hard at an
airport--you know, airports, we are essential services, so we
were all open. We had to come to work, still had to fulfill all
the requirements of staying safe, social distancing, all of
that type of thing, but we still had to have some concessions
open, airlines had to have ticket agents, airlines had to have
baggage handling crews, airlines had to have maintenance. All
of that has not recovered yet. You see it with the delays. We
saw it last month where airlines responded to the need, the
pent-up demand, certainly, you know, to Las Vegas, and then
they canceled. But that was a Nation-wide issue. They canceled
these flights because they simply did not have the staffing to
be able to accommodate all of those flights. That unfortunately
is continuing today. Not the cancellations, they finally got
their schedules down to a reasonable operating day, but what
they are able to offer, the amenities that you get--and I am
sure this esteemed committee flies a lot--you get nothing, you
know, catering. Every part of that experience is not up to what
it used to be. So airports, I know for us because we are part
of the Las Vegas experience, we work with our concessionaires
tremendously to make sure that that passenger can get a drink,
can get something they can bring on the plane. But it is not
easy. Our concessionaires are not being able to hire at the
same pace.
It is very, very hard with the mentality of telecommuting.
You can't telecommute at an airport, you have to have front-
line people. You have to have real people at an airport to
service that traveler.
Mrs. Demings. OK. Mr. Chairman, I----
Chairman Thompson. The gentlelady's----
Mrs. Demings. I think I am out of time. Thank you so much.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you. The gentlelady's time has
expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Jackson
Lee, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Chairman----
Chairman Thompson. Ms. Jackson Lee, you are recognized.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. I am trying to unmute, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you so very much.
Let me thank you for this important hearing. I don't
think----
Chairman Thompson. We are having some----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Can you hear me? Can you hear me, Mr.
Chairman? Hello?
Chairman Thompson. Well, not well. Try it again.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I will.
Let me start by thanking the Chairman for this hearing and
also Congresswoman Titus for bringing us to this important
issue, and the witnesses that have already spoken, including
our witnesses dealing with DHS and particularly in dealing with
the procedures that will help international travelers. That is
a key element to the economic survival of cities like Las
Vegas. This is an important leadership role that Congresswoman
Titus is now playing to help this city and as well to bring
this attention of how we can address the question of the
economic aftermath of the pandemic and how do we ensure the
traveling public has the needed documents in a way that can be
processed.
So I want to raise a question to both of you. Has Las Vegas
seen an increase in international tourism in 2022? Which we
hear that that there is an implosion of travel, certainly
domestically.
First let me have you answer that question. Have you seen
the growth and do you expect that growth to exponentially grow
over the next couple of months?
Ms. Wik. Thank you for your question.
We are tracking to be recovered hopefully by end of this
year from an international perspective. But from a Convention
and Visitors Authority perspective, we are looking the
international segment for growth, not just about recovery. So
we are working closely to make sure that we are driving demand
and that we want to ensure that we can capitalize on the demand
and make sure that we can accommodate the demand that we are
driving.
Just this year we have hosted net new events to the
destination, including NHL All-Star Game, NFL Pro Bowl, NFL
Draft, we announced the Superbowl, I mentioned we announced F-
1. We are trying to line up our event calendar and our trade
show calendar to make sure Las Vegas is the No. 1 destination.
So yes, we are on track to recover, but we have our eyes on
growth. That is what we appreciate this Congressional
delegation has moved hurdles to enable the recovery happen thus
far and we look forward to partnering with you to keep that
going. We are thankful for those efforts.
Ms. Jackson Lee. In the course of international travel, do
you see the need for continued information about COVID rates
and do you foresee further travel restrictions? We do know that
there may be an uptick in the fall, and what can we do as
Members of Congress to help that the period that may see an
uptick, that you continue in growth and economic recovery?
Ms. Wik. I think we have the tools in our toolkit in terms
of we know mask-wearing works, we know vaccination works, and
we know testing works. So working with the airport and our
Congressional delegation on what that correct balance of
infrastructure and guidelines are in making sure that my job is
to communicate that out, to make sure that visitors know what
to expect and how to have the best experience possible here. So
it is about figuring out what is the best protocols that then
we will communicate out.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, clearly I believe that you all are
at the forefront of travel and the increase in travel. Cities
like Houston that are growing in that area can utilize and
model themselves after how you addressed these questions of
increased travel, particularly in the midst of what will seem
to be a continuing engagement with the pandemic, and maybe even
other infectious diseases. We will try to work in expediting
documents, but more importantly in collaborating to ensure that
the economic recovery continues.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Thank you very much.
Chairman Thompson. The gentlelady yields back.
Let me thank our witnesses for their testimony on this
panel. Obviously you bring us good news. Las Vegas and
surroundings are on the way back. As Members of Congress, we
want to be full participants in facilitating that way back. I
want to yield time to the gentlelady from Nevada who invited us
to come and hear the story about the challenges and how it was
met and how we as Members of Congress can be helpful in that
process.
Ms. Titus. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I know it is not an easy thing to take a Congressional
committee on the road, but this really meant a lot for you to
bring us here. The Members who joined us, I thank them too and
the airport for hosting us.
You know, I wanted you to hear Las Vegas' story because it
is a success story. We are a very resilient community. We came
back from the problems with the housing crisis about 10 years
ago, now we are coming back from the COVID crisis. So our
resilience I think can serve as an example to other communities
that are now trying to recover, especially those in the whole
tourism realm. We think about tourism often in a secondary way,
but it is such an important part of our economy. Every place in
the country has something somebody wants to see. It is a
historic site or beautiful natural scenery or it is the world's
largest ball of twine, like they have somewhere in the Midwest.
So tourism really does affect every community. But when your
economy is so based on hospitality and tourism, we are hit
harder than other places whenever there is a dip in the
economy. So hearing the best practices, hearing the challenges
we still face, hearing how Government works with the private
sector, all of those are really key factors to recovery.
So I am so glad that you all were here to tell us that
story and so glad that my colleagues got to hear it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. Well, thank you very much. Let me say
you have been a gracious host to the committee. You can invite
us back to Las Vegas at any time.
Let me remind the Members of the committee that they might
have additional questions for our witnesses and we ask that you
respond expeditiously in writing to those questions.
The Chair reminds Members that the committee record shall
be kept open for 10 business days.
Without objection, the committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
