- MOBILIZING OUR CYBER DEFENSES: SECURING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE AGAINST RUSSIAN CYBER THREATS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MOBILIZING OUR CYBER DEFENSES: SECURING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE AGAINST
RUSSIAN CYBER THREATS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 5, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-50

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-220                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            John Katko, New York
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island      Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Clay Higgins, Louisiana
J. Luis Correa, California           Michael Guest, Mississippi
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri            Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Al Green, Texas                      Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Yvette D. Clarke, New York           Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
Eric Swalwell, California            Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Dina Titus, Nevada                   Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey    Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Val Butler Demings, Florida          Peter Meijer, Michigan
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California    Kat Cammack, Florida
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          August Pfluger, Texas
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey
Ritchie Torres, New York, Vice
Chairman
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Daniel Kroese, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Ritchie Torres, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York, and Vice Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable John Katko, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     5

Witnesses

Mr. Adam Meyers, Senior Vice President, Intelligence,
Crowdstrike:
Oral Statement.................................................     7
Prepared Statement.............................................     8
Mr. Kevin M. Morley, Manager, Federal Relations, American Water
Works Association:
Oral Statement.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    16
Mr. Steven Silberstein, Chief Executive Officer, Financial
Services Information Sharing and Analysis Center:
Oral Statement.................................................    19
Prepared Statement.............................................    21
Mr. Amit Yoran, Chairman and CEO, Tenable, Inc.:
Oral Statement.................................................    44
Prepared Statement.............................................    46

For the Record

The Honorable Ritchie Torres, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York, and Vice Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Statement of Sandra Joyce, Executive Vice President and Head of
Global Intelligence, Mandiant, Inc...........................   109
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Article, New York Times, March 20, 2017........................    61
Article, ForeignPolicy.com, April 30, 2022.....................    65
Article, The Atlantic, August 29, 2018.........................    70
The Honorable Andrew S. Clyde, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Georgia:
Article, Zdnet.com, March 9, 2019..............................    98
Article, cnn.com, October 29, 2020.............................   101
Article, U.S. News and World Report, May 8, 2021...............   104

Appendix

Questions From Honorable Nanette Barragan for Adam Meyers........   113
Questions From Honorable Ralph Norman for Adam Meyers............   113
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Steven Silberstein   113
Question From Honorable Nanette Barragan for Steven Silberstein..   114
Questions From Honorable Ralph Norman for Steven Silberstein.....   114
Question From Honorable Nanette Barragan for Kevin M. Morley.....   114
Questions From Ranking Member Andrew Garbarino for Kevin M.
Morley.........................................................   114
Questions From Honorable Ralph Norman for Kevin M. Morley........   114
Questions From Honorable Nanette Barragan for Amit Yoran.........   116
Questions From Honorable Ralph Norman for Amit Yoran.............   117

MOBILIZING OUR CYBER DEFENSES: SECURING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE AGAINST
RUSSIAN CYBER THREATS

----------

Tuesday, April 5, 2022

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., 310
Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Ritchie Torres [Member of
the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Torres, Jackson Lee, Langevin,
Correa, Slotkin, Cleaver, Green, Clarke, Watson Coleman, Rice,
Gottheimer, Malinowski, Katko, Higgins, Bishop, Van Drew,
Norman, Miller-Meeks, Clyde, Gimenez, LaTurner, Cammack,
Pfluger, and Garbarino.
Mr. Torres [presiding]. The Committee on Homeland Security
will be in order. Without objection, the Chair is authorized to
declare the committee in recess at any point.
Good afternoon. Before we begin today's hearing, I want to
extend sincere condolences on behalf of the committee to the
family of Chairman Don Young, Dean of the House, whose life was
celebrated at a memorial last week. Chairman Young's decades of
service to the State of Alaska and to this great Nation will
never be forgotten. Our thoughts are with his loved ones at
this most difficult time.
Today, the committee is meeting to examine how we can
better secure our Nation's critical infrastructure against
Russian cyber threats. Just over 1 month ago, Russian troops
launched an unprovoked, unjustified invasion of Ukraine. The
United States and its allies responded swiftly and decisively,
imposing harsh sanctions against Russian financial
institutions, Russian government leaders and oligarchs, and
even Vladimir Putin himself.
The Biden administration has also banned the import of
Russian crude oil, petroleum, and natural gas; imposed export
controls of critical technologies; and worked with our allies
to ban Russia's largest banks from SWIFT. In time, these
restrictions, together with additional actions taken by the
United States and its allies, will cripple the Russian economy
and undermine Putin's ability to continue his ill-conceived
military operation in Ukraine.
As Russia continues to struggle under the weight of
sanctions imposed by the world's democracies, we must consider
the potential risk to the homeland. Over the past decade,
Russia has demonstrated its ability and willingness to use
cyber tools to advance its global agenda. It has used its
neighbors in Eastern Europe as test beds for deploying its
cyber capabilities to interfere with elections, spread
disinformation, and disrupt critical infrastructure. In 2015
and 2016, for example, Russian hackers temporarily knocked out
power to over 200,000 Ukrainians. In 2017, Russia unleashed
NotPetya to disrupt Ukraine's financial system, but the malware
affected networks across critical infrastructure sectors
globally, including in the United States.
Russia's willingness to deploy its cyber capabilities
against the United States is similarly well-documented. Since
at least 2008, the intelligence community has warned of
Russia's formidable cyber capabilities in its annual threat
assessment. In 2017, the intelligence community concluded that
the Russian Government had attempted to interfere in the 2016
Presidential elections, engaging in both information operations
and targeting election infrastructure. The following year, DHS
and FBI warned entities in a range of sectors from energy and
aviation to water and critical manufacturing, that the Russian
Government was attempting to gain access to their networks.
Despite these warnings, the Federal Government and its private-
sector partners have been slow to chart an enduring course for
strategic partnership.
Historically, the Federal Government has struggled to
demonstrate the security value of public-private partnerships.
Meanwhile, the private sector has been reluctant to fully
engage and feared new regulations. One of the most frustrating
challenges we face is the lack of urgency to act based on
intelligence alone. Too often, it has taken a major incident to
force change.
The SolarWinds supply chain attack is a good example. It
forced a collective shift from passively observing policy
problems to actively solving them. The President issued an
Executive Order overhauling and modernizing the Federal
Government's approach to securing its networks.
Congress has also stepped up. It has increased
cybersecurity funding and provided the administration with new
authorities, including incident reporting and CyberSentry, that
will help detect and disrupt malicious cyber campaigns faster.
The private sector has come to the table to work with the
Federal Government in new ways. The administration, Congress,
and our private-sector partners have acted with urgency over
the past year and left us better-prepared to defend U.S.
networks. But there is still room to improve.
First, the Biden administration has engaged in
unprecedented cyber threat information and intelligence sharing
with critical infrastructure owners and operators in advance of
and during Russia's unprovoked invasion of Ukraine. Moving
forward, the Government and private sector must assess the
effectiveness of existing partnerships and continue to deepen
strategic collaboration to defend against current and future
cyber threats.
Second, the administration has undertaken historic
initiatives to raise the cybersecurity posture across all 16
critical infrastructure sectors, which varies dramatically due
to a range of factors from resources to regulation. To
effectively defend against Russian cyber threats, the Federal
Government must tailor its support to, and collaboration with,
critical infrastructure sectors to their varying degrees of
capability.
Toward that end, I was pleased to see the President's
budget proposal. The President proposed a new competitive grant
program aimed at raising the cybersecurity posture of certain
critical infrastructure sectors.
Finally, the Federal Government and the private sector must
work together to harness the security gains realized as we
defend against Russian cyber threats in order to establish a
new, heightened security baseline.
I look forward to the witnesses' testimony and the Members'
questions. I now recognize the Ranking Member of the full
committee, the gentleman from New York, Mr. Katko, for an
opening statement.
[The statement of Vice Chairman Torres follows:]
Statement of Vice Chairman Ritchie Torres
April 5, 2022
Today, the committee is meeting to examine how we can better secure
our Nation's critical infrastructure against Russian cyber threats.
Just over 1 month ago, Russian troops launched an unprovoked,
unjustified invasion of Ukraine. The United States and its allies
responded swiftly and decisively, imposing harsh sanctions against
Russian financial institutions, Russian government leaders and
oligarchs, and even Vladimir Putin himself.
The Biden administration has also banned the import of Russian
crude oil, petroleum, and natural gas; imposed export controls of
critical technologies; and worked with our allies to ban Russia's
largest banks from SWIFT. In time, these restrictions--together with
additional actions taken by the United States and its allies--will
cripple the Russian economy and undermine Putin's ability to continue
his ill-conceived military operation in Ukraine. As Russia continues to
struggle under the weight of sanctions imposed by the world's
democracies, we must consider the potential risks to the homeland.
Over the past decade, Russia has demonstrated its ability and
willingness to use cyber tools to advance its global agenda. It has
used its neighbors in Eastern Europe as test beds for deploying its
cyber capabilities to interfere with elections, spread disinformation,
and disrupt critical infrastructure. In 2015 and 2016, for example,
Russian hackers temporarily knocked out power to over 200,000
Ukrainians. In 2017, Russia unleashed NotPetya to disrupt Ukraine's
financial system, but the malware affected networks across critical
infrastructure sectors globally, including in the United States.
Russia's willingness to deploy its cyber capabilities against the
United States is well-documented. Since at least 2008, the intelligence
community has warned of Russia's formidable cyber capabilities in its
annual threat assessment. In 2017, the intelligence community concluded
that the Russian government had attempted to interfere in the 2016
Presidential elections--engaging in both information operations and
targeting election infrastructure. The following year, DHS and FBI
warned entities in a range of sectors--from energy and aviation to
water and critical manufacturing--that the Russian government was
attempting to gain access to their networks. Despite these warnings,
the Federal Government and its private-sector partners have been slow
to chart an enduring course for strategic partnership.
Historically, the Federal Government has struggled to demonstrate
the security value of public-private partnerships. Meanwhile, the
private sector has been reluctant to fully engage and feared new
regulations. One of the most frustrating challenges we face is the lack
of urgency to act based on intelligence alone. Too often, it has taken
a major incident to force change.
The SolarWinds supply chain attack is a good example. It forced a
collective shift from admiring policy problems to solving them. The
President issued an Executive Order overhauling and modernizing the
Federal Government's approach to securing its networks.
Congress has also stepped up. It has increased cybersecurity
funding and provided the administration new authorities--including
incident reporting and CyberSentry--that will help detect and eradicate
malicious cyber campaigns faster. And the private sector has come to
the table to work with the Federal Government in new ways.
The administration, Congress, and our private-sector partners have
acted with urgency over the past year and left us better-prepared to
defend U.S. networks. But there is still room to improve.
First, the Biden administration has engaged in unprecedented cyber
threat information and intelligence sharing with critical
infrastructure owners and operators in advance of and during Russia's
unprovoked invasion of Ukraine. Moving forward, the government and
private sector must assess the effectiveness of existing partnerships
and continue to deepen strategic collaboration to defend against
current and future cyber threats.
Second, the administration has undertaken historic initiatives to
raise the cybersecurity posture across all 16 critical infrastructure
sectors, which varies dramatically due to a range of factors from
resources to regulation. To effectively defend against Russian cyber
threats, the Federal Government must tailor its support to, and
collaboration with, critical infrastructure sectors to their varying
degrees of capability.
Toward that end, I was pleased to see the President's budget
proposed a new competitive grant program aimed at raising the
cybersecurity posture of certain critical infrastructure sectors.
Finally, the Federal Government and the private sector must work
together to harness the security gains realized as we defend against
Russian cyber threats in order to establish a new, heightened security
baseline.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Chairman Torres, for hosting this
hearing today and I thank you to the witnesses for being here.
It is a very important topic, obviously.
Each of you play an extremely important role in the
increasingly interconnected web of services that continues in
our Nation's cybersecurity and critical infrastructure security
realm. In fact, all of us here today play an important role in
that ecosystem. We each have a job to do. As we have repeatedly
seen, one misstep can have disastrous consequences for the
Nation's infrastructure and the communities we represent. There
has never been a more important time for our businesses, our
State and local governments, and our Federal Government to be
prepared not just to defend against cyber attacks, but to be
resilient should an attack occur.
As the Biden administration recently said, there is
``evolving intelligence that the Russian Government is
exploring options for potential cyber attacks.'' I don't need
to tell you that today what that might mean for our
constituents, or in the case of our panel, your customers and
clients.
Looking ahead at some of the particularly tangible attacks
over the past few years, we can see that the motives have been
either of financial gain or intelligence gathering, not pure
destruction. Well, what if the goal was pure destruction? What
if the goal was pure destruction?
What if destructive attacks happened on critical
infrastructure simultaneously? We saw this in 2017 with the
NotPetya attack, which was a purely destructive campaign
originally aimed at Ukrainian networks by Russian attackers but
quickly spun out of control and ultimately caused over $10
billion in damages globally. It impacted global shipping for
weeks and wreaked havoc for companies around the world.
There is so much this body should be doing to prepare for
this type of threat. Thankfully, we have recently taken
significant steps to make our country safer. Just 2 weeks ago,
the Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act
was signed into law as part of the omnibus appropriations bill
for fiscal year 2022. This is one of the most important pieces
of cybersecurity legislation in the past decade. No one will
argue with that.
Enhanced reporting to the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, or CISA, of significant cyber incidents and
ransomware attacks on critical infrastructure will mean greater
visibility for the Federal Government, earlier disruption of
malicious cyber campaigns, and better information and threat
intelligence going back out to the private sector so it can
defend against future attacks. This legislation also solidifies
CISA's role as a lead Federal agency for cybersecurity.
I want to thank my colleagues in both the House and Senate,
as well as the private sector, for their partnership and
support in getting this most important piece of legislation
across the finish line. The success of these tools is dependent
on the success of the agencies we entrust them to. Fortunately,
we have the extremely capable CISA Director Jen Easterly and
National Cyber Director Chris Inglis at the helm of our
Nation's cyber defenses. They have been working tirelessly to
keep us safe and I thank them for their work. However, their
impact only extends as far as their mandate. It is up to all of
us, especially those of you here today, as industry leaders to
keep your companies, clients, and customers, our very
constituents, secure and resilient.
I look forward to hearing from you all about your
partnerships with CISA, what more you need from the Federal
Government, what you don't need from the Federal Government,
and the actions you are taking to secure our critical
infrastructure. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Katko follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member John Katko
Thank you, Chairman Thompson, for hosting this hearing. And thank
you to our witnesses for being here today.
Each of you play an extremely important role in the increasingly
interconnected web of services that constitutes our Nation's
cybersecurity and critical infrastructure.
In fact, all of us here play an important role in this ecosystem.
We each have a job to do, and as we have repeatedly seen, one
misstep can have disastrous consequences for the Nation's
infrastructure and the communities we represent.
There has never been a more important time for our businesses, our
State and local governments, and our Federal Government to be prepared
not just to defend against cyber attacks--but to be resilient should an
attack occur.
As the Biden administration recently said, there is ``evolving
intelligence that the Russian government is exploring options for
potential cyber attacks.''
I don't need to tell anyone here today what that might mean for our
constituents, or in the case of our panel, your customers and clients.
Looking at some of the particularly tangible attacks over the past
year, we can see that the motives have been either financial gain or
intelligence gathering, NOT pure destruction.
But what if the goal was pure destruction?
What if destructive attacks happened on critical infrastructure
simultaneously?
We saw this in 2017 with the NotPetya attack, which was a purely
destructive campaign originally aimed at Ukrainian networks by Russian
attackers, but quickly spun out of control and ultimately caused over
$10 billion in damages globally.
It impacted global shipping for weeks and wreaked havoc for
companies around the world.
There is so much this body should be doing to prepare for this type
of threat, and thankfully, we have recently taken significant steps to
make our country safer.
Just 2 weeks ago, the Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical
Infrastructure Act was signed into law as part of the Omnibus
Appropriations bill for fiscal year 2022.
This is one of the most important pieces of cybersecurity
legislation in the past decade.
Enhanced reporting to the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency, CISA, of significant cyber incidents and ransomware attacks on
critical infrastructure will mean greater visibility for the Federal
Government, earlier disruption of malicious cyber campaigns, and better
information and threat intelligence going back out to the private
sector so it can defend against future attacks.
This legislation also solidifies CISA's roles as the lead Federal
agency for cybersecurity.
I want to thank my colleagues in both the House and Senate, as well
as the private sector, for their partnership and support in getting
this across the finish line.
The success of these tools is dependent on the success of the
agencies we entrust them to, and fortunately, we have the extremely
capable CISA director, Jen Easterly, and National cyber director, Chris
Inglis, at the helm of our Nation's cyber defense efforts.
They have been working tirelessly to keep us safe, and I thank them
for their work.
However, their impact only extends as far as their mandate.
It is up to all of us, especially those of you here today, as
industry leaders, to keep your companies, clients, and customers--our
constituents--secure and resilient.
I look forward to hearing from you all about your partnerships with
CISA, what more you need from the Federal Government, and the actions
you're taking to secure our critical infrastructure.

Mr. Torres. All the Members of the committee are reminded
that under the committee's rules, opening statements may be
submitted for the record. Members are also reminded that the
committee will operate according to the guidelines laid out by
the Chairman and Ranking Member in our February 3, 2021,
colloquy regarding remote procedures.
I now welcome our panel of witnesses. Our first witness,
Mr. Adam Meyers, is the senior vice president of intelligence
at CrowdStrike. In that capacity, Mr. Meyers directs a team of
cyber threat experts as they track criminal, state-sponsored,
and nationalist cyber adversary groups across the globe.
Our second witness, Mr. Steve Silberstein, is the CEO of
the Financial Services ISAC, where he leads efforts to increase
the value of information sharing in the financial services
sector and improve how member organizations share critical
information within the private sector and within Government.
Our third witness, Dr. Kevin Morley, is a manager of
Federal relations at the American Water Works Association. Dr.
Morley works closely with multiple organizations to advance the
security and preparedness of the water sector. His role
includes supporting the development of standards that represent
the minimum best practices of water sector risk and resilience
management, including cybersecurity guidance.
Our final witness, Mr. Amit Yoran, who is the chairman and
CEO of Tenable. Mr. Yoran works with organizations to
understand and reduce their cybersecurity risk. Prior, he
served as a founding director of the United States Computer
Emergency Readiness team, US-CERT program at DHS, and is a
recognized security thought leader on operational technology.
Without objection, the witnesses' full statements will be
included in the record. I now ask each witness to summarize his
statement for 5 minutes, beginning with Mr. Meyers.

STATEMENT OF ADAM MEYERS, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, INTELLIGENCE,
CROWDSTRIKE

Mr. Meyers. Congressman Torres, Ranking Member Katko, and
Members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today. As the world watches the conflict in Ukraine
unfold, this hearing evaluating the posture of critical
infrastructure security is particularly timely. Across the
country, cybersecurity professionals in Government and industry
are on high alert monitoring for the use of cyber operations
within the conflict itself and preparing for the possibility of
Russian attacks against U.S. critical infrastructure.
CrowdStrike has supported cybersecurity initiatives for the
U.S. Government and key allied governments across the globe. We
actively participate in public-private partnerships such as
CISA's JCDC, through which we have worked with select industry
partners to disrupt Russian infrastructure preparing for cyber
operations. It is CrowdStrike's goal to raise the cost of doing
business for threat actors across the globe through our
research, technology, and partnership.
In the immediate lead-up to the 2022 conflict in Ukraine,
Russian-nexus adversaries engaged in espionage, as well as
disruptive and destructive attacks against government and
commercial targets. The commencement of the conflict also
activated Russian e-crime and hacktivist actors.
Russia has a long history of leveraging cyber operations to
effectuate political goals. Russian cyber operations against
Ukraine began in earnest following the Euromaidan protests in
2013. Attacks in 2015 and 2016 targeted critical
infrastructure, famously disrupting power and distribution in
the Ukraine. The NotPetya attack of 2017 caused a reported $10
billion in damages across the globe.
Numerous adversaries have contributed to the asymmetric
campaign waged against Ukraine. One notable example observed in
2014 was a coordinated campaign targeting the central election
committee and Ukrainian media sector, which CrowdStrike
attributes to Berserk Bear, an adversary group believed to be
related to the FSB.
As Russia began to amass forces on the Ukrainian border,
Russian cyber threat activity targeting this Nation increased
in kind. Beginning in mid-January 2022, website defacements,
data theft, and destructive wiper attacks impacted numerous
Ukrainian entities. The wiper attack and website defacements
occurred immediately following a series of bilateral meetings
between the United States and Russia regarding troop
deployments. CrowdStrike currently associates these activities
with the Russian-nexus threat actor we have designated Ember
Bear, an adversary group that has operated against government
and military organizations in Eastern Europe since early 2021.
On 23 February, a second wiper attack was identified, which
CrowdStrike tracks as DriveSlayer. More technically
sophisticated than the Ember Bear activity from January, it is
propagated by a worm allowing it to spread autonomously. The
technical complexity and overlaps of tactics is consistent with
previous operations and bear striking similarity to the
NotPetya attack of 2017.
The conflict in Ukraine has also impacted, perhaps even
reshaped, the cyber criminal threat landscape. This is notable
because Russia has long harbored and potentially leveraged for
policy or political ends, e-crime threat actors. These
adversaries now have potential to act in support of Russian
state goals by acting as an irregular component performing
disruptive attacks through ransomware around the globe and
specifically in the United States.
The conflict catalyzed a significant level of both pro-
Russian and pro-Ukrainian hacktivists. One pro-Russian group
claimed a series of distributed denial-of-service attacks
against Polish and Latvian government sites and targeted the
National Bank of Poland. In a warning, they issued a reminder
about the REvil ransomware, which disrupted U.S. critical
infrastructure last spring.
While U.S. critical infrastructure operators are
increasingly focused on the threat from Russia, defensive
capabilities differ significantly across the sectors. As
sanctions by the United States and allies mount in scope and
impact, the risk of targeted attacks against them becomes more
acute. The U.S. Government has made significant strides over
the past several years in coordinating with industry against
cyber threats.
The establishment of JCDC, in particular, where CrowdStrike
participates as a plankholder, has helped strengthen industry
and government collaboration. Russian activity to date has been
modest relative to early fears. However, this could change at
any time.
U.S. critical infrastructure operators must remain on high
alert. Critical infrastructure operators must still do
cybersecurity well. This is a last-mile problem that cannot be
solved through policy initiatives alone. Though not an
exhaustive list, entities should develop and maintain a skilled
work force and leverage measures identified in the Executive
Order, such as the use of modern tools like multi-factor
authentication, endpoint detection and response, and zero trust
architectures, and also, proactive threat hunting.
I will close by briefly highlighting recent collaboration
with government and industry counterparts, Cloudflare and Ping
Identity, to launch a free Critical Infrastructure Defense
Project for the energy, water, and hospital sectors. We
encourage eligible entities to consider participating in this
program.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today.
I look forward to your questions and continued discussion.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Meyers follows:]
Prepared Statement of Adam Meyers
March 30, 2022
i. introduction
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Katko, and Members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. As the world
watches the conflict in Ukraine unfold, cybersecurity professionals are
on high alert. Colleagues from across Government and industry are
monitoring the use of cyber means within the conflict itself and
preparing for the possibility of Russian attacks abroad--either for the
purposes of retaliation or coercion. This hearing evaluating critical
infrastructure security posture is particularly timely.
Since 2011 I have built and led the intelligence team at
CrowdStrike, a commercial security technology company headquartered in
the United States with offices around the globe. In my capacity as the
head of intelligence, I manage a team of more than 200 professionals
who conduct research on threat actors operating for State interests
like espionage; financially motivated or criminal purposes; and to
advance ``Hacktivist'' goals. This team tracks the technical, cultural,
and behavioral aspects of these attacks to identify and attribute
threat actors, extrapolate how they operate, and determine what can be
done to mitigate these actions. Prior to CrowdStrike, I worked to
secure the defense industrial base (DIB), where I supported numerous
Federal customers across the military, intelligence community, and
various civilian agencies in information security matters.
The CrowdStrike Intelligence team has supported cybersecurity
initiatives for the U.S. Government and key allied governments around
the globe. We actively participate in public-private partnerships, such
as the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Agency's (CISA) Joint Cyber
Defense Collaborative (JCDC), through which we have worked over the
past few weeks with select industry partners to disrupt malicious
Russian cyber infrastructure. Previously, we facilitated botnet
disruptions such as the coordinated take down of the Kelihos botnet in
partnership with the Department of Justice (DoJ)/Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI)--the careful timing of which enabled the arrest,
extradition to the United States, and successful prosecution of the
operator. Through our research, technology, and partnership, it is
CrowdStrike's goal to raise the cost of doing business for threat
actors across the spectrum of cyber adversaries.
ii. cyber activity associated with the conflict in ukraine \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ I have endeavored to cite as much source material as possible
for this testimony. In some instances, however, it was most prudent to
redact details like URLs. In other instances, I've cited limited-
distribution CrowdStrike research. Additional information and materials
are available to committee staff upon request.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the immediate lead up to the 2022 military conflict in Ukraine,
several Russian-state nexus threat actors engaged in espionage as well
as disruptive and destructive attacks against government and commercial
targets. The commencement of the conflict also activated Russian eCrime
and ``Hacktivist'' actors. I will survey developments with each in
turn, following a brief discussion of the recent history of Russian
threat activity targeting Ukraine.
ii.1. background
Russia has a long history of leveraging cyber operations to
effectuate political goals in Ukraine. Russian cyber operations against
Ukraine began in earnest following the Euromaidan protests which began
in late 2013. The Main Center for Special Technologies (GTsST), Unit
74455 of Russia's military intelligence organization,\2\ which
CrowdStrike tracks as VOODOO BEAR,\3\ has been one of the major
perpetrators of these offensive operations. The overarching motivation
for VOODOO BEAR activities is to contribute to psychological operations
seeking to degrade, delegitimize, or otherwise influence public trust
in State institutions and industry sectors in target countries,
including government, energy, transportation, and media organizations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Redesignated the Main Directorate of the General Staff of the
Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, researchers and analysts still
widely refer to this organization by its former acronym, GRU.
\3\ CrowdStrike uses a cryptonym-based system to designate threat
actors we track. Names generally take the form of a community- or
researcher-derived codeword with some significance, followed by an
animal type based on the actor's geography or motivation. This naming
scheme is designed to be somewhat more descriptive than others, and can
simplify and disambiguate communication and information sharing with
government and industry counterparts, as well as assist customers'
threat modeling processes. See Adam Meyers, Meet The Threat Actors:
List of APTs and Adversary Groups, CrowdStrike Blog (Feb. 24, 2019),
https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/meet-the-adversaries/. Most notably
for the purposes of this discussion, we use BEAR for Russian State-
nexus actors, SPIDER for criminal actors, and JACKAL for hacktivist
actors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This adversary was behind notorious incidents such as disruptions
to Ukrainian Critical Infrastructure resulting in power outages in both
December 2015, and a year later, as well as campaigns targeting media,
transportation, and electoral infrastructure. VOODOO BEAR operations
created wider concern for the international community in June 2017 when
a supply chain attack against a financial software update mechanism
resulted in the deployment of NotPetya, a self-propagating destructive
weapon masquerading as ransomware. The impact of the NotPetya incident
by some estimates caused USD $10 Billion in total damage and impacted
global companies and public services in a variety of sectors, including
critical infrastructure providers.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Andy Greenberg, The Untold Story of NotPetya, the Most
Devastating Cyberattack in History, WIRED (Aug. 22, 2018, 5 o'clock
AM), https://www.wired.com/story/notpetya-cyberattack-ukraine-russia-
code-crashed-the-world/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Another threat actor, which CrowdStrike tracks as PRIMITIVE BEAR,
has conducted wide-spread espionage against Ukrainian government
targets since 2014. Believed to be operating from the city of
Simferopol in Crimea, this actor represents an offensive cyber
capability established specifically in a conflict region to facilitate
rapid tasking and collection.
Numerous other adversaries \5\ have contributed to the broader
asymmetric campaign waged against Ukraine. One notable example observed
in 2014 was a coordinated campaign targeting the Central Election
Commission (CEC) and Ukrainian media sector which CrowdStrike
attributes in part to BERSERK BEAR, a component of the Federal Security
Service of the Russian Federation (FSB), and in part to the CyberBerkut
hacktivist front.\6\ Taken together, this campaign intended to deliver
effects against strategic targets in the effort to undermine the
democratic process within Ukraine.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ FANCY BEAR, COZY BEAR, and RepeatingUmbra--which strongly
overlaps with an adversary tracked as UNC1151 in the broader
information security industry--actively conducted espionage campaigns
targeting Ukraine within the last year.
\6\ Brian Yates, CyberBerkut Attempt to Alter Ukrainian Election,
Guardianlv (May 25, 2014), https://guardianlv.com/2014/05/cyberberkut-
attempt-to-alter-ukrainian-election/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
II.2. Current Nation-State Activity
As Russia began to amass forces on the Ukrainian border, Russian
cyber threat activity targeting the Nation increased in kind. In mid-
January 2022, a campaign of website defacement and data theft impacted
numerous Ukrainian government entities contemporaneously with a wiper
attack that the security industry has dubbed Whispergate.\7\ The
website defacements included messaging in Ukrainian, Russian, and
Polish language that was of a threatening nature, and an image with
metadata suggested the activity originated in Poland. The wiper attack
and website defacements occurred immediately following a series of
bilateral meetings between the United States and Russia regarding troop
deployments near the Ukrainian border. Following the defacement and
wiper attacks, several personas emerged in on-line underground forums
offering data stolen in these incidents. CrowdStrike currently
associates these activities with the Russian-nexus threat actor
designated EMBER BEAR, an adversary group that has operated against
government and military organizations in eastern Europe since early
2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ CISA, Alert (AA22-057A): Destructive Malware Targeting
Organizations in Ukraine (last revised Mar. 1, 2022), https://
www.cisa.gov/uscert/ncas/alerts/aa22-057a.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In mid-February, various Ukrainian banking and governmental
websites were targeted as part of a large-scale distributed denial-of-
service (DDoS) attack.\8\ This included the websites of Ukraine's
Ministry of Defense and Armed Forces as well as the website of the
State Savings Bank of Ukraine (Oschadbank) and the mobile application
of Ukraine's largest commercial bank, PrivatBank. In concert with the
DDoS attack, some banking customers were targeted with SMS messages
falsely indicating ATM systems were not functioning, and bomb threats
were made against several bank locations. The DDoS attacks were later
attributed by various government officials to the Main Intelligence
Directorate of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian
Federation (``GRU'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Attention: There is No Threat to the Funds of Privatbank
Depositors (Feb. 15, 2022), https://spravdi.gov.ua/uvaga-zhodnoyi-
zagrozy-dlya-koshtiv-vkladnykiv-pryvatbanku-nemaye/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On 23 February 2022 a second wiper attack was identified, which
CrowdStrike tracks as DriveSlayer. More technically sophisticated than
the WhisperGate/EMBER BEAR activity from January, DriveSlayer is
propagated by a worm the broader cybersecurity industry tracks under
the name HermeticWizard. The technical complexity and overlap of
tactics is consistent with previous operations attributed to VOODOO
BEAR. In what might be construed as a lesson learned from NotPetya's
rampant spread, HermeticWizard was intentionally designed to limit its
spread to the local network, theoretically limiting infections
primarily to networks in Ukraine.
On 24 February 2022, several Ukrainian government websites were
displaying a defacement message before becoming unresponsive to visitor
requests. The displayed message was almost identical to the one used in
defacement activity against similar targets on 14 January 2022. Soon
after the DriveSlayer wiper attack and website defacements, Russian
troops attacked Ukraine. In the weeks since the commencement of
military conflict numerous other incidents have been identified
including additional wiper attacks, misinformation, and espionage
against Ukrainian targets.
Although beyond the scope of this testimony, I would at least like
to note two other forms of activity associated with this conflict. The
first is reported destructive attacks targeting Ukrainian satellite
communications capabilities.\9\ The second is informational or
psychological operations-type activities, likely including
amplification through personas and propagation through social media.
Elements of the researcher community are monitoring these types of
operations, and information about their scope and effects is likely to
become clearer over time.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Ellen Makashima, Russian Military Behind Hack of Satellite
Communication Devices in Ukraine at War's Outset, U.S. Officials Say,
Washington Post (Mar. 24, 2022, 10:25 PM), https://
www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2022/03/24/russian-military-
behind-hack-satellite-communication-devices-ukraine-wars-outset-us-
officials-say/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
II.3 eCrime
The conflict in Ukraine has also impacted--perhaps even reshaped--
the criminal cyber threat ecosystem. This is notable because Russia has
long harbored, and potentially leveraged for policy or political ends,
eCrime threat actors. These adversaries now have the potential to act
in support of Russian state goals, such as by acting as an irregular
component, performing disruptive attacks around the globe and
specifically in the United States.
In the immediate wake of the invasion of Ukraine, eCrime actors who
are responsible for financially motivated malicious cyber activity
began responding to the conflict. Some actors appeared to directly
support Russian state interests. WIZARD SPIDER,\10\ an adversary that
first surfaced in 2016 with their Trickbot malware, and is more
recently associated with several ransomware operations including Ryuk
and Conti, announced their full support of the Russian government and
their willingness to retaliate against critical infrastructure
entities.\11\ Other groups such as SALTY SPIDER, the operator of the
Sality botnet, and SCULLY SPIDER, operator of the Danabot
infrastructure, recently engaged in DDoS attacks uncharacteristic of
their previous operations, against Ukrainian targets. It is unknown
whether these incidents were motivated by patriotism, conducted at the
direction of Russian security services, or followed some other motive
such as financial gain.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ WIZARD SPIDER is not associated with the HermeticWizard wiper
malware described above; the naming overlap is coincidental.
\11\ In response to this announcement, a security researcher
released logs of internal communications of this group exposing their
composition, internal structure, recruitment strategies, financial
infrastructure, and future ambitions. These leaks provided an
unprecedented view into the internal machinations of a several hundred
person organization built for the express purpose of conducting
extortion, theft, and other criminal enterprises against Western
organizations and critical infrastructures.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In other cases, the criminal ecosystem broke with Russian members
over the invasion. For example, some criminal forums--digital bazaars
for buying and selling stolen information and tools for offensive cyber
operations--began banning users associated with Russian Internet
Protocol (IP) address space as a sort-of criminal community-driven
sanction in response to the Russian aggressions against Ukraine.\12\
However, anti-Russian sentiment in the eCrime space was not wide-
spread, and most of the criminal groups tracked by CrowdStrike signaled
that they were apolitical and primarily focused on revenue generation,
consistent with their general modus operandi. Some groups have actually
used the conflict as fodder for conducting operations, inserting
malicious components into varying participatory DDoS tools marketed at
individuals who want to lend their computers to attacks against Russia
in response to the conflict. Ever opportunistic, some criminally-
motivated actors have used the conflict in Ukraine as material for
lures, or implanted information stealers in participatory DDoS tools
designed for individuals who wish to engage in hacktivism against
Russian targets but lack the technical sophistication to launch attacks
on their own.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ CrowdStrike Intelligence Reporting, Feb. 25, 2022.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
II.4 Hacktivism
The conflict catalyzed a significant level of both pro-Russian and
pro-Ukrainian hacktivism. On the pro-Russian side, Killnet--a low-level
Russian eCrime group--turned to hacktivism in response to Ukraine's
coordinated effort to unite pro-Ukraine hacktivists, including the so-
called IT Army of Ukraine.\13\ Killnet claimed a series of DDoS attacks
beyond Ukraine's borders and against websites controlled by the Polish
and Latvian governments. Killnet also claimed a DDoS attack against the
website of the National Bank of Poland. In a social media post, the
group called the attack against the bank a ``warning'' and included
links to the National Bank of Poland website as well as an on-line tool
for checking website availability. The group threatened to target the
Polish government if Warsaw escalated tensions between NATO and Russian
forces in the region. Specifically, the group vowed to encrypt ``all
information systems with internet access'' in Poland. In the warning,
Killnet also issued a ``reminder'' about REvil (ransomware developed by
the eCrime adversary PINCHY SPIDER) and a recent high-profile
ransomware attack against a U.S. critical infrastructure operator.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Russian Killnet Hackers Brought Down Anonymous Website,
Ren.TV, (Mar. 1, 2022), [Source URL available to committee staff by
request.]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pro-Ukrainian Hacktivism observed or reported to date includes:\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Except where otherwise noted, information in this subsection
is derived from CrowdStrike Intelligence Reporting, Jan.-Feb. 2022.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Anonymous.--Since at least mid-February 2022, affiliates of
the hacktivist collective Anonymous advertised their intent to
conduct cyber operations should tensions in Ukraine escalate.
Self-identified Anonymous affiliates have claimed
responsibility for dozens of incidents since late February,
including DDoS attacks, website defacements, and leaks.
Anonymous affiliate's claims are frequently exaggerated,
however CrowdStrike has confirmed significant data leaks from
Russian-state-owned energy company Rosneft, Russia's censorship
agency Roskomnadzor, Russia's state-controlled oil pipeline
company Transneft, and the Central Bank of Russia. Some
affiliates have also claimed more disruptive attacks, including
destroying back-up images of mobile phones and file directories
from Rosneft and a brief take-over of multiple Russian state
media organizations to broadcast footage of the war in Ukraine.

PARTISAN JACKAL.--The Cyber Partisans, which CrowdStrike
tracks as PARTISAN JACKAL, signifying its hacktivist
motivation, issued a statement on social media calling on
``like-minded hackers'' in Ukraine and Russia to join forces
against the ``fascist campaign'' Russia has launched against
``brotherly'' Ukraine. This statement followed a 24 February
2022 post announcing the formation of the ``Belarus Tactical
Group'' consisting of members of multiple other resistance
groups that PARTISAN JACKAL supports. PARTISAN JACKAL
previously responded to Russia's troop presence in Belarus by
encrypting several systems controlled by State-owned railway
operator Belarusian Railway.

CURIOUS JACKAL.--Personas associated with Spanish-speaking
actor KelvinSecTeam, tracked as CURIOUS JACKAL, published
several posts on forums and social media detailing recent
targeting of the Russian government. This included posts with
at least 668 seemingly legitimate government files, information
on the State media outlet RT, and surveillance video
purportedly from inside a nuclear power plant in Russia.

Ukrainian Government.--As the military conflict began, the
Ukrainian government reportedly started recruiting a volunteer
cyber force, the IT Army of Ukraine. Advertisements for
volunteers began circulating on hacker forums, calling on
Ukrainian forum members to ``get involved in the cyber defense
of our country.'' The forum posts reportedly directed users to
an application asking volunteers for areas of specialty and
professional references. The volunteers are reportedly divided
into defensive and offensive units.\15\ CrowdStrike has
observed the offensive units use social media outlets to
coordinate DDoS attacks against Russian government and private
industry websites.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Joel Schectman and Christopher Bing, EXCLUSIVE Ukraine Calls
on Hacker Underground to Defend Against Russia, Reuters (Feb. 24, 2022,
6:51 PM), https://www.reuters.com/world/exclusive-ukraine-calls-hacker-
underground-defend-against-russia-2022-02-24/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Unknown actors.--Unidentified hacktivists defaced the
Russian Emergency Situations Ministry website. The hacktivists
replaced a ministry hotline number with a number Russian
soldiers could use to defect, changed news items on the front
page to ``Don't Believe Russian media--they lie'', and posted a
link offering ``full information about the war in Ukraine.''
The same day, likely hacktivists posted insults aimed at
President Putin and Russians on Russian judicial websites.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Mary Ilyushina, Russian Government Website Face
`Unprecedented' Wave of Hacking Attacks, Ministry Says, Washington Post
(Mar. 17, 2022, 8:29AM), https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/03/
17/russia-government-hacking-wave-unprecedented/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Supply chain.--In one deeply concerning incident, the
maintainer of `node-ipc' a popular open-source coding component
altered it to effectuate a targeted supply chain attack to
protest Russia's invasion of Ukraine. The maintainer released a
sabotaged version of the software that included malicious code
that would delete files or overwrite them with a heart emoji
for users based in Russia and Belarus, as determined by the
system's external IP address. The affected module is used as a
dependency in many nodejs-based applications, which were also
impacted by the malicious node-ipc versions. The unintended
consequences of this supply chain attack have not been fully
assessed, but it stands to erode trust in open source software
and damage the credibility of such projects.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Adam Bannister, NPM Maintainer Targets Russian Users with
Data-Wiping `Protestware', Daily Swig (Mar. 21, 2022), https://
portswigger.net/daily swig/npm-maintainer-targets-russian-users-with-
data-wiping-protestware.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
iii. u.s. critical infrastructure readiness
Since long before the current conflict in Ukraine, U.S. National
security officials and cybersecurity industry analysts have raised
concerns about Russia's demonstrated capabilities and potential
intentions to attack U.S. critical infrastructure. Periodic breaches of
operators in this space, attributed to Russia-nexus actors, illustrate
that U.S. infrastructure could at least be held at risk, and possibly
attacked, degraded, and destroyed, during a time of heightened
geopolitical tensions. As the war in Ukraine drags on without Russia
achieving its political objectives, and as sanctions by the United
States and allies mount in scope and impact, the risk of such attacks
becomes more acute.
U.S. critical infrastructure operators, for their part, are
increasingly focused on this threat. The U.S. Government, through
collective efforts of the White House, CISA, the Department of Energy,
and other Sector Risk Management Agencies, have rolled out a variety of
awareness and assistance campaigns over the years to help strengthen
infrastructure entities' security posture. There have been improvements
over the past decade, albeit from a sometimes low baseline of
readiness. Defensive capabilities also differ significantly across
sectors. For structural reasons, we see different resourcing and
outcomes across sectors like financial services and water utilities,
for example.
iv. u.s. government support and coordination mechanisms
White House public statements and reported notifications and offers
of assistance to State government leadership; the CISA #ShieldsUp
campaign; and well-timed DoJ indictments represent an unprecedented
level of communications engagement on cybersecurity from Executive
branch leadership. These are all positive steps from an awareness
perspective.
The U.S. Government has made significant strides over the past few
years in coordinating with industry against cyber threats. The
establishment of JCDC in particular, where CrowdStrike participates as
a plankholder organization, has helped strengthen cybersecurity and IT
industry and Government collaboration and information sharing. Parallel
efforts by non-Governmental organizations as well as other agencies
with different authorities and mandates also help the community. Many
of these have formed organically over the years, and in my assessment,
contribute to a healthy ecosystem. Mature entities like CrowdStrike and
others in the cybersecurity industry can support participation in
multiple groups organized around different themes, interests, and
relationships so long as there is marginal value--and this ultimately
promotes sharing.
Beyond the cybersecurity industry, businesses and critical
infrastructure operators have significant limitations and constraints
on time, attention, and resources. Those seeking support or fulfilling
regulatory obligations presently collaborate through some or all of
CISA, a different Sector Risk Management Agency, and the FBI. Views
within the community differ about the extent to which the status quo
``choose your partner''-style system is equal to the threats we face,
and my co-panelists are better suited than me to address the efficacy
for their respective sectors. I will just note here that the recent
consolidation of Incident Reporting under CISA appears likely to
promote rapid analysis and dissemination of threat indicators and
trends, which can improve security posture across the board.
v. conclusions and recommendations
Russian state actors have used cyber means over the years to
advance its political agenda, and that continues in the context of the
on-going war in Ukraine. Events there have also affected the shape of
the broader eCrime ecosystem and activated both pro-Russia and pro-
Ukraine hacktivism. Outside the immediate theater of conflict, Russian
activity to date has been modest relative to early fears. However, this
could change at any time and indeed there are indications that Russia
may become more aggressive in retaliation for foreign support to
Ukraine and significant sanctions on Russian personnel and entities.
U.S. critical infrastructure operators must remain on high alert. With
significant media coverage and the efforts of U.S. Government actions
and warnings described above, it appears that private-sector entities
are increasingly taking note.
But even with awareness sufficiently raised, and new resources and
support, critical infrastructure operators must still ``do''
cybersecurity well. This is a ``last mile'' problem that cannot be
solved through policy initiatives alone. Though not an exhaustive list,
entities should:

Build relationships with law enforcement or homeland
security staff that can help during an incident.

Develop or maintain access to know-how and skilled workers
or support staff. This includes having an incident response
plan in place and, in many cases, a retainer with a qualified
provider of incident response services.

Levage measures identified in Executive Order 14028 on
Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity. This includes use of
modern IT enterprise security tools and concepts like Multi-
Factor Authentication (MFA) and Endpoint Detection and Response
(EDR); sufficient logging; migration where practical to cloud/
Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) applications; implementation of
Zero Trust Architectures; and proactive threat hunting for
adversaries within their networks.

Utilize, where appropriate, specialized tools and
capabilities required for Operational Technology (OT) security.
For small and medium-sized organizations--say, those with fewer
than 6 or 8 dedicated cybersecurity staff--one of the biggest
``needle movers'' in recent years has probably been the
increasing adoption of managed security service providers
(MSSP)/Managed Detection and Response (MDR) providers. This is
a trend that should be encouraged and incentivized.
Congress' efforts in recent years implementing Cyberspace Solarium
Commission recommendations and, most recently, Incident Reporting
measures will absolutely help. In addition, consider:

Ensuring CISA is sufficiently resourced to carry out both
its Federal Civilian Executive Branch (FCEB) and private
sector/infrastructure security mandate.

Strengthening FCEB cybersecurity by modernizing the Federal
Information Security Management Act (FISMA) to reduce
compliance burdens and Federal Risk and Authorization
Management Program (FedRAMP) to speed authorizations.

Expanding the use of shared services procurement models for
Federal IT to create operational efficiencies, particularly for
cyber threat intelligence and adoption of state-of-the-art
cybersecurity technologies.

Working with CISA to guarantee that new Incident Reporting
mandates do not become overly burdensome to victims and reduce
focus on remediation during a cyber incident or event.

Taking measures to expand National incident response
capacity.
I'll close by briefly referencing efforts CrowdStrike has
undertaken to support defensive efforts during this time of increased
risk. As noted above, we have collaborated with organizations like JCDC
to address active campaigns. As always, we endeavor to openly publish
through our blog materials that might help the community understand
emerging threats and threat actors, and we will continue to do that as
appropriate. We have taken special measures to strengthen defenses of
current customers, and in consultation with Government partners we
collaborated with industry counterparts Cloudflare and Ping Identity to
launch a free Critical Infrastructure Defense Project for the Energy,
Water, and Hospital sectors.\18\ We encourage eligible entities to
consider participating in this program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Rapidly Improving Cyber Readiness for U.S. Critical
Infrastructure, Critical Infrastructure Defense Project, https://
criticalinfrastructuredefense.org/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. I look
forward to your questions and our continued discussion.

Mr. Torres. Thank you for your testimony. I now recognize
Dr. Morley to summarize his statement for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN M. MORLEY, MANAGER, FEDERAL RELATIONS,
AMERICAN WATER WORKS ASSOCIATION

Mr. Morley. Good morning, Chairman, Congressman Torres,
Ranking Member Katko, and Members of the committee. I
appreciate this opportunity to discuss cybersecurity in the
water sector and the support provided by our Federal partners.
Our members represent water systems large and small, municipal,
investor-owned, urban, and rural, to protect public health and
the environment and enhance the quality of life. In the modern
era of utility operations, this mission also includes managing
cybersecurity risks that may threaten the essential lifeline
function that water professionals provide 24/7/365.
The current threat situation illustrates both the necessity
and the strength of continuous two-way engagement and the value
of partnership that is necessary to jointly manage cyber
threats facing our Nation. AWWA recognizes the cybersecurity
challenge and believes a new approach is necessary, one that
recognizes the technical and financial challenges facing the
sector. This approach would set minimum cybersecurity standards
for all types of water systems. An effort that would provide a
tiered risk-based and performance-based set of requirements
modeled on a similar approach applied in the electric sector.
Federal oversight for such approach would be provided by
EPA given their existing statutory role in the water sector.
AWWA stands ready to work with Congress, the sector, and our
Federal partners to implement the strategy that supports
sustainable cybersecurity protection that recognizes the
variability in water systems across the Nation.
In late December, working with our sector partners, EPA and
CISA, we reached out, through EPA, to 58,000 water systems
alerting them to Russian cyber threat activities identified by
CISA. The associated advisories have been shared across
multiple communication platforms to ensure the widest possible
distribution. These engagements help professional organizations
like AWWA amplify the message of our Federal partners about the
evolving threat environment.
The new Shields Up campaign deployed by CISA has been very
well received and represents a welcome reorganization of the
information available to critical infrastructure systems. In
many cases, however, advisories and alerts are highly technical
and may be difficult to implement by entities that lack in-
house cybersecurity expertise.
To enhance the effectiveness of information sharing, we
recommend that CISA work with EPA and partners like AWWA, the
WaterISAC, and the Water Sector Coordinating Council to
properly contextualize threat information and ensure that the
information transmitted is concise and actionable.
In addition, expedient declassification of threat
intelligence is essential. While there is often tension getting
information moved to the unclassed level, in reality, most
entities simply want two things. What is the vulnerability and
what is the solution to mitigate it?
AWWA's cybersecurity guidance and assessment tool, first
issued in 2014, have been updated regularly. They support the
water sector's use of the NIST cybersecurity framework and help
community water systems to address the cyber provisions
implemented by Congress in America's Water Infrastructure Act
of 2018.
These resources also support the recommendations in several
Executive Orders, recent National security memorandums, and
ANSI/AWWA standards. Coordination with EPA, NIST, and CISA was
essential in developing these resources, which provide a strong
foundation for cybersecurity risk management.
I do want to highlight CISA's Cyber Hygiene program, a
service that I believe provides some of the most immediate risk
reduction benefits to users. We recommend that EPA, CISA, and
the sector organizations coordinate on a unified outreach
campaign to increase deployment of CyHy to water systems,
especially small and medium utilities.
CISA and EPA are currently working with the Water Sector
Coordinating Council on the Industrial Control Systems
Cybersecurity Initiative. This 100-day action plan will review
the scalability of ICS monitoring technology deployment and
establish information-sharing protocols with our Federal
partners.
Partnership is a key element of AWWA's cybersecurity risk
management activities. I just want to share with you two quick
examples. We have partnered with CISA and Idaho National Lab to
integrate the findings of our assessment tool with CISA's
cybersecurity evaluation tool, or CSET. In addition, over the
last several years, we worked with EPA, USDA, partners like
RCAP under grants to provide guidance and training to systems
serving less than 10,000 people.
We encourage continued investment and support for this type
of capacity development considering there are more than 40,000
community water systems that serve less than 3,300 people.
In summary, these are demonstrations of the value and power
of collaborative partnership between the water sector and our
Federal partners. We welcome the opportunity to build on these
successful engagements using a framework that is adaptive to
the dynamic nature of the threat, recognizes the variability
and the operational complexity and system maturity, and the
reality of the financial and technical capacity challenges
facing our Nation's water systems. I thank this opportunity to
speak with the committee and look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Morley follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kevin M. Morley
April 5, 2022
Good morning, Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Katko, and Members
of the committee. My name is Kevin Morley, and I am the Federal
relations manager for the American Water Works Association, or AWWA, on
whose behalf I am speaking today. I appreciate this opportunity to
offer AWWA's perspectives on how cybersecurity threats are being
addressed in the water sector (drinking water and wastewater systems).
AWWA's 50,000 members span the full spectrum of the water profession.
Our utility members represent water systems large and small, municipal
and investor-owned, urban and rural. We work to protect public health
and the environment, support the economy, and enhance our quality of
life. In the modern era of water utility operations, our mission also
includes managing cybersecurity risks that threaten the essential
lifeline function water professionals provide 24/7/365.
AWWA strongly values collaboration and information sharing with our
Federal partners to address the dynamic nature of the cyber threats
facing our critical infrastructure systems. Recent Federal
recommendations on how to mitigate Russian cyber threats have been
invaluable. The water sector has actively participated in multiple
briefings provided by the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency (CISA) and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) that
illuminate the evolving threat environment and help professional
organizations, such as AWWA, build awareness among members. Working
with sector partners, EPA reached out to 58,000 water systems
collectively serving about 300 million Americans regarding cyber threat
concerns at the end of December 2021. This led to several sector-level
briefings hosted by EPA to share information on Russian cyber threat
activity. The associated advisories have been shared across multiple
communication platforms to ensure the widest possible distribution to
water utility owners and operators.
The current situation illustrates both the necessity and strength
of continuous two-way engagement to jointly manage the cyber threats
facing critical infrastructure systems, including drinking water and
wastewater systems. Functionally, we see the following areas of
collaboration as most essential:

Actionable Threat Intelligence,

Vulnerability Mitigation and Technical Assistance,

Partnership and a Path Forward.
actionable threat intelligence
We recognize the complexity and sensitivity of the intelligence
efforts developed by our Federal partners. CISA, and its predecessors,
have generated copious amounts of information, alerts, and advisories
on a multitude of cyber vulnerabilities that have enabled many entities
to address otherwise unknown security gaps. The new Shields Up campaign
deployed by CISA has been very well-received and represents a welcome
reorganization of the information disseminated to assist and guide
critical infrastructure sectors. There are multiple Federal partners
that assess threats and develop valuable mitigation recommendations
that are valuable but often difficult for a single water system to
track and monitor absent a centralized hub for dissemination. Shields
Up has provided a unified platform to share this information in a
format that allows sector organizations, such as AWWA, to effectively
amplify the recommendations developed by CISA and our Federal partners
for cybersecurity risk management.
To enhance the effectiveness of the information being shared, we
recommend that CISA work with Sector Risk Management Agencies (SRMA)--
EPA in the water sector's case--and partners like AWWA, WaterISAC and
the Water Sector Coordinating Council to properly contextualize threat
information. In many cases, advisories and alerts are quite technical,
and they may be difficult to implement by entities without in-house
cybersecurity experts. It should be recognized that many systems are
divisions of municipal government and certain systems are not directly
managed by the water utility. Integrating sector subject-matter experts
into the review and development of threat alerts and advisories will
help ensure that the information transmitted to the sector is concise,
actionable, and properly contextualized.
Expedient declassification of threat intelligence is essential to
ensure that system owners and operators can effectively deploy
mitigations. While there is often tension in getting information moved
below a certain classification level, the reality is most entities
simply want to know what the vulnerability is and how it can be
mitigated. The variables that often drive classification such as
attribution and tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) are rarely
of direct interest to the end user of the technology or system that may
have been compromised.
vulnerability mitigation and technical assistance
AWWA, in alignment with our mission, has been directly engaged in
developing resources to facilitate the assessment of cybersecurity
vulnerabilities. This effort is centered on the controls provided in
the NIST Cybersecurity Framework. AWWA's sector-specific guidance and
assessment tool \1\ provides a water utility with a tailored
application of the NIST CSF that is based on its application of certain
technologies. Using the tool allows utility assessment of cybersecurity
controls and practices to be right-sized in a manner that emphasizes
actions that address the highest priority controls expected to quickly
provide the greatest risk reduction value. Coordination with NIST, EPA,
and CISA was essential in developing this resource. Collaboration with
our Federal partners provided a strong foundation for creating a
consistent and repeatable course of action to reduce vulnerabilities to
cyber attacks as recommended in Executive Order 13636 and several ANSI/
AWWA standards.\2\ \3\ \4\ The guidance and assessment tool were first
released in 2014 and are regularly updated to help community water
systems comply with the cybersecurity provisions included in section
2013 of America's Water Infrastructure Act (AWIA) of 2018 (Pub. L. 115-
270). In AWIA, Congress placed an emphasis on assessing and taking
action to mitigate cybersecurity threats that could impact drinking
water utility operations and/or business enterprise systems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ American Water Works Association, Water Sector Cybersecurity
Risk Management Guidance and Assessment Tool, https://www.awwa.org/
cybersecurity.
\2\ ANSI/AWWA G430: Security Practices for Operations and
Management.
\3\ ANSI/AWWA J100: Risk and Resilience Management of Water and
Wastewater Systems.
\4\ ANSI/AWWA G440: Emergency Preparedness Practices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cybersecurity vulnerabilities are a critical concern in the entire
water sector. AWWA's resources are designed to assist all water systems
in assessing potential vulnerabilities with various technology
applications. Once a vulnerability is identified, many of the CISA
resources can help mitigate risks. One valuable resource is the Cyber
Hygiene Service that assesses the ``health'' of an entity's publicly
accessible web applications by checking for known vulnerabilities and
weak configurations. This service is likely to provide the most
immediate risk reduction benefit to users based on the actionable
mitigation recommendations included in the reports provided to
subscribers by CISA. We recommend that EPA, CISA, and sector
organizations coordinate a unified outreach campaign to increase
deployment of this resource among water systems, especially smaller and
medium-sized utilities.
As water system cyber capabilities mature, other CISA-based
resources provide support for long-term, sustainable cyber risk
management strategies. The Cyber Security Evaluation Tool (CSET)
provides more advanced capabilities to users. AWWA worked with CISA and
Idaho National Lab to integrate AWWA's Assessment Tool output with
CSET. This new functionality allows a water system that has used
AWWA's tool to seamlessly transition their information into CSET, a
resource that provides advanced features and analysis of system
architecture and controls. This is an excellent demonstration of
partnership between the sector and Federal Government to advance our
shared objective of improving the cybersecurity capabilities of water
utilities.
The diversity in the water sector is unique among U.S. utility
sectors in both the size and complexity of water systems that provide
drinking water and wastewater services across the country as either a
public agency or a privately-owned utility. Consequently, education and
training are an on-going activity and need within the sector. A
partnership with the United States Department of Agriculture
facilitated the development of materials and important training on
cybersecurity for small systems. Through an EPA small systems capacity
development grant, AWWA and the Rural Community Assistance Partnership
(RCAP) also were able to provide guidance and training on AWIA
compliance, including directed outreach and training on cybersecurity.
The training drew on a scaled-down version of the AWWA guidance,
targeted to the needs of small systems. AWWA produced facilitated
training, eLearning resources, and a guidance document for small
utilities titled Water Sector Cybersecurity Risk Management Guidance
for Small Systems.\5\ This ``getting started guide'' is intended to
help small, rural utilities improve their cybersecurity practices. The
intended users serve populations of fewer than 10,000 people, and
particularly, utilities that serve fewer than 3,300 people. This
resource was prepared to reflect the reality that many of the controls
in the NIST CSF do not apply to the environment of many small
utilities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ AWWA, Water Sector Cybersecurity Risk Management Guidance for
Small Systems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These types of capacity development efforts are essential when
considering there are more than 45,000 community water systems that
serve fewer than 3,300 people. AWWA encourages continued support for
this type of engagement, given that cybersecurity is a threat to
critical infrastructure systems of all sizes and types.
The water sector is actively engaged with CISA and EPA through the
Water Sector Coordinating Council on the Industrial Control Systems
(ICS) Cybersecurity Initiative. This 100-day action plan will review
the scalability of ICS monitoring technology deployment, such as CISA's
CyberSentry, including the development of criteria for the adoption of
such technology by water systems. In addition, the action plan will
seek to establish the necessary information-sharing protocols with
Federal partners leveraging the actions already taken by the electric
and gas sectors. The direct involvement of subject-matter experts from
the water sector is essential for ensuring that this type of action
properly accounts for the operational needs and constraints of a water
utility.
partnership and a path forward
Under Presidential Policy Directive 21, each sector has an
established Sector Coordinating Council (SCC). The intent of this
framework is partnership between CISA and SRMAs on critical homeland
security matters facing the Nation. While SCCs have provided invaluable
support in fulfilling the mission of CISA and SMRAs, there is always
opportunity for improvement and continued growth. Given the scale of
the water sector, the function of the Water SCC and WaterISAC can be
more consistently leveraged to provide real-time assessment and
calibration of critical information-sharing products that may be
developed by Federal partners. Federal water sector-specific resources
should not be developed and released independent of review and
coordination by relevant subject-matter experts, such as the members
that constitute the Water SCC and supporting associations. Our shared
mission to facilitate the secure operations of critical infrastructure
is stronger when we work collaboratively and leverage the assets and
resources each can bring to bear on the challenges imposed by cyber
threats. Consistent messaging and clarity on how our respective
resources and guidance documents complement each other is in the best
interest of the public we serve together.
AWWA recognizes the cybersecurity challenge and is committed to
establishing a new paradigm for cybersecurity governance in the water
sector. We believe a new approach \6\ is necessary, one that recognizes
the technical and financial challenges facing the sector and sets
minimum cybersecurity standards for all types of water systems. A
tiered risk-and performance-based requirements model similar to the
approach used in the electric sector under the auspices of North
American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) would underpin this
approach in the water sector. An entity similar to NERC would be
created in the water sector to lead the development of the requirements
using subject-matter experts from the field. It would also perform
periodic third-party conformity assessments. Federal oversight and
approval of requirements would be provided by the EPA, given existing
statutory authority for water and wastewater utility operations. A
recent report by Foundation for the Defense of Democracies (FDD)\7\
recognized the merits of such an oversight body in providing on-going
industry-led cyber threat mitigation efforts. AWWA welcomes the
opportunity to work with our Federal partners to implement a strategy
that provides sustainable cybersecurity protection that recognizes the
variability in the maturity and complexity of water systems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Paul Stockton, Strengthening the Cybersecurity of America's
Water Systems: Industry-Led Regulatory Options (Washington, DC:
American Water Works Association, August 2021).
\7\ Foundation for the Defense of Democracies, Poor Cybersecurity
Makes Water a Weak Link in Critical Infrastructure.

Mr. Torres. Thank you for your testimony. I now recognize
Mr. Silberstein to summarize his statement for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN SILBERSTEIN, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
FINANCIAL SERVICES INFORMATION SHARING AND ANALYSIS CENTER

Mr. Silberstein. Thank you, Chairman Torres, Ranking Member
Katko, and honorable of Members of the committee for this
opportunity to testify. I am Steven Silberstein, CEO of the
Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis Center,
known as FS-ISAC.
You should know upfront that the financial sector is well-
situated to navigate the current threat environment but remains
highly vigilant not knowing what may come next. Financial
sanctions suggest the sector to be a distinct target but the
sector benefits from an historic security experience dating
back to the days of physical safes to protect cash. Before
adding details, I would like to explain the role of FS-ISAC
within the sector.
FS-ISAC exists to foster the resilience of the global
financial services sector and its customers. As a private,
nonprofit association, FS-ISAC membership consists of
approximately 5,000 financial institutions in nearly 70
countries that together represent $100 trillion of deposits and
assets under custody.
We manage this critical cyber community with more than 100
staff situated around the globe. FS-ISAC is the global cyber
intelligence-sharing community for the financial sector
allowing us to take a follow-the-sun approach.
The highly competitive financial service industry
recognizes that collaboration around cybersecurity is a must,
just as historically cooperating to establish clearinghouses
and exchanges where all parties can meet to complete a
transaction. Similarly, cyber criminals don't target just one
institution. Instead, they try to maximize their investment by
attacking many. If one firm notices that its systems are being
targeted, it will share this information with its peers through
the FS-ISAC, empowering our members to prepare and defend
against an attack before it happens to them. With a sector-wide
view, we are better able to prepare firms for emerging threats
and new vulnerabilities.
In addition to our operational mission, we have been an
active member of the Financial Services Sector Coordinating
Council, FSSCC, since its inception 20 years ago. The council
is comprised of the sector's key operators and associations
through which nearly the entire sector is represented.
Let me switch to the effective role played by our public-
sector partners during this current incident, and this must be
acknowledged. We applaud the Biden-Harris administration and
its sharing of information throughout the escalating situation
in Eastern Europe and the Russian invasion of Ukraine. The
sector appreciates the paradigm shift from reactive to
proactive sharing of information--excuse me--the repeated and
consistent messaging, and realistic context provided by CISA,
the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Agency, joined by the
NSA, U.S. Treasury, FBI, and other Government organizations has
allowed our sector to institute the necessary security
precautions and motivated institutions to conduct timely
reviews of their cyber hygiene and incident response plans.
Following the stand-up of the Unified Coordination Group,
UCG, by the Department of Homeland Security last month,
Treasury and CISA leadership engaged with the sector to develop
a joint playbook for how the Government and industry may
communicate and engage during incident response and recovery
for this critical sector during the current heightened
tensions. Also, as noted by my colleagues, CISA's new JCDC,
Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative, provides a key
communications channel while fostering real-time information
sharing among the sector, CISA, the U.S. Treasury, critical
infrastructure, and other stakeholders. The JCDC enables our
analysts to engage with sector-specific insights and review
technical exchanges for sector implications, again, for sector
distribution.
As I speak, the financial sector has not experienced an
increased level of cyber attacks directly attributable to
Russia. We are always tracking the continuous background noise
of low-level cyber attacks and reconnaissance missions.
However, outside of the conflict zone, we are not seeing any
significant uptick in attacks attributable to any specific
geography or threat actor. But the early and continued sharing
of warnings and technical information by CISA and the
Government have prompted the financial sector to open emergency
communications channels at the end of last year. We activated
the sector's Core Executive Response Group, which is part of
our all-hazards playbook. On this recurring call, Government
leadership from Treasury, CISA, and regulators communicate and
provide updates on emerging vulnerabilities, associated
mitigations, and resiliency plans for the sector.
Over the last 100 days, the sector's various information
channels have effectively amplified the Government's warnings,
alerts, and available resources, and we have participated in a
useful array of Classified and un-Classified stakeholder
engagements.
In conclusion, I would like to share that FS-ISAC and our
fellow sector organizations stand ready to work with the
administration, Congress, and this committee in any way we can
protect the financial sector, its customers, and economic
security. The direction of sharing has been very effective and
we are optimistic that it will continue and advance the
security for all. Thank you, again, for the opportunity today.
I am happy to answer any questions when they come.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Silberstein follows:]
Prepared Statement of Steven Silberstein
March 30, 2022
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Katko and Honorable Members of
the committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify at this hearing
on ``Mobilizing Our Cyber Defenses: Securing Critical Infrastructure
Against Russian Cyber Threats.'' I am Steven Silberstein, CEO of the
Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis Center, or FS-ISAC.
My statement will illustrate how the strong and effective
partnership between the financial sector and the Federal Government
enhances the resilience of this critical sector not only generally, but
also specifically with respect to the current geopolitical situation.
You should know up front that the sector is well-situated to navigate
the current threat environment, but remains highly vigilant, not
knowing what may come next. Before sharing these details, I would like
to explain the role of the FS-ISAC within the financial sector.
the role of the fs-isac
The FS-ISAC exists to foster the resilience and continuity of the
global financial services infrastructure, individual financial
institutions and, of course, customers, against acts that could
significantly disrupt the sector's ability to provide services critical
to the orderly functioning of the economy. As such, FS-ISAC stands
front and center in the face of continued cyber attacks against
financial institutions.
The financial sector formed the very first ISAC in 1999 in response
to Presidential Decision Directive 63, which in 1998 called for the
private sector to establish ISACs and for the public and private
sectors to collaborate to protect critical infrastructure from cyber
threats and attacks. A private, nonprofit association, the FS-ISAC
represents nearly 5,000 financial institution members in nearly 70
countries that, together, have nearly $100 trillion under management.
Members include commercial banks, credit unions, exchanges,
clearing houses, brokerages and investment companies, insurance
companies, payments processors, and financial trade associations.
Headquartered in Reston, Virginia, we manage this critical network with
more than 100 people situated in about 10 countries. The FS-ISAC is the
only global cyber intelligence-sharing community solely focused on the
financial sector, allowing it to take a ``follow-the-sun'' approach,
with staff continuously working with the members.
It might surprise the committee to learn that a highly competitive
industry like financial services can be very collaborative when it
comes to cybersecurity. It makes sense, though, because cyber criminals
try to target as many victims as possible with the same attack. In that
way they earn a better return on their nefarious investment. Moreover,
given the sector's reliance on public trust, an attack on one bank
could damage the trust of customers of other banks, a dangerous
situation for the financial sector and the public at large.
Thus, if one firm notices that its systems are being targeted, it
will share that information with its peers through the FS-ISAC,
empowering other members to prepare for and defend against that attack
before it happens to them. Our thousands of member financial
institutions report cyber activity daily on our secure platform. In
turn, our global intelligence team reviews, processes, and analyzes the
intelligence and provides members with alerts, updates, and briefings--
such as the attached report on cyber challenges in 2022. In addition to
the daily intake and dissemination of current threats, we conduct
regular threat calls to provide more details and context and provide
members with a secure chat capability. There is a wide variety of
channels, based on charter-like banking or insurance--geography,
incidents, and current issues like the Russian/Ukraine situation.
Unlike individual firms, we can see how many institutions experience
the same type of threat or attack, allowing us to gauge across the
sector its seriousness and sophistication.
We publish executive-level reports to arm boards and leadership
with a high-level understanding of the cyber threat landscape so they
can make strategic business decisions about investing in cybersecurity
and resource allocation. Not only does the FS-ISAC monitor intelligence
and cyber threats, but it also conducts exercises that simulate attack
scenarios based on the current threats. This allows members to practice
how they would respond and develop a plan in the event of an incident.
A recent example may illustrate how these capabilities combine to
improve resilience. In 2021, the New Zealand Stock exchange was the
target of a distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack. Such an attack
intends to clog a network so as to crash a website or system. This
event was part of a wave of DDoS attacks that affected more than 100
financial institutions globally. It is not an exaggeration to say
thousands of institutions could have been attacked if not for the
intelligence sharing on FS-ISAC's platform, which enabled financial
institutions to share critical information needed for members to shore
up their defenses to prevent the attack from expanding.
Two important nonprofit subsidiaries of FS-ISAC deserve mention--
Sheltered Harbor and the Financial Data Exchange (FDX). Sheltered
Harbor protects public confidence in the financial sector if a
devastating event like a cyber attack causes an institution's critical
systems and its backups to fail. FDX seeks to unify the financial
sector around a common, interoperable, and royalty-free standard for
the secure access of user-permissioned financial data. Background
documents on both nonprofits are attached.
financial sector collaboration
Of course, the FS-ISAC does not perform this role in isolation. On
the contrary, the financial sector boasts a history and depth of
collaboration among competitors and between it and Government that
bolsters resilience and ultimately serves the needs and interests of
its customers.
Ahead of the Year 2000 Rollover, for example, financial
institutions voluntarily graded their readiness and shared scores with
regulators on a global basis. This incentivized the entire sector to be
prepared. Following 9/11, the financial sector decided to coordinate to
enhance its readiness and to more effectively collaborate with the
Government, forming the Financial Services Sector Coordinating Council
(FSSCC) in 2002. This closely followed Federal and State financial
regulators, which, led by the U.S. Department of the Treasury, formed
the Financial and Banking Information Infrastructure Committee (FBIIC)
earlier in 2002. More information about FBIIC may be found at
fbiic.gov. The financial sector effectively established its own
Government and sector coordinating councils well before the creation of
the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, illustrating its commitment
to partnership, as well as its ability to innovate, to be ahead of the
curve on matters like the protection of its own critical
infrastructure.
The FSSCC is comprised of the sector's key organizations, through
which nearly the entire sector is represented, including the American
Bankers Association; the Bank Policy Institute (BPI) and BITS, its
technology policy division; the Securities Industry and Financial
Markets Association (SIFMA); the Analysis and Resilience Center for
Systemic Risk (ARC); the Independent Community Bankers of America and
the FS-ISAC. I would like to recognize the current FSSCC chair and vice
chair (respectively) for their leadership and partnership: Ron Green,
chief security officer of Mastercard; and Chris Feeney, executive vice
president at BPI and president of BITS. An overview of FSSCC is
attached and a full list of members can be found at fsscc.org.
During FSSCC's 20 years, the FS-ISAC evolved into the operational
arm of FSSCC, complementing FSSCC's role as the policy arm on critical
infrastructure protection matters. The FS-ISAC developed a playbook
that outlines how it responds to cyber threats and incidents on a daily
basis. It includes a section developed in coordination with FSSCC,
SIFMA, and FBIIC that lays out a process for these four sector
organizations to come together, if necessary, in response to a
significant incident--forming the Core Executive Response Group (CERG),
to ensure information is distributed as appropriate across the sector.
The CERG proved valuable during the early phases of COVID-19. As we
watched the virus spread at the end of 2019 and beginning of 2020, we
recognized the need for the sector, public and private, to discuss how
we should respond to it and share ideas for protecting financial
institutions and customers alike by keeping critical infrastructure
operating. FS-ISAC called together the CERG on January 30, 2020, ahead
of most alarm bells going off in the United States, to be prepared if
the inevitable occurred. The CERG participants met for nearly 18
months, sharing information about the virus, addressing common
challenges and sharing effective practices for operating in the face of
it. During this time, we also tackled SolarWinds, a Microsoft Exchange
vulnerability and other incidents that arose while still managing the
effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Though largely unknown, this CERG experience exemplifies the
success of the public/private partnership within the financial sector.
Leadership from the Treasury Department and the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), along with Federal and State
regulators, met regularly--often multiple times per week--with their
counterparts from FS-ISAC, financial trade associations, and key
financial firms to ensure customers could continue to receive financial
products and services through the challenging early phases of the
pandemic.
Our sector collaboration also extends beyond the financial sector
itself. We are members of the National Council of ISACs, sharing
information regularly with other member ISACs, particularly during
critical events and incidents. Given financial sector reliance on
telecommunications and electricity, FSSCC and FS-ISAC led the
development of a tri-sector playbook in 2018. The three sectors
exercised the playbook prior to the pandemic and regularly used it
during the pandemic to ensure information flowed freely among these
three sectors.
The sector's collaboration with the Treasury Department, as our
Sector Risk Management Agency (SMRA), constitutes another important
component of the partnership. The Treasury Department helps ensure that
CISA receives accurate, comprehensive information about current sector
operations and any potential incidents. Moreover, the Treasury
Department coordinates with the sector and CISA to identify sector
risks and then assess and mitigate them through, for example, informing
National Critical Functions, conducting regular exercises to test
preparedness and emergency planning. The value of the Treasury
Department's SRMA role came to thefore ahead of the current
geopolitical crisis, which I will address shortly.
I have elaborated at length on the partnerships within the
financial sector, because we responded to the crisis of the moment
within this context. The FS-ISAC knows well how to promote the
resilience of our members, and we do so in conjunction with our
financial sector partners, public and private, in a familiar, trusted,
and effective fashion. As such, the effective role played by our public
sector partners must be acknowledged.
current collaboration with the u.s. government
We applaud the Biden-Harris administration and its various Federal
Government components on the expeditious and early sharing of
information throughout the escalating geopolitical situation in Eastern
Europe and current Russian invasion of Ukraine. The sector appreciated
the paradigm shift from reactive to proactive warnings forecasting
Russian military action, the potential for Russia to engage in
malicious cyber activity against the United States and evolving
intelligence that Russia may be exploring options for potential cyber
attacks. The repeated, consistent messaging and realistic context
provided by CISA, the Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI), the
Treasury Department and other Government organizations allowed our
sector to prepare for and institute the necessary security precautions,
motivating institutions to conduct expeditious reviews of their
incident response and regional personnel evacuation plans.
This early and continued sharing of indicators of compromise (IOCs)
and warnings by CISA and the Treasury Department prompted the financial
sector to open emergency communications channels prior to the 2021
holiday season and activate the sector's CERG on December 15, 2021. On
this recurring call, Government leadership, including the Treasury
Department, CISA, and Government regulators, provides updates on
emerging vulnerabilities and associated mitigations, as well as current
sanctions announcements, and facilitates the regular exchange of
preparation activities taken by the sector.
As part of its role as the National coordinator for critical
infrastructure security and resilience, CISA has actively engaged with
its Government and industry partners, including our SRMA, to share
Classified and un-Classified information. The rapid de-Classification
and passage of IOCs and malicious internet protocol (IP) addresses to
the sector by the Federal Government is commended. Financial sector
representatives have participated in several broad cross-sector
information calls, as well as monthly un-Classified and Classified
briefs hosted by the Treasury Department. There are also weekly
intelligence collaboration sessions with the Treasury Department and
ARC member firms.
Additionally, the establishment of CISA's ``Shields-Up'' web page,
available at cisa.gov, has proven to be a great awareness tool for
critical infrastructure organizations--and the business community as a
whole--housing in one place the latest technical products and security
guidance and steps organizations, businesses, and individuals can take
to heighten their security posture and ensure they are prepared for a
disruptive cyber incident. In addition to the various alerts,
advisories, and insight products, CISA also established a catalog of
free services from Government partners, the open-source community, and
its Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative (JCDC) members to assist with the
challenge of identifying resources to address urgent security issues.
My organization, as well as our sector's trade associations and other
partners, have consistently amplified these information products and
resources to thousands of organizations around the country.
Operationally, the FS-ISAC, along with other representatives of the
financial services sector, have engaged directly with CISA and the
Treasury Department via a dedicated JCDC communications channel to
foster near-real-time information sharing. The JCDC brings together
public and private partners to begin to unify defensive actions and
drive down risk in advance of cyber incidents occurring and help
strengthen the Nation's cyber defenses through planning, preparation,
and information sharing. This direct engagement within the JCDC has
also allowed the FS-ISAC analysts to provide sector specific insights
and review technical exchanges for sector implications that can then be
distributed to the sector at large.
Let me now turn to the current cyber threat and the manner in which
the financial sector is handling it.
state of the sector
As I write this statement, the financial sector has not experienced
an increased level of cyber attacks coming from Russia. Of course, we
are always tracking ``background noise'' in terms of low-level cyber
attacks, mostly from threat actors scanning for vulnerabilities.
However, outside of the conflict zone, we are not seeing any
significant uptick in attacks attributable to any specific geography or
threat actor. I reiterate that this assessment holds true as I prepare
to deliver this statement to the committee, but we are always on the
watch in the event this changes.
Over the last 100 days, the financial sector has taken various
precautionary steps to not only ensure our individual organizations,
but also the sector as a whole, is as prepared as it can be at this
point. As described previously, the sector's various coordination and
information-sharing elements have amplified the administration's
warnings and cyber alerts/advisories to thousands of entities around
the world, as well as participated in an assorted array of un-
Classified and Classified stakeholder engagement opportunities. Our
recurring CERG calls with leaders from across the sector have ensured
we will be aware of any change in the security of the financial system.
Currently, the FS-ISAC Cyber Threat Level (CTL), a barometer of the
cyber threat landscape as collectively determined by our member
financial firms, is elevated. Elevated is the second level of four
levels on the scale; the CTL has not been raised to high or severe, for
the reasons noted previously. This means that the financial sector is
in a state of heightened cybersecurity awareness and is taking extra
steps to strengthen cyber defenses. There is heightened awareness and
diligence across most of the globe, given that the adversary is well-
practiced and--armed on the cyber side. However, the cybersecurity
measures highlighted last week by the administration are critical
baseline practices and should always be implemented to increase
preparedness and operational resilience.
Financial institutions, and banks in particular, have always had to
protect themselves. Long before cyber threats existed, criminals like
Willie Sutton targeted banks because ``that was where the money was.''
Criminals have since evolved, using sophisticated tools to attack
financial institutions, and some nation-states have followed suit.
Fortunately, the sector's ability to thwart such attacks has evolved in
tandem, and the financial system remains attentive to and is well-
prepared to defend against potential sophisticated Russian cyber
attacks.
The FS-ISAC and other sector organizations have been raising the
level of cyber resilience within the sector for more than 20 years.
Working with thousands of financial firms around the world, we know the
tactics, techniques, and procedures used by Russian state and non-state
actors up until now. Given that, our members have been preparing to
defend themselves by securing networks and servers, ensuring data is
properly backed up, patching vulnerabilities, reducing access to
systems to the absolute minimum, exercising to practice how to respond
in various scenarios, and, of course, heightening vigilance across the
board. The financial sector recognizes that preparation is the most
important component, as targets do not receive the same type of
``heads-up'' warning with cyber incidents as in a kinetic war. Our
organizations always need to be prepared.
improving public/private collaboration
The public/private partnership is not simply alive and well; it
thrives within the financial sector. I cannot speak more highly of the
value provided by the Treasury Department, CISA, FBIIC, FBI, and U.S.
Secret Service to the cause of enhancing resilience. All are to be
commended for their contributions. Of course, as in any endeavor,
improvements can always be made. To that end, I offer two brief items
for enhancing collaboration.

The Treasury Department and CISA have recently increased the
amount of information shared with the sector, and I applaud
them for it. With respect to both Classified and un-Classified
information, we encourage this trend to continue and increase,
for the greater protection of the sector.

The highly regulated and global financial sector faces a
variety of incident reporting requirements. We urge
collaboration to minimize the operational impact of multiple
incident reporting requirements unique to the financial sector.
These suggested improvements do not detract from the productive
partnership that serves the financial sector and its customers so very
well. The sector's secure posture in the light of Russian cyber threats
testifies, in no small part, to that partnership.
conclusion
In closing, I wish to reiterate that the financial sector is
currently secure but remains highly vigilant. That we have not yet seen
the attacks anticipated does not mean they will not come. If they do,
the sector will be prepared. The FS-ISAC and our fellow sector
organizations stand ready to work with the administration, Congress and
this committee in any way we can to protect the financial sector, its
customers and economic security. Please do not hesitate to call upon
us.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before you today. I
am happy to answer any questions Members of the committee may have.
Attachments:

FS-ISAC Annual Global Intelligence Office Report,
``Navigating Cyber 2022'' (March 2022)

Financial Services Sector Coordinating Council (FSSCC)
Overview

Sheltered Harbor Overview

Financial Data Exchange (FDX) Overview

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Torres. Thank you for your testimony. I now recognize
Mr. Yoran to summarize his statement for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF AMIT YORAN, CHAIRMAN AND CEO, TENABLE, INC.

Mr. Yoran. Thank you, Chairman Torres, Ranking Member
Katko, and Members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today and your leadership during this
incredibly important time.
I am Amit Yoran, chairman and CEO of Tenable. With over
40,000 customers world-wide, including just about every Federal
department and agency, a majority of the Fortune 500, and
numerous Global 2000 organizations, Tenable is the world's
leading provider of vulnerability management and cyber risk
assessment capabilities.
Recently, LAPSUS$ has shown that with only $25,000 a group
of teenagers could get into organizations with mature
cybersecurity practices. Consider Russia, with much deeper
pockets, focus, and mission, targeting critical infrastructure.
That should be a sobering, if not terrifying, call to action.
U.S. critical infrastructure is a complex network of 16
interconnected sectors, each with varying degrees of
cybersecurity preparedness and risk management practices. Many
organizations increasingly interconnect IT and OT systems in
pursuit of improved efficiency resulting in increased
vulnerability. These risks are exacerbated when exposing slow-
moving, highly-structured environments to the pace, speed, and
dynamic threats introduced through the IT world.
Last year's Colonial Pipeline and ensuing gas supply
failures serve as a stark example of the potential impact of
increasing IT-OT convergence and the importance of basic cyber
hygiene. Government policy should not allow for learned
helplessness by Government agencies or private industry. There
is too much at stake for individuals and organizations to
remain negligent, not taking even the basic steps to improve
their cyber posture and manage cyber risk proactively.
CISA has already recommended best practices that
organizations can implement to prepare themselves from a cyber
perspective through its Shields Up initiative. These
recommendations align strongly with the best practice
recommendations of numerous security advocacy groups, industry
associations, working groups, and regulatory bodies.
Organizations that fail to implement these basic steps should
be held accountable.
The SEC's proposed cybersecurity risk management strategy,
governance, and disclosure would require public companies to
disclose their policies and procedures for identifying and
managing cybersecurity risks, management's role in implementing
cyber policies and procedures, and the board of directors'
cybersecurity expertise. This proposal stands alongside the
recently passed Cyber Incident Reporting legislation for timely
and transparent notification of cyber breaches as the two
actions that would most dramatically improve our cybersecurity
preparedness as a Nation. Requiring greater transparency of
cyber risk practices and oversight, forces companies to treat
cybersecurity risk as business risk and will lead to stronger
cybersecurity governance and accountability among corporate
leaders and boards. This results in more effective
cybersecurity, period.
For decades now, critical infrastructure operators have
highlighted the complexity, impracticality, and challenges of
updating infrastructure software, applying patches, and
hardening their systems. I will not minimize the seemingly
overwhelming nature of these tasks from where we sit today. But
these things can be done. We should be able to design, develop,
and deploy critical infrastructure software that is capable of
being patched and operated in a protected, secure, and
resilient fashion.
I can tell you, that unless we make a stand, unless we show
our resolve, unless we demonstrate our commitment to a more
secure future, there will be a hearing like this one decades
from now wondering why responsible action wasn't taken. While
Americans remain at strategic risk, we can only conclude that
market forces around cybersecurity have not achieved successful
equilibrium. Free markets work best with risk informed decision
making and transparency. Pushing for such a regulatory regime
should be a nonpartisan effort. Such an effort would fuel, not
stifle, innovation, discover new approaches in cybersecurity,
and new approaches in critical infrastructure service delivery.
Thank you, again, Chairman Torres, Ranking Member Katko,
and all the Members of the committee, for your attention to
this important topic. I look forward to working with you and
your colleagues, as cybersecurity remains a critical issue
facing our Nation and economic security. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify today and look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Yoran follows:]
Prepared Statement of Amit Yoran
March 30, 2022
introduction
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Katko, and Members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on securing
our critical infrastructure against Russian cyber threats. We are at a
major inflection point in history and how we respond will make all the
difference. Thank you for your leadership always, and particularly at
this incredibly important time.
My name is Amit Yoran and I am the chairman and CEO of Tenable. I
have spent more than 20 years in the cybersecurity field, both as a
public servant and in industry. I earned a master's in computer science
from The George Washington University and a bachelor's in computer
science from the United States Military Academy. I served as the
director of the National Cybersecurity Division and as the founding
director of the United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-
CERT) program. Additionally, I have served on a number of Presidential
advisory commissions. As an innovator and entrepreneur in the security
space, I founded and built two security companies: Riptech, acquired by
Symantec; and NetWitness, from which I went on to serve as the
president of RSA after it acquired NetWitness. I have also served as a
director and advisor to security startups and industry advisory boards.
I have previously testified before Congressional committees on
cybersecurity policy, encryption, and other related issues.
The company I lead, Tenable, is headquartered in Columbia,
Maryland. Tenable has over 1,600 employees globally and more than
40,000 customers world-wide. Tenable is publicly traded on the NASDAQ
and is the world's leading provider of vulnerability management
capabilities. Our company provides organizations with an unmatched
breadth of visibility and depth of analytics to measure and communicate
cyber risk. We believe cybersecurity is foundational to making better
and more strategic decisions. Our goal is to eliminate blind spots and
help organizations prioritize which actions they can take to most
efficiently reduce exposure and loss.
Simply put, Tenable empowers organizations of all sizes to
understand and reduce their cyber risk. For the Federal Government
specifically, Tenable provides the most widely-deployed vulnerability
assessment solution, serving just about every department and agency.
Our solutions are also broadly used by State and local governments to
manage cyber risk.
understanding the threat
Knowing what the threat is, the impact it could have on your
systems and how to respond is far more important than knowing where the
threat is coming from.
Understanding where the threat is coming from is useful from the
perspective of National cyber strategy, defense, and intelligence. It
can also help determine how to prioritize remediations based on the
motivations of threat actors. Beyond that, knowing where a threat is
coming from has little impact on how an organization responds. For
almost all organizations, cybersecurity risk management practices are
the same regardless of whether the attack is coming from the Russians,
other nation-states, cyber criminals, or other bad actors.
Ransomware against critical infrastructure providers is incredibly
profitable for cyber criminals, as demonstrated by the Conti ransomware
data leaks. The Conti group and its affiliates reportedly made use of
over 30 known vulnerabilities, some of which were first disclosed in
2018. The Conti bitcoin wallet data showed more than $1 billion had
been paid, creating a massive funding method for Russian actors.
Ransomware is also a very flexible weapon, as demonstrated by the
Russian-attributed malware BlackEnergy and CrashOverride, both of which
were used in attacks against the Ukrainian power grid, and were very
sophisticated and modular with payloads that could be delivered in
near-real time to the victim. Two separate indictments from the
Department of Justice (DOJ) were unsealed on March 25, charging four
Russian nationals for extensive hacking campaigns against critical
infrastructure providers world-wide.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ TechTarget, ``US indicts Russian nationals for critical
infrastructure attacks,'' https://www.techtarget.com/searchsecurity/
news/252515161/US-indicts-Russian-nationals-for-critical-
infrastructure-attacks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
LAPSUS$ has shown that with only $25,000, a group of teenagers
could gain access into organizations that have even the most mature
security practices. The thought of a nation-state--with much deeper
pockets, focus, patience and a mission--targeting these sectors should
be a sobering, if not terrifying, call to urgent action.
the state of u.s. critical infrastructure
Last week, President Biden warned of the potential for Russian
cyber attacks against the United States in response to the economic
costs we have imposed following the invasion of Ukraine. He urged
Governors, private-sector partners, and critical infrastructure
providers to harden their cyber defenses immediately. The White House
also issued a Fact Sheet, ``Act Now to Protect Against Potential
Cyberattacks,'' that called for companies to deploy multi-factor
authentication, continuous monitoring, and threat mitigation, to make
sure systems are patched and protected against all known
vulnerabilities, build security into products from the ground up, and
use modern tools to check for known and potential vulnerabilities.
Critical infrastructure is not one thing, and most critical
infrastructure industries vastly differ. The Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) has identified 16 critical
infrastructure sectors in the United States, including financial
services, energy providers, water and wastewater treatment facilities,
and transportation systems. There is no singular defense paradigm that
could effectively be applied across all the sectors. Some critical
infrastructure providers have a high degree of cybersecurity
preparedness, strong risk understanding and risk management practices,
and very strong security programs. Others are woefully ill-prepared.
All critical infrastructure sectors continue to undergo digital
transformation, resulting in an expanding cyber attack surface. New
technology investments represent great efficiency opportunities, like
the move to smart factories and smart cities, but these shifts can
introduce real gaps in security. Without enhancements to security and
resiliency, critical infrastructure providers are left unprepared to
address cyber threats.
Just this week, a new report from the Center for Strategic and
International Studies (CSIS) and Trellix, yet again, put this lack of
preparedness in writing. The report, based on survey results from 800
IT decision makers from several countries around the world, including
the United States, found that 9 percent of critical infrastructure
operators don't even have a cybersecurity strategy in place, despite
the fact that 85 percent of respondents believe they have been targeted
by a nation-state cyber threat.
Certain critical infrastructure sectors better understand strategic
risk assessments and cyber risk management as a discipline. Generally
speaking, the cybersecurity practices in these markets and industries
have been more highly regulated than others.
For example, the financial services sector has long relied on IT
and has built strong cyber risk management processes and practices.
Most modern banks realize that, in many ways, they are technology
companies. For decades, everything from bank accounts to transactions
to data analytics have been digitized, resulting in a culture of strong
security practices. These security practices have been encouraged
through a high level of regulation and oversight. While dramatic
differences can be found in the security readiness of individual banks,
the sector as a whole has strong security and is resilient as a
critical infrastructure.
For years, the electric industry operated on voluntary compliance
of reliability standards, but following the Northeast blackout of 2003,
Congress authorized the mandatory development of reliability standards,
which included cybersecurity (Energy Policy Act of 2005).
Due, in part, to regulation by the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission (FERC), which oversees the reliable operation of the bulk
power system, the electric sector has improved cyber resiliency. FERC
certified the North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) to
oversee electric reliability, and as part of its definition of
resilience, included cybersecurity as critical. Today, cybersecurity
standards in the energy sector continue to be developed and enforced by
NERC resulting in improved security and reliability.
As IT and operational technology (OT) systems become increasingly
interconnected, even some well-managed critical infrastructure sectors
remain at risk. For example, some industries, such as mining, chemical
plants, and fuel pipelines, already have safety systems to prevent
destruction of physical infrastructure and bodily harm or loss of life.
However, as organizations increasingly interconnect their IT and OT
systems in the pursuit of improved efficiency, more control settings
become digitized. As a result, the effectiveness of some of these
safety measures may be brought into question.
On May 7, 2021, Colonial Pipeline was hit with a ransomware attack
that caused the company to shut its operations for 6 days, prompting
the President of the United States to issue a state of emergency. The
compromise affected billing systems responsible for tracking and
invoicing the amount of fuel each distributor receives. These business
systems were actually located in the organization's IT environment, not
its OT environment. The OT systems that control the pipeline itself
were not directly accessed in the attack. Yet, the fear and uncertainty
of the possible reach of the attack contributed to Colonial Pipeline's
decision to shut down pipeline operations. Colonial Pipeline ultimately
ended up paying the hacking group DarkSide a total of 75 bitcoins ($4.4
million) for the ability to unlock its systems and get fuel back out to
a majority of the East Coast. This highly visible incident serves as a
stark example of the potential negative impact of increasing IT/OT
convergence.
The Colonial Pipeline incident also highlights the importance of
maintaining cyber hygiene. The attack vector in this case was the
cracking of a password for an account no longer in use, that had remote
access to the corporate network. Enabling multi-factor authentication
and disabling dormant accounts are simple but effective examples of
things that need to be done methodically and rigorously to reduce
exposure.
Other critical infrastructure sectors have not prioritized cyber
and are largely blindsided by cyber as a strategic risk. Some of these
sectors haven't historically thought of interconnectivity, access,
complexity, and digitization as strategic cyber risk and haven't been
regulated in that way.
For example, many health care providers and hospitals have long
viewed IT as a cost efficiency play for automation and sharing
information when needed to provide better care, not necessarily a
strategic asset. Consequently, attackers have caught many health care
organizations off guard.
Ransomware attacks on the health care sector have demonstrated its
susceptibility to cyber attacks and have often exposed poor cyber
hygiene practices. WannaCry, which took advantage of a well-known
vulnerability for which patches were widely available and broadly
distributed, shut down hospitals around the world. Even though medical
equipment was still operating, hospitals couldn't on-board new patients
or use their systems to track the distribution of medicines. Just last
year, Scripps Healthcare, a non-profit health care organization with 5
hospitals and 19 outpatient facilities in Southern California, was hit
with a ransomware attack that impacted critical IT and back-up systems.
Scripps was forced to reroute stroke and heart attack patients to other
facilities, an impact that could have cost lives. The company lost
nearly $113 million as an immediate result of the attack, and now faces
a class action lawsuit due to the medical records of nearly 150,000
patients being exposed.
While the Scripps example is a costly one, it is but one example of
how much ransomware attacks are costing our medical industry. If we
look at the number of ransomware attacks across the health care
industry alone in 2020, combining the ransoms paid and the amount of
downtime tracked, there was a loss of $20.8 billion. This is double
what it was in 2019 and 10 times more than in 2018.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ HIPPA Journal, ``Scripps Health Ransomware Attack Cost
Increases to Almost $113 Million,'' https://www.hipaajournal.com/
scripps-health-ransomware-attack-cost-113-million/; GovInfoSecurity,
``Scripps Health Reports Financial Toll of Ransomware Attack,'' https:/
/www.govinfosecurity.com/scripps-health-reports-financial-toll-
ransomware-attack-a-17288; Comparitech, ``Ransomware attacks on US
healthcare organizations cost $20.8bn in 2020,'' https://
www.comparitech.com/blog/information-security/ransomware-attacks-
hospitals-data/
#How_much_did_these_ransomware_attacks_cost_healthcare_organizations_in_
2020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A closer look at the data reveals stark differences among critical
infrastructure sectors. According to Tenable's own vulnerability data,
financial services organizations and organizations in the energy
sector, which encompasses more than the electric sector, average about
the same number of critical vulnerabilities per device, showing a
relative approximation in the maturity of their cyber practices.
Contrast that with health care and manufacturing, which average twice
as many critical vulnerabilities per device. The median time for
financial services and energy sector organizations to remediate a
critical vulnerability is approximately 12 days, while manufacturing
and health care average 29 and 32 days, respectively. This gap provides
adversaries ample opportunity and highlights the sample disparities in
the cyber maturity of these sectors.
There are also vast disparities in the amount of funding available
to critical infrastructure providers. Many systems run by
municipalities, such as water and wastewater, do not have the same
funding or cybersecurity expertise to combat the evolving threats. In
February 2021, a water treatment plant was breached in Oldsmar,
Florida, a town of 15,000. The attacker attempted to change the
alkaline levels in the water to a level that would severely damage
human tissue. It's another striking example of the risks of IT/OT
convergence; the attacker gained access to a remote IT management
software called Team Viewer, and from there ``accessed the system by
exploiting cybersecurity weaknesses including poor password security,
and an outdated Windows 7 operating system,'' according to the FBI.
This attack further demonstrates the significance of proper system
hygiene.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ ABC News WFTS Tampa Bay, ``FBI: Water system hack likely caused
by remote access program, old software and poor password security,''
https://www.abcactionnews.com/news/local-news/i-team-investigates/fbi-
water-system-hack-likely-caused-by-remote-access-program-old-software-
and-poor-password-security; Wired, ``A Hacker Tried to Poison a Florida
City's Water Supply, Officials Say,'' https://www.wired.com/story/
oldsmar-florida-water-utility-hack/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Some critical infrastructure sectors, including the energy sector's
oil and gas refining and extraction industries, are still largely
unregulated when it comes to cybersecurity, and that is a particularly
concerning scenario when we consider that those critical systems are
frequently managed using workstations running on outdated operating
systems and software. It's worth noting that pipeline owners and
operators are now subject to new baseline cybersecurity standards
through a TSA Directive,\4\ however the rest of the sector remains
largely unregulated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ U.S. Department of Homeland Security, ``DHS Announces New
Cybersecurity Requirements for Critical Pipeline Owners and
Operators,'' https://www.dhs.gov/news/2021/05/27/dhs-announces-new-
cybersecurity-requirements-critical-pipeline-owners-and-operators.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
rapid connectivity and the risks of it/ot convergence
A recent assessment of an available search engine for internet-
connected devices revealed that more than 28,000 Industrial Control
Systems (ICS) and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)
systems are directly accessible from the internet.\5\ While not
directly accessible from the internet, countless more can be accessed
via increasingly popular service portals, which can themselves be
compromised. Combine that with human error and frequency of poorly
configured software, and the rapid connectivity required to keep
today's OT environments running efficiently, we may be entering an era
which exponentially hastens systemic cybersecurity failures. Systems
that are interconnected in ways they weren't designed leads to
complexity and breeds insecurity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Shodan, https://www.shodan.io/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These systems, and other OT technologies used in critical
infrastructure environments, are notoriously difficult to patch because
systems may have to be taken down and thoroughly tested each time an
update is made. Existing operating models for most OT environments,
such as power plants, gas pipelines, and manufacturing plants, leave
little margin for downtime. These companies have historically tried to
reduce their exposure by highly segmenting their environments, but the
increase of IT/OT convergence is making segmentation less effective,
resulting in systems that can't be patched or secured as targets.
Furthermore, many critical infrastructure organizations still fail
to segment their IT and OT environments. There are increasingly
compelling business reasons to create interconnection points between
these environments, but doing so without an appreciation of the
consequences such actions represent can result in system risks which
are not understood.
what can critical infrastructure providers do?
Critical infrastructure providers have a duty of care, highlighted
in turbulent times, to be responsible stewards of the services that are
relied on by millions of Americans. Protecting ourselves means knowing
what's on your network and maintaining it in good working order, which
includes protecting against known vulnerabilities.
As more people have access to these systems, security quickly
breaks down unless tight identity management practices are in place.
Systems must be treated as if a sophisticated adversary already has or
can gain access.
CISA released insightful guidance on recommended practices that
organizations can take to best prepare themselves from a cyber
perspective. Some of these practices include:

Asset Inventory and Risk Characterization.--The foundation
for every security framework, whether IT or OT, always begins
with visibility into the assets for which you are responsible.
It is critically important to be able to understand the network
layout of your environments, the systems that reside in those
networks, the software installed, how they are configured, how
they are accessed, and the function they serve to the mission
of the organization. Only when you have this level of
visibility can you begin to quantify the risk profile of these
environments and a strategy to secure it.

Vulnerability and Patch Management Program.--It is important
for every organization to follow a well-defined vulnerability
and configuration management program that is able to not only
identify Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVEs) in the
environment, but also identify how these critical systems are
configured and identify when those configurations change. They
also need well-defined processes in place to remediate issues
identified through patch and configuration management programs
that take into account the complexities of the systems running
and the importance they play to the organization.

Network Segmentation and Remote Access.--Historically, OT
systems have been completely separated from other environments.
With the convergence of IT/OT systems, this practice is
increasingly untenable and frequently violated. Whether it is
Active Directory trusts between corporate and OT domains, or
remote access being granted to enable remote access for
monitoring or troubleshooting purposes, interconnectivity of
systems is already today's reality. A continual audit of access
and interconnectivity into these environments is an absolute
imperative, and that includes assessing and monitoring the
integrity of the Active Directory and other access control
systems. Who is allowed to connect to them and the hygiene of
the systems that are connecting are foundational to
understanding the integrity of and risk to critical
infrastructures.

Cybersecurity Training/Education on OT.--Because OT
environments have historically been separated from everything
else, the notion of securing them is relatively new for both IT
personnel as well as OT engineers. Training must be mandatory
for OT engineers, who have typically not had to consider the
cyber risks their actions or inactions might introduce. IT
security teams in these organizations must also undergo
training to better understand the ways that OT systems differ
from IT, and the unique challenges associated with securing
critical infrastructure.
how can the government help industry?
Government policy should not allow for ``learned helplessness'' by
Federal Government agencies or private industry. Helplessness allows
individuals and organizations to remain negligent and avoid
accountability for not taking even the most basic steps to improve
cyber posture. Government can surely play a stronger role in
deterrence, to include thoughtful consideration of offensive
capabilities, attributing attacks and establishing retorts and
countermeasures as appropriate; however, those efforts should not
replace strong basic cyber hygiene practices.
Tenable recommends the following steps that Government should
implement to enhance the cyber preparedness of U.S. critical
infrastructure:

Establish baseline cybersecurity standards of care for
critical infrastructure that align with international standards
and the National Institutes of Standards and Technology (NIST)
Cybersecurity Framework, based on effective cyber hygiene
practices.--Basic cyber hygiene for critical infrastructure
operators includes continuous understanding of what assets are
on your network, ensuring strong identity and access
management, scanning for and patching known vulnerabilities,
and implementing incident detection and response capabilities.

Finalize and implement the proposed SEC rule that requires
public companies to disclose their policies and practices to
address their cybersecurity risks.--The SEC's Proposed Rule on
Cybersecurity Risk Management, Strategy, Governance and
Disclosure would require public companies to disclose their
policies and procedures for identifying and managing
cybersecurity risks, management's role in implementing cyber
policies and procedures, and the board of directors'
cybersecurity expertise.\6\ This is the single action that
would most dramatically improve our cybersecurity preparedness
as a Nation. Requiring greater transparency of cyber risk
practices and oversight forces companies to treat cybersecurity
risk as a business risk and will lead to stronger cybersecurity
governance and accountability among corporate leaders and
boards, and ultimately more effective cybersecurity practices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Cyberspace Solarium Commission, Final Report, https://
www.solarium.gov/report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cybersecurity breaches can damage a company's financial
condition. In addition to the costs of remediation from a
cyber attack and loss of customers, revenue, and
reputation, there are risks of shareholder lawsuits,
customer lawsuits, increases in insurance premiums and
increased scrutiny from external auditors and the board of
directors. There are indirect consequences to cyber
failures as well; cyber attacks can distract management,
resulting in new problems; they can also trigger customer
audits of a company's cybersecurity defenses, which can
lead to the involvement of outside counsel and other third
parties, and significant added expenses.\7\ In forcing
corporate leadership to pay attention, this proposal serves
as the most significant driver for companies to establish
baseline cybersecurity practices and processes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Harvard Business Review, ``The SEC Is Serious About
Cybersecurity. Is Your Company?'' https://hbr.org/2021/09/the-sec-is-
serious-about-cybersecurity-is-your-company.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Implement the cyber incident reporting requirements included
in the fiscal year 2022 Omnibus Appropriations bill.--CISA must
implement these new requirements in a way that will enable
actionable incident information to be shared with owners and
operators of critical infrastructure systems so that they can
take steps to protect themselves and seek to mitigate any on-
going attacks.

Support and strengthen value-added engagement between the
private sector and public sector.--The JCDC, of which Tenable
is a member, is bringing together representatives from private
industry and key Government agencies to drive strategic
planning and incident response capabilities. This type of
operational Government-industry engagement has been a positive
step forward, and we thank CISA and Director Jen Easterly for
their continued support and urge them to continue strengthening
the JCDC's alignment.
In response to the on-going Russia-Ukraine conflict, CISA
established its Shields Up initiative to encourage all
organizations to adopt a heightened posture of vigilance.
Shields Up has developed helpful resources to empower
organizations to prepare for and defend against cyber attacks.
protecting government networks and systems

Accelerate effective Zero Trust implementation by Federal
agencies.--Congress should provide Federal agencies with the
resources needed to implement Cyber Executive Order 14028 to
modernize and strengthen our collective cyber defenses,
recognizing that Zero Trust is a philosophy that dictates
systems design and operation, not a singular product.

Strengthen Government networks by including protection of
Federal OT and Active Directory services in the Continuous
Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) Program:

OT.--Federal civilian agencies own and operate a multitude
of OT and ICS, particularly through the Departments of
Energy and Commerce. However, the Government doesn't
currently have a firm grasp of all the assets it controls.
By adding OT/ICS security to the CDM program, Government
agencies will be required to conduct an inventory of their
OT/ICS systems, and to take steps to strengthen their
security.

Active Directory.--Active Directory is one of, if not the
most highly targeted and compromised pieces of
infrastructure. These systems provide access control across
the network and persistence should attacks be detected. As
highlighted by the Mandiant breach disclosures, Russian and
other foreign intelligence services are actively targeting
Active Directory when going after U.S. Government systems.
All Government systems must incorporate Active Directory
security to ensure least privileges for user identities,
and to scan for misconfigurations that can be exploited to
gain access to Active Directory and monitor for on-going
suspicious and high-risk activities within Active
Directory.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ U.S Department of Commerce, ``NOAA Inadequately Managed Its
Active Directories That Support Critical Missions,'' https://
www.oig.doc.gov/OIGPublications/OIG-22-018-A.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Implement Section 1505 of the fiscal year 2022 National
Defense Authorization Act.--This provision requires the
Department of Defense to conduct an inventory of OT assets and
update its policies to establish baseline cybersecurity
requirements for operational technology.

Establish metrics for transparency and accountability.--
Congress should update its oversight of agency cybersecurity by
using the Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
as a model to replace existing unstructured agency reporting. A
cybersecurity scorecard would provide improved transparency
metrics and milestones against which all agencies measure and
report their progress.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ MITRE, ``Eight Recommendation for Congress to Improve Federal
Cybersecurity,'' https://www.mitre.org/sites/default/files/
publications/pr-21-3403-eight-recommendations-for-congress-to-improve-
federal-cybersecurity.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ensure sufficient funding for CISA and the Office of the
National Cyber Director to ensure they can meet mission
requirements.--I supported the creation of the Office of the
National Cyber Director and applaud Director Chris Inglis'
efforts to stand up and staff the new office. The threats to
Federal networks and critical infrastructure are growing at a
significant rate, and CISA must serve as an effective
coordinator to strengthen security in these environments.
Congress should see the fiscal year 2022 appropriations for
CISA as a new baseline number, which should grow at a rate
commensurate with the needs of the mission.
onclusion
There are fundamental steps all providers must take, from knowing
what's on their network and how those systems are vulnerable to
addressing those exposures, and from controlling user access and
privileges to managing critical systems that are interconnected, that
will make it harder for bad actors to compromise critical
infrastructures.
Many critical operating environments lack a formal systemic
approach to risk assessments and processes, let alone the continuous
visibility expected for critical services and high-value targets. These
formal processes are desperately needed as rapid increases in access
and interconnectivity dramatically increase risk. In these instances,
regulation for transparency and standards of care can help drive
improvement in risk management practices and at the same time foster
innovation.
I would like to thank Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Katko, and
all the Members of the committee for your attention to this important
issue. I appreciate the opportunity to testify today and look forward
to working with you and your colleagues as we collectively mobilize our
cyber defenses.

Mr. Torres. I thank the witnesses for their testimony. I
will remind each Member that he or she will have 5 minutes to
question the witnesses. I will now recognize myself for
questions.
Ransomware attacks that have stolen billions of dollars
from American households, businesses, and governments have come
disproportionately from Russian cyber threats. SolarWinds, the
largest espionage campaign in history, Colonial Pipeline, the
largest breach of energy infrastructure in history, JBS, the
largest breach of food infrastructure in history, all of these
intrusions came from Russian cyber threats. Mr. Meyers, would
it be fair to think of Russia as a superpower in cyber space?
Mr. Meyers. Yes, Congressman, I think that Russia has
demonstrated through numerous years and numerous campaigns
significant technical capabilities and intent to target Western
and U.S. infrastructure.
Mr. Torres. Even though the United States may have more
cyber capabilities than Russia, there is a sense in which the
United States might have more cyber vulnerabilities because
American infrastructure tends to be more automated, more
computerized. Is that a fair assessment?
Mr. Meyers. Yes, sir.
Mr. Torres. You know, we would never expect an American
business in a physical conflict to defend itself successfully
against a superpower like Russia. Is it reasonable and
realistic to expect an American business in a cyber conflict to
defend itself successfully against a cyber superpower? Mr.
Yoran, do you have any thoughts on that?
Mr. Yoran. I don't think it is reasonable to expect that
all critical infrastructure operators would be able to defend
themselves in totality against a sophisticated cyber superpower
like Russia. I do think it is reasonable to expect that they
exercise a good standard of care with their system, including
maintaining their systems in good repair, searching for
vulnerabilities, fixing vulnerabilities, addressing high-
priority threats that CISA and others have shared with them. In
doing so, I think they can significantly reduce their exposure
and the probability of causing significant outage.
Mr. Torres. Should the U.S. Government assume a greater
role in defending privately-owned and -operated critical
infrastructure, a role that extends beyond public awareness
campaigns and voluntary public-private partnerships?
Mr. Yoran. I don't think the U.S. Government should be in
the cyber defense role where they are defending critical
networks and critical infrastructure where they might not
understand the changes that they might make and how those might
impact the critical infrastructure. It is incumbent upon those
operators which understand the systems, how those systems
operate, how they work together, and how they fit to defend
those networks, with help from intelligence, information, and
prioritization from their Government partners.
Mr. Torres. Should the Federal Government mandate best
practices in cyber hygiene like multi-factor authentication
across all the sectors of critical infrastructure?
Mr. Yoran. I believe that each--and I am going to keep
answering questions unless one of my colleagues jumps in or
unless these questions are directed at me. I believe it is
critical and important for the Federal Government to mandate
cyber best practices noting, however, that there is not one
cyber best practice across all critical infrastructures. And
that the regulatory agencies and sector-specific agencies
should work with CISA and their private-sector counterparts to
develop those and maintain those best practices.
Mr. Torres. Mr. Meyers, should we mandate multi-factor
authentication across all sectors or critical infrastructure?
Mr. Meyers. I would point to the Executive Order and the
recommendations there as a good example. As far as mandating, I
think that there is not necessarily a deep understanding of how
these systems are architected and leveraged in the commercial
sectors. So, I think recommendations are probably a good first
step.
Mr. Torres. In February 2021, a hacker broke into the local
water system for Oldsmar, Florida, a town of 15,000 people, and
raised the sodium hydroxide levels in an attempt to poison the
water supply. There are tens of thousands of water systems in
America, and most of them are run by local governments that
often lack the wherewithal to sufficiently invest in their own
cybersecurity. The Foundation for Defense of Democracies has
been sounding the alarm about what infrastructure is the
weakest link in the critical infrastructure chain. The
Foundation for Defense of Democracies, the Government
Accountability Office, the Cyberspace Solarium Commission, all
of these entities have been critical of the EPA's performance
as the sector risk management agency. Dr. Morley, how can a
water system that is so fragile, and so fragmented, and so
federated be secured from Russian cyber threats?
Mr. Morley. Sure. I, you know, recognize the question, sir,
and I believe that some of that recognizes some of the capacity
issues that we have identified in the sector as being
challenges in implementation of certain cybersecurity best
practices. That would be a great example of where further
implementation of the CyHy program would be very beneficial to
a community like Oldsmar or other utility systems. It is also
the reason why AWWA has developed a white paper talking about a
framework, a new governance approach for cybersecurity in the
water sector. A collaborative process modeled on what is in the
electric sector. I welcome the opportunity to discuss that
further.
Mr. Torres. I now recognize the Ranking Member of the full
committee, the gentleman from New York, Mr. Katko, for
questions.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
your testimony today. You know, when I first came on this
committee 7-plus years ago, ISIS was for sure the greatest
threat to our country, ISIS inspired terrorist attacks in this
country. They manifested themselves in several cataclysmic
events like in San Bernardino, and the Pulse night club, and
many others.
The threat dynamic has changed dramatically for the
homeland since then. We have done a much better job dealing
with those types of incidents. ISIS has been degraded but not
eliminated. So, the threat persists but it is not like it was.
But the greatest threat that is to our country right now, in my
mind for sure, is what we are talking about today,
cybersecurity and the threat of cyber attacks against this
country.
I noted some in my opening statement over the past few
years, we have had many very serious attacks. China clearly has
state actors perpetrating those attacks. Russia has gangs, if
you will, within Russia that operate under the imprimatur of
the Russian government and at their disposal when needed to do
so. Given the conflict in Ukraine, obviously, that is a big
concern right now.
So, with that as setting the table, what I am trying to
figure out and understand is what is most vulnerable, and how
do you go about helping it? There is a tug-and-pull between is
it just good old-fashioned Government regulation? Or is it good
old-fashioned Government assistance and letting the private
sector be partners with them?
I am informed by what I saw in my time as a prosecutor when
terrorism, 9/11 happened, I was a prosecutor. Instead of a
whole new realm of regulations, we had partnerships. That is
what the Joint Terrorism Task Force is. That is my view of CISA
is, is a partnership. A partnership with the private sector,
right? Then to give them the tools they need to work with the
private sector. By the way, if you want an incentive to secure
your systems, if there is technology out there and you are not
securing your systems with that technology that is reasonably
attainable for you, and you get hacked, you are going to be
vulnerable to lawsuits from your shareholders, and damn well
you should.
So, there is a state-of-the-art component to this that is
here that we need to talk about as well. So, I think it is
incumbent upon CISA to be not the regulator, but to be the
facilitator and the partner with the private sector. I think
what is going on lately with the Log4j and some of these other
things, we are seeing that partnership really kind-of blossom
and is being very productive. So, I am excited for that.
But, you know, Mr. Yoran and, you know, Mr. Morley, you
talked about it a little bit the water sector. But I want to
ask you, Mr. Yoran, where do you think the water sector and
wastewater systems fall within the realm of critical
infrastructure and as well as their cybersecurity defenses?
Mr. Yoran. It is a great question, Congressman. You know, I
think the water sector as--and within each sector, there is,
you know, varying degrees of sophistication and capability. It
is true in the financial services sector. It is true in the
electric sector. It is true in the water sector. So, some are
much more sophisticated than others.
I do think the financial services sector, as an example,
the IT sector, as an example, have been much more forward-
leaning about cybersecurity and stand today much better
prepared. They have been facing, and their understanding of the
risk they have been facing for years now is more sophisticated.
I think, the, you know, the water sector and a lot of the
industrial heavy sectors are much more deliberate. Their
infrastructures move much more slowly, but they have been
interconnecting their operational technologies with their IT
technologies. So, the pace of risk that these sectors are
facing has really increased over recent years. So, I think a
lot of work remains to be done in some of these sectors.
Mr. Katko. OK. Now, for all of you, I only have about a
minute left. So, I will ask this open-ended question. We have
got identified it is a systemically important critical
infrastructure within a critical infrastructure sector. Then we
have got to do something about it, right? We understand it is
going to be a partnership and we got to work with the private
sector. What is it that we can do to help CISA be better at
working with you and strengthening those partnerships in
addressing those vulnerabilities? Mr. Morley or Mr. Meyers, how
about you go first?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you. Having worked with CISA through JCDC
on the Log4j and now in the most recent escalations in Eastern
Europe, I think information sharing has been absolutely
critical. CISA has done a phenomenal job of not only sharing
information but standing up systems for rapid information
sharing between partners and CISA to have more tactical type
communications. I think that fostering those types of
environments in that information sharing is absolutely
critical. I also think from a defensive perspective, the
vulnerabilities that CISA has highlighted as being critical to
fix, the Shields Up program, as well as some of the other
initiatives that they have rolled out, have been very effective
and I would like to see that continue.
Mr. Katko. I know I am out of time, Mr. Chairman. So, I
appreciate your indulgence. I have a lot more to ask you all.
Please keep coming to me and talking to me because I want to
hear more about it going forward. This is very important. Thank
you and I yield back.
Mr. Torres. I now recognize the gentleman from Rhode
Island, Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to
welcome our witnesses today. I appreciate your testimony and
your expertise in cyber. A particular hello to Amit. Good to
see you again.
So, let me begin on this question. The elevated cyber
threats to our critical infrastructure systems illustrate that
while we have come a long way in improving the Nation's
cybersecurity over the last few years, much work still remains
to be done. In particular, I believe that we must develop a
better understanding of the vulnerabilities present within key
technologies that underpin our networks in critical
infrastructure.
So, one of the Cyberspace Solarium Commission's
recommendations currently reflected in an amendment to the
America Competes Act would establish critical technology
security centers through grants to universities and FFRDCs to
create a comprehensive and centralized security testing
ecosystem for foundational critical technologies like network
industrial control systems and open-source software. So, if
could, for Mr. Yoran, I will start with you, how might such an
initiative to identify, report, and in some cases support
through mediation of vulnerabilities in these critical
technologies, inform and improve risk mitigation efforts for
critical infrastructure?
Mr. Yoran. Good to see you, Congressman, and thank you for
your tremendous leadership on cyber issues over the course of
so many years. I think it is important when we talk about these
efforts, to remember that there are such distinct differences
between these critical infrastructures and such distinct
approaches which make more or less sense. For instance, in the
electric sector, in the financial services, or in IT sector,
you see a very rapid pace of change. You see a high degree of
cyber sophistication and agility to address issues as they
might be highlighted by CISA or other Government partners.
As you move to more industrial systems and you connect IT
and OT systems, you see the IT side of the house sometimes able
to deal with these vulnerabilities and advance notice from
Government partners. You see, in many cases, the OT side of the
house as much more slow moving and deliberate. While that may
sound bad from a cybersecurity practitioner's standpoint, and
it does mean that systems will be vulnerable, those deliberate
processes are in place for very specific reasons to make sure
that, you know, we don't create accidental outages and things
of that nature. So, I think there really needs to be a very
different approach to protecting critical infrastructures when
we join IT and OT systems together.
Mr. Langevin. Thanks. I am hoping that these critical
technology centers would do just that to identify those
problems and help to remediate them ahead of time before there
is a problem.
Let me continue on with you, Amit, to last week the SEC
proposed a rule requiring companies to disclose policies and
practices for identifying and managing cybersecurity risks,
management's role in implementing cyber policies and
procedures, and cyber expertise across the board of directors.
On the Solarium Commission we also called for an increased
level of reporting on cybersecurity from publicly-traded
companies because cyber risk is a business risk and
shareholders, I believe, should be able to discriminate between
companies that take cybersecurity seriously and those that
don't.
So, in your testimony, you referenced this proposed rule
as, and I quote, ``the single action that would most
dramatically improve our cybersecurity preparedness as a
Nation.'' I agree with that statement, but could you talk about
this proposed rule and why you feel it could make such an
impact?
Mr. Yoran. You know, and I think there are two critical
components to transparency. No. 1, I think, you know, the
recent legislation when it was terrific in requiring breach
notification to CISA so that action can be taken, information
can be shared, and our critical infrastructure is better
protected. The second piece of that is having greater
transparency starting with public companies around what their
cybersecurity risk management practices look like. That type of
transparency will cause corporate leadership to pay closer
attention, will cause boards of directors to pay closer
attention to cybersecurity. By paying closer attention, I am
fairly certain that that would cause improved focus on and
improvement in cybersecurity practices.
That is critically important for shareholders to make
informed decisions about their investments. It is critically
important for customers to make important decisions about whose
technologies they trust and don't trust. So, I think it is
absolutely critical for the free market to work that we have
that level of transparency of both cybersecurity practices,
risk management, and transparency around breaches.
Mr. Langevin. OK. Thank you very much. I know my time has
expired. I do have one more question I will submit for the
record for Dr. Morley. But unless we go for a second round, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Torres. Absolutely. I now recognize the gentleman from
North Carolina, Mr. Bishop, for questions.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Meyers,
CrowdStrike was the firm that diagnosed the alleged Russian
hack of the DNC server in 2016. Is that correct?
Mr. Meyers. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bishop. Has CrowdStrike been contacted by the Office of
Special Counsel, Mr. Durham's office?
Mr. Meyers. I am not sure.
Mr. Bishop. CrowdStrike, I understand, the FBI concluded
that there had been a Russian hack based on a report provided
by CrowdStrike that was provided for the Perkins Coie law firm.
Do you know that to be true?
Mr. Meyers. Yes, we published our findings in a blog post
in 2016.
Mr. Bishop. My understanding is that the report, the
version of the report provided to the FBI was heavily redacted.
Are you aware of that?
Mr. Meyers. I am not aware of that.
Mr. Bishop. Do you know of any reason that CrowdStrike
cannot publish or release to the public or release to this
committee a complete and unredacted version of that report?
Mr. Meyers. I am not exactly sure which report you are
referring to, but happy to follow up with you and get anything
that we can.
Mr. Bishop. All right, thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Torres. I now recognize the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms.
Jackson Lee, for questions. I now recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. Correa, for questions. I now recognize Mr.
Cleaver for questions. I now recognize Mr. Green for questions.
Herein lies the challenge of the hybrid model. I now recognize
Ms. Clarke for questions. She is gone too. I now recognize Mrs.
Watson-Coleman for questions. I actually see Miss Rice. So, I
recognize Miss Rice for questions, yes? See, by process of
elimination.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Chairman Torres. Thank you so much,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you all so much for coming here today. This
is such a critically important issue that we are discussing.
Software and application code are known attack vectors for
bad actors in critical infrastructure operators, especially
those that rely on third-party vendors or open-source code to
develop software or applications. They need to be constantly on
guard against vulnerabilities in their code. But it is harder
than ever for industry and Government alike to defend
themselves. There was a recent report by Rapid7 that found that
the average time for known vulnerabilities to be exploited
dropped from 42 days last year to 12 days this year. So,
attackers are getting faster and it is harder to patch code in
real time.
At the same time, a State of Software Security report
released last week found that 8 in 10 software applications
owned and operated by the public sector had a security flaw.
So, critical infrastructure only faired slightly better. The
same study found that 73 percent of financial service apps and
77 percent of health care apps contained security flaws.
So, Mr. Silberstein, you mentioned the importance of CISA's
Shields Up webpage and ramped-up communications since the war
in Ukraine began. When a new vulnerability is discovered and
posted to the known exploited vulnerabilities catalog, how do
you disseminate that information to your members? If one of
your members on their own discovers a flaw in open-source or
vendor developed code that may be used by other financial
institutions, do they share that information with you and their
peer institutions?
Mr. Silberstein. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that
question. We first try to--any public releases about
vulnerabilities from any reputable source, we attempt to
rapidly amplify to our whole membership with a minimum delay,
with a focus in pointing to the immediate mitigations that can
be put in place to prevent access to the vulnerability because
the challenges of patching can be large. We saw that with the
Log4J where the time span--this was embedded in many systems--
the time span for particularly larger organizations to get to
every instance took days, and maybe more.
So, we put a focus on rapid mitigation. We are also working
with our partners in the whole supply chain to emphasis that as
the headline in any disclosure of vulnerability. What do you do
at this instant to shut that door while you then go fix the
inside of the house?
Second, to your question on when members discover
vulnerabilities, yes, we rapidly share across the full
community and also to whatever source. Additionally, a lot of
our membership are actively involved in the Alpha-Omega program
of the Open Software Federation, which is focusing on a
proactive discovery of vulnerabilities and improving the open-
source community.
Miss Rice. Thank you for that. Dr. Morley, I only have
about a minute-and-a-half left. But you have emphasized the
diversity of the water sector and the wide variety of cyber
capabilities within it. When CISA announces a newly-discovered
vulnerability or issues recommendations on how to mitigate
cyber threats from malign actors, are these understandable and
actionable for your smallest members? I mean, how does the AWWA
help its least-cyber-capable members build up their defenses?
Mr. Morley. That is a excellent question, Congresswoman. We
do our best to retransmit that ourselves and with our partner
organizations, including the WaterISAC. However, as I
mentioned, certain advisories in some cases have a certain
level of technical sophistication that probably require a
little bit of contextualization and that is why we would
encourage a little more front-end engagement between EPA and
CISA to ensure that that information is actionable to our
members at the smallest level.
Miss Rice. Thank you all very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Torres. I now recognize the gentleman from Louisiana,
Mr. Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. I thank the Chairman and Ranking Member Katko
for holding this hearing today. Our critical infrastructure has
certainly shown vulnerabilities across the United States and,
indeed, the world. The lessons that we learn increasingly are
troubling regarding our own posture and strength resiliency in
our American critical infrastructure. So, the position of this
committee must be to calmly seek solutions for the American
people. You gentlemen are going to be asked some challenging
questions today because it is an emerging understanding of just
how vulnerable we can be to attack when we thought perhaps we
were not.
I have noted through the years as new projects have been
developed in my own district in the oil and gas industry, or
petrochemical industry, L&G. I represent south Louisiana. These
massive projects have had the capacity to be off the grid. They
have their own electrical supply, massive generators should
power be lost. They can continue running. They have their own
water, deep water wells. They have on-premise servers and
hardware systems. I recall a study from as recently as 2019,
that somewhere over 90 percent of American businesses had some
level of on-premise servers.
Therefore, it seems to me as a regular American with no
background in cybersecurity until I came to Congress, and
gentlemen like Ranking Member Katko and others have made it a
priority to push into the American narrative that we must
strengthen our critical infrastructure and our cybersecurity,
is certainly going to be an increasing area of vulnerability
should we lose our grid, for instance, or just a large portion
of our grids, 15, 20 percent of our grid. It is difficult to
see how we would recover from that. So, Mr. Yoran, am I
pronouncing your name correctly?
Mr. Yoran. Yes, sir.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, sir. Mr. Yoran, what would be your
opinion regarding, as we move forward from the Federal level,
to encourage private business and local Government entities to
develop off-grid capabilities to insulate themselves from
attack and to decrease their vulnerability?
Mr. Yoran. Congressman, that is a great question. I think,
you know, one very important responsibility and opportunity
that exists for the Federal Government is through sharing of
information with the private sector around the threat and what
actions they can take to better protect themselves and mitigate
risk. My greatest concern is that examples like the one you
were sharing from your district where you have got very remote
pieces of equipment, are increasingly moving on grid--well, and
I shouldn't say on grid, not power grid--onto the internet in
some form or fashion. While there might not be an internet
line, they are deploying cellular or other communications
mechanisms so they can get real-time telemetry from those
remote sites. They can troubleshoot and they can identify where
the equipment may be failing or may----
Mr. Higgins. So, you would see that connection as a
vulnerability that we need to watch?
Mr. Yoran. Exactly. So is----
Mr. Higgins. I would concur. In the interest of time, I
have one more question for you, sir. In America, we have
codified into law the right to strike back if we come under
fire. If you are fired upon, you identify the threat and you
can return fire. Yet, in the cyber realm, that is not codified
into law. Mr. Yoran, what is your opinion about what Congress
should do about that? Should we make it legal to strike back in
the cyber realm?
Mr. Yoran. It should be----
Mr. Higgins. It is a legitimate question.
Mr. Yoran. Yes, sir, a legitimate question. I think it
should remain illegal for private industry or private citizens
to strike back. But there is an important role that is one of
the critical functions for the U.S. Government.
Mr. Higgins. Under advisement. Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Torres. Thank you. I now recognize the gentlewoman from
Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee, for questions.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank you and good morning to all of
you. This is a very important hearing. I would like to submit
three articles into the record. First, the excerpts from the
House Intelligence Committee hearing on Russia. It is in The
New York Times. As I do that, let me read an excerpt from that
article. I have been authorized this was the FBI Director by
the Department of Justice to confirm that the FBI, as part of
our counter-intelligence mission, is investigating the Russian
Government's efforts to interfere in the 2016 Presidential
election and that includes investigating the nature of any
links between individuals associated with the Trump campaign
and the Russian Government and whether there were any
coordination between the campaign and Russia's efforts.
I ask unanimous consent to submit that into the record.
Mr. Torres. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. I ask unanimous consent to ``Here We Go
Again'' article, ``Russia Gears Up to Interfere in 2020
Election'', April 30, 2020, and The Atlantic ``Russia is Co-
opting Angry Young Men'' from The Atlantic, from the periodical
seemingly, Center for Diplomacy and Global.
I ask unanimous consent, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Torres. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me ask questions to Mr. Silberstein,
Mr. Yoran. Mr. Silberstein, we are in a very difficult time.
Again, I offer my deepest concern and sympathy to the people of
Ukraine who are feeling the sting, the siege, the violence, the
viciousness, the murderous behavior of Vladimir Putin. I can
see him not taking any prisoners as it relates to the United
States in his angst and anger against us.
As it relates to your testimony, page 4, line 11, that the
consistent message and realistic context provided by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, other governments, has allowed
your sector to prepare for and institute necessary security
precautions. Are there industry best practices regarding
regional personnel evacuation plans? Why don't you answer this
last question first: Which industries would consider evacuation
plans as a core component of a cyber incident response if it
came particularly from really a established enemy at this time
like Russia?
Mr. Silberstein. Thank you, Congresswoman. If I may ask for
a little clarification referring to evacuation in the conflict
zone or in another locale?
Ms. Jackson Lee. In the United States. If we are being
attacked here.
Mr. Silberstein. Well, I think we have fairly good
resiliency plans that unfortunately have been practiced around
both natural disaster and COVID over the last 10 years, which
would deal with suitable physical issues as far as personnel.
Through COVID, we had wide-spread dislocation out of offices to
the work from home model as everyone is aware. The sector was
able to pretty successfully weather that.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I will bypass the first question I asked.
Do you all have a sense of preparation from foreign intrusion
such as Russia? It has been known that the intrusion before had
been established as outside groups. Suppose it was
governmental, are you prepared for that?
Mr. Silberstein. I believe the financial sector is. It does
not differentiate in general between private enterprise against
the sector versus nation-state attempts against us. But also
realizes that nation-state potentially comes with more power.
An important aspect of the sector's preparation is a very
distinct let's not be complacent where there is no good enough
cybersecurity. It is a continued attempt to keep up with
adversaries. Just as technology evolves, the technology of the
adversaries as well as the technology and----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Silberstein [continuing]. Capability you need is in
place.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Mr. Yoran, you spoke about
infamous Colonial Pipeline was hit with ransomware
particularly, allegedly by criminal element. They went to great
lengths to appear legitimate. But my question would be if you
can combine the answer as to those intrusions that try to
appear legitimate that the CEO of Colonial Pipeline one, did
not tell the United States timely, the Government, paid $4.4
million in ransom to its Russian-based attacker, DarkSide. Do
you agree with Colonial's position that paying the ransom was,
in that case, the right thing to do? Are we expecting more of
this, and particularly as Russia continues to act in
terroristic manner? Mr. Yoran.
Mr. Yoran. That is a great question. I am not familiar with
the details of the decision-making process for Colonial. But,
you know, assuming that their first and foremost objective was
to get the pipeline up and operational, we all saw the
challenges in getting gas and the supply shortages, which were
resulting. I do think that the important legislation which
Congress has enacted now would require timely notification to
CISA of that ransomware payment, which is commendable.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Do you think there is a credible fear of
Russia's continued attempts to attack our local assets, our
National assets?
Mr. Torres. I just want to say your time has expired. So,
yes, we are going to move on.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Torres. I now recognize the gentleman from New Jersey,
Mr. Van Drew, for questions.
Mr. Van Drew. Thank you, Chairman and Ranking Member Katko.
Thank you to the witnesses for testifying to the committee
today. Unfortunately, we are here again addressing the
exponential rise in cyber threats. Last year, 14 of the 16
critical infrastructure sectors experienced a ransomware attack
of some type. These threats are real and they are still
increasing.
A few years ago in my district, the Atlanta County
Utilities Authority located in Egg Harbor Township, New Jersey,
was the victim of a cyber attack. The utilities authority
reported an incident in which perpetrators gained unauthorized
access to sensitive data of their customers. Additionally,
operational information was withheld as the criminals demanded
ransom. Fortunately, the overall function of the authority was
minimally impacted, but the fallout could have been far worse.
Services like utility authorities are vital to day-to-day life
and it is imperative that Congress and the administration
continue to invest in protecting critical infrastructure
everywhere, small or large, in every way. It affects every
aspect of our life.
Mr. Adam Meyers, you may be aware, part of the Colonial
Pipeline runs through my district. The pipeline and several
other companies and industries have been victims of ransomware
attack in the recent years. I am concerned about the
proliferation of these attacks. Why have they become more
rampant and what can Congress do? I know you have outlined some
of this, but to really get to the rub, what could we do or do
you think we should do? What more can we do to help
organizations mitigate them? This is going to be the great
challenge for the next how many years, I don't know. But for
many, many years and it is something that we need to do even
better with. What more would you, if you were the President or
you could control everything, what would you do right now?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you. That is a good and challenging
question to answer. The increase in these attacks, I think
first and foremost, is occurring because these adversaries are
making money. In the course of 2021, we observed somewhere
around 50 or so ransomware incidents per week. The average
ransom demand was around $6.1 million. So, in any given week,
we were looking at around $300 million in potential ransom
demands that were being issued to victims.
This is something that I think we need to attack on
multiple fronts. We need to think about it in terms of the
financial viability. If we disrupt the financial viability of
these operations for these threat actors and make it more
expensive for them to operate, it is going to potentially
reduce the incentive for them to conduct these types of
operations.
Employing the right technology. Many organizations,
particularly across the United States in critical
infrastructure, are relying on legacy tools and software that
were conceptualized in the late 1990's for security today. The
threats have advanced, the technology also needs to advance.
So, organizations need to invest in security to appropriately
defend against these attacks.
From a Government perspective, I think that both law
enforcement has been making tremendous strides. CISA, through
JCDC and partnerships, have been able to share information. I
think that the information sharing between the public and
private sector is absolutely critical to ensure the success and
the ability for us to defend these infrastructures.
Finally, I think the legislation that was passed recently
in terms of the reporting requirements, is a step in the right
direction and will enable us to more effectively martial our
forces to fight against these types of attacks.
Mr. Van Drew. Yes, we still do need to do better, correct?
When you mention that we have legacy, you know, infrastructure
in place to deal with this, that tells me that you think we
should be doing more and should be more on the cutting edge.
Mr. Meyers. Absolutely. I think that the Executive Order
that was issued regarding employing things like endpoint
defense and response technology, zero trust. One of the things
that we have observed over the last year, is that organizations
that were impacted by these ransomware actors and criminal
actors, and also state-sponsored actors, those that employed
zero trust and strong identity management, had very different
outcomes than those that did not.
Mr. Van Drew. OK. So, that tells us that hopefully if we
are here again in a year, another year, that we hopefully can
say, hey, we have done more, we are doing better in those areas
that you just mentioned.
Finally, do we have the smartest, best, most knowledgeable
people on the Government side working on this, candidly?
Mr. Meyers. I believe so. I think that particularly working
with CISA over the past several months it has been, and having
spent years in Government prior to CrowdStrike, I think that we
are absolutely moving in the right direction. That the work
force has become much smarter and much more capable, and we are
continuing to train and operationalize that.
Mr. Torres. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Van Drew. Thank you for your answers.
Mr. Torres. I now recognize the gentleman from California,
Mr. Correa, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to welcome our
witnesses today and thank you for being a part of the very
important hearing. We talk about incentives for these attacks,
cyber attacks. We talk about the financial. People make money
off of this. I think all of us at one time or another, have had
our credit cards hacked. In my district, I had a tax preparer
who was a victim of cyber ransom attack. He did 5,000 clients
he had, he lost 1,000 of them to cyber--to a cyber attack.
This stuff is getting more and more common. Yet, I believe
it pales to the potential damage of a terrorist attack on one
of our systems, a water system. Back home, in June 2021, our
large-scale cyber espionage campaign included the Metropolitan
Water District of Southern California, Anaheim and Santa Ana in
my district. About 19 million, 19 million water consumers were
affected. You just hate to think about the potential for loss
of life if somebody intentionally attacked us with more serious
and deadly intentions.
We talk today about minimum standards, mandatory standards,
liability. I would like to focus on trying to prevent this from
happening, not trying to figure out who is to blame after the
aftermath of an attack like this. So, my question would be what
else can we do to coordinate? Instead of mandating, instead of
talking about minimum standards, being up-to-scrub, up-to-date
on the latest technology, how can CISA work to make sure that
we are actively talking to these agencies on a daily basis to
make sure they are anticipating it is a, you know, cross-
discussion back and forth? Are we doing that? Can we do better?
Mr. Morley.
Mr. Morley. Excellent question, sir. I would frame that in
terms of the conversations today, in terms of partnership,
right? Obviously, the critical infrastructure owner-operator is
a key piece of the equation. In addition, the information
shared by our Federal partners, as I mentioned earlier, the
sooner we can get that into an operational setting, un-
Classified, that the utility owner-operator can take action on
that, that is great. In addition, similar to the activities of
these gentlemen and technology providers, they are key----
Mr. Correa. Can I ask, you say the sooner----
Mr. Morley [continuing]. Key element----
Mr. Correa [continuing]. The better.
Mr. Morley [continuing]. Of the partnership.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Morley, you said the sooner the better.
That doesn't feel good right now. How fast can we get up and
running and begin to establish a process where we can be there?
Mr. Morley. I think the----
Mr. Correa. In terms of CISA----
Mr. Morley [continuing]. I think the agency, CISA, in
particular, is working toward that end. Programs like JCDC are
designed to try to support that activity. I am hopeful that we
can get there as expediently as you suggest we should.
Mr. Correa. Other comments from our witnesses here today?
Mr. Yoran, any thoughts?
Mr. Yoran. No, sir. I think, you know, CISA is doing a
tremendous job. They are, you know, I think we have talked
about JCDC and Shields Up as important initiatives. Even
outside of those, and in addition to those, the control systems
program. I know the name is iterated a few times. They do have
active engagement with a lot of the critical infrastructure
operators and we have seen increased pace of communication, and
I think also, the quality of content of those communications
has improved in recent periods.
Mr. Correa. Gentlemen, I just want to be clear that this
Member here is not looking for a got-you kind of a situation
with my questions. Because again, 19 million customers, that is
a lot of lives at stake. So, my goal, and I think the goals of
Members on this committee are how we can help you help us to do
a better job of protecting our constituents? Mr. Chairman, I
have 25 seconds. With that, I yield.
Mr. Torres. Thank you. I now recognize the gentlewoman from
Iowa, Mrs. Miller-Meeks, for questions.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Yoran, cyber
attacks, hacking, ransomware is not new. In the State of Iowa,
we have had several municipalities who in fact were hacked and
paid ransomware in order to get back their data, which prompted
us at the State level to put through legislation that provides
for disclosure and then communications with our, you know,
public intelligence and investigations, investigative division,
in order to address that. So, it is an extraordinarily
important topic.
I think, Mr. Yoran, if I am not mistaken, you are a
graduate of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. So, as a
fellow army veteran, thank you for your service. In your
testimony, you mentioned that knowing what the threat is is far
more important than knowing who is behind the threat. It seems
that there are some high maturity organizations that could
adequately action the ``who'' information, but those are
extremely limited. Could you provide some color into where that
line lies?
Mr. Yoran. I am sorry, Congresswoman, the line, could you
just clarify again, the line between----
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Between the ``who'' and the ``what''.
Mr. Yoran. Well, I think for most operators and I think,
you know, Dr. Morley and other panelists might be able to also
articulate this, I think for most operators, it isn't critical
to know the ``who'' is behind the attacks. I think knowing
where they have the greatest exposures is absolutely critical
so that they can address them. Getting high-priority threat
intelligence, whether it is from private-sector partners or
from CISA and public-sector partners, helps to prioritize which
vulnerabilities are being leveraged by the threat actor of the
day.
Today, that might be Russia. The purpose of this hearing is
Russia. Clearly, while the activity is happening in Ukraine,
and all eyes are on Russia, you could see other threat actors
taking advantage of the situation. So, I think knowing where
you have exposures and know which exposures to prioritize
through threat intelligence is absolutely critical to success.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you. This is for all of you. As
you know, the committee raised concerns with the White House's
decision to place the Department of Energy as the lead response
agency to the Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack last year. In
this case, DOE is not the lead sector risk management agency,
rather the Department of Homeland Security, via the
Transportation Security Administration, is the co-lead for the
pipeline sector. As you can appreciate, and I have heard this
from numerous entities, consistency in how the Federal
Government responds to cyber incidents is of utmost important.
We have policies, procedures, and statutes for a reason, and
they should be followed.
At a time like now, we simply can't afford similar missteps
should something like this happen again. Can you all speak to
the importance from a private-sector perspective of the
consistent and clear Federal Government response procedures?
Mr. Morley. I will take a run at that, Congresswoman. I
think it is absolutely critical that the sector risk management
agencies with leadership in our case, the EPA, are directly
involved in that engagement with CISA as the risk management
agency given the understanding that, you know, in our case, EPA
has in water utility operations in the critical elements that
in some cases CISA may not have some of that direct
understanding. So, I think that collaborative approach is most
appropriate.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Mr. Meyers.
Mr. Meyers. Thank you. I think that each one of these
incidents is going to have different merits, different threat
actors, different impact and so, consistency is absolutely
important. But I think that we should recognize that there are
different agencies that might be more suitable or different
organizations that might be suitable to assist in some of these
incidents. So, you know, I wouldn't want to limit our ability
to respond by trying to have the same response each time, but
knowing that we have to get the right partners involved and the
right Federal agencies involved to address whatever that
incident might be.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Mr. Yoran, do you have any comments or
Mr. Meyers?
Mr. Yoran. I think Mr. Meyers has it right. You know, in
different incidents you will have different agencies involved,
but it is absolutely critical that Homeland Security take the
lead across all agencies. When an incident happens, Log4j,
Log4Shell, whatever it is, the private sector is already
connected to JCDC. It is already connected to CISA. They can
work together there. They can engage there. Then you can pull
in each sector's specific agency as appropriate as required
versus every private-sector entity, you know, CrowdStrike,
Tenable, whoever, trying to connect to all the different, you
know, the 16 different departments and agencies is just
extremely inefficient--would be extremely inefficient.
Mr. Torres. The gentlewoman's time has expired. I now
recognize the gentlewoman from New York, Ms. Clarke, for
questions.
Ms. Clarke. I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman Ritchie
Torres, and let me thank our Ranking Member Mr. Katko. On a
call with stakeholders, 2 weeks ago, CISA Director Easterly
urged owners and operators to report data on cyber incidents,
as well as an anomalous--excuse me--anomalous activity that
falls short of an incident to CISA so it can help detect any
Russian cyber campaigns very early. Fortunately, Congress
passed legislation, which I authored, requiring this type of
reporting. But it will take some time for these requirements to
go into effect.
Mr. Silberstein, financial institutions are a rich target
for Russian hackers on a normal day, to say nothing of the
unique role they play in, for instance, the context of
sanctions. Is the FS-ISAC doing anything to encourage financial
institutions to voluntarily report this information to CISA?
Mr. Silberstein. Yes, thank you, Congresswoman. So, we, the
financial sector I could say benefits from a long history of
being under attack, as well as a lot of regulation that has
required reporting. So, there is a pretty good cadence of
reporting recognition among the U.S.-regulated financial
community, and both of regulatory requirement and also as a
civic duty to help out. We facilitate, in certain situations,
to report on behalf of members. We encourage them also to
engage directly with law enforcement, CISA, et cetera where it
is appropriate. So, we are fully supportive of that model.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. Dr. Morley, is AWWA doing anything
to encourage or facilitate this type of reporting? Do you think
that the water sector has the resources it needs to know what
and how to report?
Mr. Morley. Yes, Congresswoman, we have very consistently
encouraged members to report incidents of whether it is
physical or cyber attacks with the WaterISAC and CISA.
Recently, just-issued and redistributed an adversary from FBI
that was focused on municipal communities of which we are
typically part of on how to report that information to the FBI.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. Mr. Meyers and Mr. Yoran, are you
encouraging companies you work with to voluntarily report to
CISA? Have you seen any uptick in willingness to do so given
the gravity of the current threat landscape?
Mr. Meyers. I will take that first. Thank you,
Congresswoman. I think that a lot of these investigations are
conducted under the direction of counsel. So, counsel working
with those victims, those customers, generally is the one that
is going to provide the guidance about what they should reach
out and share. But we work closely with law enforcement and
CISA to ensure that they are aware of threats and that we are
able to kind-of work together to ensure coordinated response.
Ms. Clarke. Mr. Yoran.
Mr. Yoran. Led by counsel sounds suspiciously like not
going to report to my untrained ears. But I do think that is
why it is important to have the legislation that exists,
mandating reporting of incidents and ransomware payments to
CISA.
As a company, Tenable, you know, we encourage but we don't
have an active role in the incident response process. From our
perspective, we are more frequently taking the information that
is produced at JCDC and at CISA about these high-priority
vulnerabilities and making sure that we are able to automate
the distribution of that information to tens of thousands of
organizations around the world so that they can take action and
identify where they have those specific high-priority
vulnerabilities.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. Are you planning to engage with CISA
during the rule-making process? If so, what are some of the key
takeaways you hope they internalize through that process? Mr.
Meyers, Mr. Yoran? Anyone want to tackle that? We got 7
seconds.
Mr. Yoran. I think both of our companies have teams that
are working closely with CISA in providing feedback during the
response time.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. Mr. Chairman, I yield back. I thank
you, our distinguished panelists, for your testimony today.
Mr. Torres. I now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Gimenez, for questions.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member. I
have got just a couple questions. Ransomware, and there are in
Russia we know that there is a bunch of different ransomware
operators. Does anybody know if some of the proceeds from this
ransomware ever make it back to the Russian government?
Mr. Meyers. I will take that. I think that we have seen
clear indications of Russian criminal threat actors operating
at a scale that would likely attract the attention of the
Russian government. Reasonable to assume that they would be
paying some degree of taxes or something to that effect from
some of these proceeds. The coordination of these criminal
actors and the Russian government has been difficult to
directly correlate. But we have seen nationalistic and
patriotic postings from some of them in underground forums.
That has kind-of led to the conclusion that there is some
coordination.
Mr. Gimenez. If the Russians wanted them shut down, they
could shut them down, right?
Mr. Meyers. Yes.
Mr. Gimenez. Pretty easy to identify where they are, et
cetera, how they are operating?
Mr. Meyers. Yes.
Mr. Gimenez. OK. Fair enough. So, basically, they are just
an arm of the Russian government. Thank you.
The Biden administration said that we should be expecting
more--there is a potential for increased cybersecurity threats
from Russia on the United States. Has anybody seen any evidence
of increased activity, threats, from the Russians on the United
States?
Mr. Meyers. Yes. We have been aware and I believe CISA
actually put out some reporting on this last week of Russian
threat actors conducting wide-spread scanning, attempting to
look for vulnerabilities or access into data center
infrastructure.
Mr. Gimenez. Yes, but that happens all the time. I mean,
are we talking about increased activity? Because this--the
probing, the Russians probing and state actors probing our
infrastructure, it happens all the time. All the time. Every
single day. So, is there increased activity like this?
Mr. Meyers. Yes, and in this case, it was a very specific
set of activity that was being alerted to.
Mr. Gimenez. All right. I am going to pivot to something
else now. Our critical infrastructure, to me, it would seem
like there is two types of systems. There is an open system
that is open to the internet, people can hack into, et cetera,
et cetera. There probably are systems that are closed, right?
That the operating systems just they communicate within itself.
There is no way to get into it because it is not attached to
anything on the outside. Am I mistaken that there is these two
kinds of systems?
Mr. Meyers. I think that what you are referring to is a
perception that there is OT, operational technology, and IT,
information technology, and that in a perfect world, the OT
systems are isolated from the internet, the IT facing systems.
The reality is that that is not always the case.
As Mr. Yoran pointed out, they establish cellular
communications for remote telemetry collection. There is
interconnections for business systems to collect data from the
operational side. For example, in a pipeline metering and
billing information might be important business functions that
necessitate a connection between the two. So, while in theory
they should be or could be isolated, the reality is there are
connections between that world.
Mr. Gimenez. Would it make sense, Mr. Yoran, for us maybe
to regulate that certain highly-critical infrastructure,
actually work in the manner where it is physically separated
from the open infrastructure?
Mr. Yoran. Congressman, I think it is dangerous to mandate
or regulate that they remain physically separate. I think as
Adam points out, there is business reason, efficiency reason
that you might want to interconnect those. Not just, I mean,
certainly for billing purposes, but also for being able to
predict when parts are going to fail, when outages are going to
occur. So, there are reasons to interconnect. I do think that
it makes sense to regulate, mandate, remind those operators
that they are responsible for the cybersecurity risk when they
are interconnecting those systems.
Mr. Gimenez. But you could still have those systems inside
a closed system. You could actually just have all that
predictability, et cetera, inside a closed system where it is
not connected to the outside. Isn't that true?
Mr. Yoran. You could do it. I think the practicality is
that people will want to connect----
Mr. Gimenez. Well, I am not talking about every system. I
am talking about critical infrastructure like water,
electricity, et cetera, that the United States would be hard-
pressed to survive if somehow our water systems were all hacked
and we went down. Our entire grid is hacked and we went down.
Don't you think that is maybe worth the inconvenience of, you
know, of the business side of it that, hey, maybe these things
should be a little bit separated and not--because look, the way
I look at it, and I am sorry, I am out of time. The way I look
at it, there is software protection and there is physical
protection. Software protection as good as you guys think you
may be, you will always get--somebody is going to get around
you and figure a way around you. So, thank you. I yield my time
back.
Mr. Torres. I now recognize the gentleman from New Jersey,
Mr. Malinowski, for questions.
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
our witnesses for appearing today to speak on this topic.
Obviously, I think we all wish that were here under very
different circumstances that the people of Ukraine were not, as
we speak, suffering attacks by bombs and artillery shells in
the most horrific possible way. That the American people were
not, as a result of this war, facing an even greater risk of
cyber attacks that would disrupt our lives and our economy.
We have seen first-hand how cyber attacks have become an
instrument of war on the day that Russia illegally invaded
Ukraine. They knocked out, among other things, through a cyber
attack, satellite communication systems that were used by the
Ukrainian military government, tens of thousands of ordinary
citizens. Many of us have been briefed on potential scenarios
under which similar systems in the United States might be
attacked as part of a war somewhere halfway around the world.
But the risk, obviously, is not just in times of war. My
office, for example, recently met with the cybersecurity team
for a health care provider in my district. Every single day
this hospital fends off thousands of cyber attack attempts,
mostly coming from China, Russia, and Iran. Attacks that
started long before the war in Ukraine and that will last long
after the war is over. So, we have to do more. Everything we
can to better protect our hospitals, our schools, our water
facilities, our power plants, and other critical
infrastructure. Recognizing that they have to play defense and
be successful 100 percent of the time. Whereas, our adversaries
on offense only have to be successful once to hurt our lives
and our livelihoods.
On that point, I am very particularly concerned about
securing water utilities. In my State of New Jersey in my
district, one water company helps service, one relatively small
water company, helps to service more than 30 municipalities
across 5 counties, towns in my district like Millburn, and
Westfield, Raritan, Roxbury. Many such water companies don't
have the resources of a large hospital network or investment
bank.
So, for any and all the witnesses, I would like to ask how
can Congress help these critical infrastructure operators
modernize their IT and reduce the cost and complexity of
defending their networks? How do we address the cyber poverty
line and make sure investments in intelligence sharing and
intelligence sharing are actually useful to Main Street firms,
not just those on Wall Street? Thanks so much.
Mr. Morley. Yes, Congressman, I will start off given your
comment about the water sector. I think it is absolutely
critical that--and certainly have some excellent resources
available to--made available to the water sector through the
recent infrastructure legislation. Some of that is authorized
and yet to be appropriated, but we appreciate the inclusion of
cybersecurity as an eligible activity under those programs.
That being said, as I noted earlier, a number of the
resources available from CISA are quite exceptional in
supporting utilities and identifying those vulnerabilities and
taking--helping them to take action such as the CyHy program.
We would encourage continued support for that capacity
development of community water systems and wastewater systems
as they work with our Federal partners to implement some of
these great strategies, recognizing that, you know, water
utilities are a 24/7 operation both under drinking water and
wastewater side. Some of the utilities I have spoken with here
in the last several months and years those rehabilitating or
upgrading those OT systems can often be a 3- or 4-year capital
improvement project to ensure that the system maintains
operations during that whole period. So, it is not a rapid
process, but support from our Federal partners is encouraged.
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you, sir. Just a few seconds left.
Let me just, note, I mean, I started with the example of the
Russians knocking out a satellite communications system. We
don't have time to ask you all about this, but just to let you
know that I am going to be introducing a legislation shortly
that would allow commercial satellite operators to better
protect themselves against cyber attacks. I would note that a
number of utilities, including water utilities in the United
States, rely, as we all do, on satellite, commercial satellite
technologies to facilitate their operations. So, I see that as
something that will help the entire sector. Thank you, and I
yield back.
Mr. Torres. I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Pfluger, for questions.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To all the witnesses,
thank you for taking part in this today. Obviously, very
important threats, I believe, are going up exponentially and
new threats that we haven't seen before I also believe will be
attacking our critical infrastructure. I have got a couple of
questions.
Before I get to that, last week I introduced the cyber
defense, Cyber Deterrence and Response Act to really remove any
ambiguity for a would-be attacker of American critical
infrastructure. You know, whether it is the financial sector or
the energy sector, I have always been very outspoken on energy
and believe that that is a vulnerability, a target, and
something that adversaries will target.
It basically says that any cyber attack on critical
infrastructure by a foreign state-sponsored actor will be
responded to by the President of the United States. I will just
start, Mr. Yoran, a West Point grad, myself being an Air Force
Academy grad, I think that, you know, we might be able to look
at these actions a little bit differently. Can you kind-of talk
through the benefits or even drawbacks of establishing maybe
more serious red lines that might remove some of the ambiguity,
but also could, you know, limit some of our, you know, kind-of
put us in a box, if you will, in some cases. You know, what is
the value of the deterrence by being a little more overtly
stating, you know, what we will and how we respond to some of
these attacks?
Mr. Yoran. Well, thank you, Congressman. I do think that
deterrence should play a critical role in the cybersecurity
paradigm. To date, it is greatly underserved. So, the
deterrence could be response in kind from a cyber perspective.
It could be retorts. It could be countermeasures. It could be
non-cyber responses. I think having those options available to
us as a Nation and exerting those options more frequently is
one way to signal to the rest of the international community
what is OK and what not OK from a cyber perspective.
Mr. Pfluger. Well, thank you for that. It is obviously a
difficult problem. We need to have the reporting in order to
understand, but hopefully, that reporting comes in the way of
voluntary so that we can really learn the lessons.
Let me move to the next question for Mr. Meyers. You know,
talking about the State Department launching the new Bureau of
Cyberspace and Digital Policy, and given your support
previously for the Threat Analysis Division, can you talk us
through how this new agency should stand up, how they will be
effective, and the steps they need to take to accomplish that
deterrence that we just talked about with Mr. Yoran.
Mr. Meyers. Sure. I think information sharing and bringing
visibility and awareness to what threat actors are doing and
what that looks like is absolutely critical. If I can turn back
briefly to the deterrence component, though, I think that there
is an element which is deterrence through denial that should be
considered. That is really about, as to borrow from CISA, the
Shields Up, but bringing the technology together that allows us
to ensure that these threat actors are not able to conduct
these operations.
As Mr. Yoran mentioned in his testimony about lapses using
pretty limited resources to conduct large-scale attacks against
pretty significant entities, I think zero trust, identify
management, multi-factor authentication, all of these
technologies help us make organizations more resilient and
stronger. In doing so, enable us to create deterrence through
denial by denying the threat actor the ability to operate
inside of our environments and raising the cost of doing
business to them.
Mr. Pfluger. Well, thank you for that. Last question for
anybody on the panel. In the form of personnel, they are able
to conduct these types of cyber-related activities here. I
believe we have a shortage of people and experts. How do we at
the university level or even before, primary education,
secondary education, how do we target, you know, this problem
through the training of and the education of personnel? I am
thinking of my own district, Angelo State University, a cyber
center of excellence. How do we really make a--move the needle
and make a dent in this problem, to anybody?
Mr. Meyers. I will take that first. But I think we need to
be going at the junior high school level and really encouraging
the STEM programs, encouraging students from lots of different
diverse backgrounds to get involved in math and science, and
build the work force for the future, today. We cannot just
magically make this work force appear. We need to start at a
young level and start to train them. CrowdStrike has been
encouraging that through some of our nonprofit operations with
Girls Who Code and things like that. So, I strongly encourage
doing that at an early age.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you. I am out of time. I am going to
have a question to follow up to ask each of you whether we are
behind on that or not? I appreciate it and yield back.
Mr. Torres. Thank you. I now recognize the gentleman from
Kansas for questioning, Mr. LaTurner.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to thank each of
the witnesses for taking part in this hearing today and sharing
your perspective on this important issue. Not a week goes by
that I don't hear about the threats and challenges that
businesses, schools, hospitals, and countless other
stakeholders in my district face due to increased cyber
attacks. As we all know, this threat has only increased in
recent months. We have watched the unfolding tragedy of the
Russian invasion of Ukraine.
But Russia's aggression is not limited to their heinous
attacks and bombings of civilian shelters that we see on
television. War is also being waged in the cyber space where
Russian actors are doing all they can to undermine and attack,
not just Ukraine, but the United States and our other allies
abroad. These attacks did not just start in the last month. It
has recently been reported that the Department of Justice
indicted 3 Russian FSB agents who targeted computer systems at
the Wolf Creek nuclear power plant in Burlington, Kansas from
2014 to 2017.
The Government maintains a consistent expectation that
utilities and critical infrastructure stakeholders should
operate as partners for the defense of the Nation. However, in
order for them to perform that role, as expected by the
Government, industry needs timely and actionable information
that they can take and respond effectively. This is a two-way
street. We need to ensure that industry and Government are able
to develop a trusting relationship where they are capable of
freely sharing information with the knowledge that it will
remain secure and is actually being used to strengthen and
improve our cyber defenses. I will emphasize, the need for it
to remain secure.
My first question is for Mr. Morley. Mr. Morley, given the
wide-spread disparity of your membership and the wide array of
needs that they have, do you feel that the assistance you all
are getting from CISA adequately covers the wide range of needs
that your members have?
Mr. Morley. I think to your point about timely and actual
information, I think we can improve that and ensure that the
information is actionable. I think some of that information
does come out at a level that may be beyond some of the
technical expertise that may be inhouse at a small or medium
system. Would look forward to the opportunity to work with the
agency to improve that information-sharing process.
Mr. LaTurner. I appreciate that. Mr. Silberstein, you
represent some of the most cyber mature companies in the
country. I would imagine that some of the services CISA offers
might not be as useful to your member companies as they are to
other sectors. Where does CISA need to improve in their
services for you all?
Mr. Silberstein. Thank you, Congressman. The largest
financial institutions, like many of the largest corporations
in the country, are extremely sophisticated in their
capabilities. But nevertheless, the information that CISA
provides is useful because they have a across-the-country view
and it is valuable. Does it have the same value? Probably not.
I think we are all challenged as we go down the size rankings
in any sector of the smaller institutions how they find the
resources, the money, et cetera, to do what is needed. Moving
to a--for the future to where we start building more context to
the individual sectors around the information, about their
supply chains, is a long-term direction, which could be
helpful.
Mr. LaTurner. I appreciate that. This is for everyone. I
want to give everyone an opportunity here. The Cyber Incident
Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act included within the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, it requires owners and
operators to report significant cyber incidents and ransomware
attacks to CISA, which will lead to greater visibility for the
Federal Government, earlier disruption of malicious cyber
campaigns, and better information, and threat intelligence
going back out to the private sector so they can defend against
future attacks. Several of you mentioned in your testimony that
you had recommendations for legislation. I would like to
provide an opportunity for you all to comment on that now.
Mr. Morley. Are you asking specifically about the incident
reporting legislation or?
Mr. LaTurner. Correct.
Mr. Silberstein. Yes, if I may, Congressman, we don't take
a stance on suggesting legislation in the future. But will note
that there seems to be some excellent coordination between
CISA, U.S. Treasury, and regulators about attempting to
normalize the already-existing reporting requirements with the
new reporting requirements.
Mr. LaTurner. I appreciate that. My time has expired. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Torres. Thank you. I will simply end with a final
comment that the state of cybersecurity of our critical
infrastructure runs the gamut from financial services, which is
richly resourced, to our water systems, which is fragmented and
poorly funded. We have to ensure that CISA's support is
sufficiently tailored to the widely varied needs of our
critical infrastructure, that it is sufficiently need-based.
I want to thank the witnesses for their testimony and the
Members for their questions.
Another Member showed up. Mrs. Cammack, I am sorry.
Mrs. Cammack. You were going to leave me hanging, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Torres. You are recognized for questions.
Mrs. Cammack. Well, I appreciate it. Thank you so much.
Thank you to our Chairman and the Ranking Member Katko, for
holding this very important hearing today. Again, thank you to
all our witnesses for your testimony. I know that these can be
lengthy, but we appreciate and value your testimony.
Several weeks ago, I held a call with utilities,
businesses, city and county leadership, and stakeholders across
my district, Florida's 3rd Congressional, to discuss cyber
preparedness and resiliency. Now, during this call, we were
able to discuss the resources at CISA, specifically Shields Up.
I am glad that CISA has developed this initiative for
individuals and organizations across the country to provide
this critical information on cyber threats mitigation, and best
practices that must be implemented in the face of growing cyber
threats.
However, every organization in the United States, every
level of government, private, business, ag operation, water
treatment facility, you name it, it is exposed to cyber
threats. As we have seen in the last year, cyber attacks can
have a real and immediate effect on Americans across the
country. The Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack affected the
entire East Coast, even Floridians who are not relying on
getting their fuel from a pipeline, leading to the company
halting National--normal functions for several days, which led
to fuel shortages throughout the southeast, leading to at the
time, the highest gas prices since 2014.
In February of last year, a water treatment facility in
Florida, not far from my district, was also attacked. According
to reports about the attack, the levels of sodium hydroxide at
the treatment facility were adjusted from 100 parts per million
to 11,000 parts per million, a deadly level. Fortunately, this
attack was noticed and stopped by employees who were vigilant.
Moreover, as a Member of the House Agriculture Committee, I
am especially worried about cyber threats against another
critical infrastructure sector, our Nation's food supply. In
June of last year, a cyber attack that was likely based in
Russia targeted JBS who has operations in Canada, Australia,
and the United States. Now, as you all know, JBS makes up
nearly 19 percent of the Nation's market share for meat
processing. According to a recent report from the Food and
Agriculture Organization, the war in Ukraine--global
agriculture markets face, because of the war, they face
exposure to vulnerability, to shocks, and volatility from
fertilizer prices, fuel prices, factor in regulatory and labor
concerns. In short, it is a mess.
Due to the potential disruptions in ag production and trade
in the region, U.S. producers and related agribusiness must
remain resilient in the face of enhanced cyber threats from
Russia targeting these industries. Food security is National
security. It is vital at this time to ensure that there are no
disruptions to our Nation's food supply or other critical
infrastructure sectors.
Mr. Meyers, I would like to just touch on your opening
statement. You discussed a number of threat actors and the
various goals of leveraging cyber operations. Can you discuss
the process by which you were able to determine the intended
objectives for cyber threat actors and, specifically, I am
curious, how you can make the determination for the reason for
these operations when it is not explicitly conveyed or there is
not a financial aspect to the crime?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you for the excellent question,
Congresswoman. The intent of a threat actor can be established
by the targets that they go after, the method by which they
conduct targeting. By which I mean, if they are conducting
phishing attacks with malicious attachments, looking at the
recipients of those attachments, looking at the content of the
lure that is intended to get the person to click on it or open
it, are all things that help us understand what the target
environment looks like or who the targets might be.
In terms of intent, we look at the tools that they are
leveraging. This may involve tools that are built specifically
for espionage, looking for specific files, key words, things
that will be used by a threat actor for intelligence purposes.
In the case, the examples I mentioned with regards to Ukraine
and Russia, they have employed disruptive, destructive tools
that are meant to overwrite files and to render systems
inoperable. That is kind-of the two mean differentiations
between espionage and these disruptive, destructive attacks.
The threat actors that we are tracking are capable,
particularly from a Russia perspective, in conducting
disruptive, destructive attacks against targets in the United
States, and as I highlighted, critical infrastructure.
Mrs. Cammack. My apologies for the bell. But thank you for
your commentary and my time has expired. I yield back.
Mr. Torres. Thank you. Last, but not least, the gentleman
from Georgia, Mr. Clyde, is recognized for questions.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Chairman Torres, for holding this
important hearing. As many of you are aware, far too often in
our digital age, we do hear of companies, schools, health
services, or local municipal governments, victimized by
ransomware attacks. However, what is equally as concerning are
those entities harmed by cyber crime that we do not hear about
due to those entities not filing a report with CISA, the FBI,
or the NSA often because they do not know what law enforcement
tools are available to them.
In my home district alone, Jackson County government was
hit with a ransomware attack demanding $400,000 in 2019. Polk
County elections infrastructure was hit by a ransomware attack
in 2020. A major manufacturer, ASI Southeast, was hit in 2021.
South of my district, one of the most important gas pipelines
in the southeast, Colonial Pipeline, was hit with a ransomware
attack in 2021, causing serious fuel supply disruptions.
Mr. Chairman, I request unanimous consent to have these
articles reflecting these events submitted for the record and I
would like to read them.
Mr. Torres. Without objection.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you. The first article is a ZDNet,
``Georgia county pays a whopping $400,000 to get rid of a
ransomware infection'' from May 9, 2019. October 29, of 2020,
``Ransomware hits election infrastructure in Georgia county'',
from CNN. Then from U.S. News and World Report, on May 8, 2021,
``Major U.S. pipeline halts operations after ransomware
attack''. Thank you.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Clyde. As Russia wages war on Ukraine and more
countries place economic sanctions on Russia, we have been
warned about the potential increased cyber attacks against U.S.
businesses by Russia or Russian assets. These attacks could not
only hurt the United States on a financial front, but they
could also interrupt critically important defense, utilities,
health care, manufacturing, or elections computer network
systems.
You know it is vital to our National interests that we
secure our networks to prevent ransomware and cyber attacks by
bad actors. Moreover, in shoring up our Nation's defensive
cyber capabilities, we must also make sure that we maintain
cutting-edge offensive cyber capabilities. I have always
believed that the best defense is a good offense. Without a
strong offense, our Nation will lack the ability to deter and
respond to attacks conducted against U.S. interests.
So, my question, especially for Mr. Meyers, first, and then
for Mr. Yoran, is this an area of focus, is the offensive
capability an area of focus that any of you can discuss in this
setting?
Mr. Meyers. I think that----
Mr. Clyde. Are you involved in that?
Mr. Meyers. I think that is best answered by the
intelligence community and the military law enforcement.
Private sector does not play a significant role from an
offensive perspective.
Mr. Clyde. Would you agree, are you----
Mr. Yoran. I would agree with Mr. Meyers. There is no role
for private sector in offensive cyber operations.
Mr. Clyde. OK. All right, thank you. I am a Member of the
House Committee on Oversight and Reform, and in January of this
year, CORE held a hearing on the 13th iteration of the Federal
Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act, or FITARA. This
hearing highlighted the grades each Federal agency received in
different areas of the FITARA scorecard.
While many Federal agencies passed in many areas, a large
area of concern was cybersecurity under the Federal Information
Security Management Act, or FISMA. While most FISMA scores were
a C or higher, however, there were six D grades. That made me
question what does this mean for cybersecurity for the agencies
that scored so low? I want to highlight the Department of
Energy was one of those agencies that scored a D in the FISMA
category. The White House placed the Department of Energy as
the lead response agency to the Colonial Pipeline ransomware
attack. However, the DOE was not the lead sector risk
management agency, rather the Department of Homeland Security,
via the Transportation Security Administration.
So, can any of you tell me, I think, let's see, Mr. Meyers,
you were involved in that CrowdStrike, was that not something
that you were involved in with Colonial Pipeline?
Mr. Meyers. In what regard?
Mr. Clyde. As in assisting Colonial Pipeline.
Mr. Meyers. Not to my knowledge. We covered it from an
intelligence perspective and investigated the DarkSide group
that was responsible for it.
Mr. Clyde. Right. That is kind-of where I am going. So, you
were involved in investigating the DarkSide of it.
Mr. Meyers. Yes.
Mr. Clyde. OK. So, can you tell me, did Russia have a part
in that, do you think? Or can you elaborate on that with regard
to Russia?
Mr. Meyers. I think that in that case we were--there was a
core group, which was responsible for building the platform.
This is something that we term ransomware as a service. They
built that core platform and then there was an affiliate who
was responsible for conducting the actual intrusion and
deployment of ransomware. So, it was a criminal group that is
known that we track as Carbon Spider. Then an unknown affiliate
who leveraged that infrastructure to conduct the attack.
Mr. Clyde. OK. All right. Thank you very much. With that, I
yield back.
Mr. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Clyde. Without objection, I
insert into the record a statement from Mandiant, Inc.
[The information follows:]
Statement of Sandra Joyce, Executive Vice President and Head of Global
Intelligence, Mandiant, Inc.
April 5, 2022
introduction & background
Mandiant appreciates the opportunity to provide an official
statement for the record in response to the committee's recent hearing,
``Mobilizing our Cyber Defenses: Securing Critical Infrastructure
Against Russian Cyber Threats.''
Mandiant assesses with moderate confidence that Russia will conduct
additional destructive or disruptive cyber attacks connected to the war
in Ukraine, focusing most certainly on Ukraine but also possibly
shifting to Western and NATO allies, including the United States. My
commentary will focus on cyber threat activity observed in Ukraine;
preparing for threats to the homeland; and recommendations for
escalating, de-escalating, and maintaining a steady date during a
global cyber event.
With the understanding that visibility into the cyber threats that
matter cannot be surged overnight, Mandiant has made significant
investments over the years to maintain a window of visibility into such
threats abroad. Bolstered by partnerships and data collection efforts,
we have always understood the importance of awareness into Russian
cyber operations in nations like Ukraine, to proactively put U.S.
organizations on a better defensive footing when those same actors,
tools, and techniques are used against the homeland.
Mandiant employees are on the front lines of the cyber threat
landscape, currently responding to over 150 active computer intrusions
at some of the largest companies and organizations in the world. Over
the last 18 years, we have responded to thousands of security
incidents. For each incident we respond to, it is our objective to
figure out what happened and to determine what organizations can do to
avoid similar incidents in the future. We also maintain over 300
intelligence analysts, located in more than 20 countries, speaking over
30 languages, who pursue attribution and identification of the threat
actors via research and sources.
We are committed to working with our public and private-sector
partners to safeguard the Nation from cyber attacks by sharing cyber
threat information, lessons learned, and best practices, including as a
plank-holder member of the newly-established Joint Cyber Defense
Collaborative at the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency,
and a member and contributor to various information-sharing and
analysis centers.
cyber threat activity observed in ukraine
Our long-standing visibility has helped us stay abreast of threat
campaigns targeting Ukraine, both before the run-up of Russia's
military invasion through to the present. To date, we have witnessed
continued cyber espionage campaigns, information operations, and
destructive cyber attacks by Russian threat actors against Ukrainian
targets. Multiple instances of wiper malware have impacted Ukraine's
government, energy, and financial sectors among others. Disinformation
campaigns have sought to exploit fissures among EU and NATO allies.
Some of these operations have sought to amplify limited disruptive
successes through psychological operations targeting the Ukrainian
populace--something we can learn from in anticipating how cyber attacks
might be operationalized against our own country and infrastructure.
Recent cyber operations against Ukraine have not been limited to
campaigns by Russian threat actors. Mandiant has observed suspected
Chinese espionage groups target Ukrainian organizations.\1\ The focus
of international governments and partners on Ukraine likely provides
China a target-rich environment to opportunistically leverage for its
own ends. Additionally, we have observed a network of coordinated and
inauthentic social media accounts push messaging critical of the United
States related to its actions surrounding Russia's invasion into
Ukraine. We have been tracking this network since 2019 and have
observed it promoting pro-People's Republic of China narratives.\2\
Mandiant has also identified pro-Iran information operations activity
promoting content pertaining to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, such
as the promotion of narratives suggesting that NATO and the West have
abandoned Ukraine.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Mandiant Intelligence Report 22-00007807 (24 March 2022).
\2\ Mandiant Intelligence Report 22-00009927 (13 April 2022).
\3\ Mandiant Intelligence Report 22-00004849 (7 March 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Meanwhile, ransomware operations continue to impact U.S.
organizations. The last several years of financially-motivated
campaigns by an ecosystem of various criminal actors has impacted many
key sectors of the U.S. economy. Given historic relationships between
the Russian security services and underground cybercriminal community,
this is an area of concern as we watch for deviations in patterns of
activity by known actors within this ecosystem.
preparing for threats to the homeland
In this time of an increased ``Shields Up'' posture, Mandiant
believes network defenders should prioritize the threats that matter
during an elevated state of defense. Scale is often an important factor
in successful cyber attacks, and a particular area of concern is the
ability of threat actors to leverage access into many organizations or
affect a destructive outcome that impacts downstream customers of
critical infrastructure. We are particularly concerned with Russian
cyber threat actors that appear to have a mandate to carry out
destructive attacks, such as groups we track as Sandworm Team and
TEMP.Isotope. These are Russia-based threat actors with a history of
conducting intrusions into critical infrastructure, some of which have
resulted in costly outcomes across various industries. Should we see
escalation of cyber attacks by Russia as a reprisal to sanctions,
Mandiant assesses that in addition to Government organizations, sectors
such as financial services, energy, media, and transportation are at
elevated risk for targeting by Russian threat actors.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ ``Responses to Russia's Invasion of Ukraine Likely to Spur
Retaliation'' https://www.mandiant.com/resources/russia-invasion-
ukraine-retaliation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mandiant, in partnership with Schneider Electric, recently
disclosed analysis of a new set of industrial control system (ICS)-
oriented attack tools which we call INCONTROLLER.\5\ The tools can
interact with specific industrial equipment embedded in different types
of machinery leveraged across multiple industries. While attribution
has not been made to a specific sponsor, we assess these tools to be
the work of a well-resourced nation-state and contain the capability
for sabotage or physical destruction in operational environments where
they could be deployed. The capability of these tools is comparable to
some of the more sophisticated malware families we have observed target
ICS environments, to include the malware used to disrupt electric
utilities in Ukraine in 2016.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ ``INCONTROLLER: New State-Sponsored Cyber Attack Tools Target
Multiple Industrial Control Systems'' https://www.mandiant.com/
resources/incontroller-state-sponsored-ics-tool.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As we have seen abroad, the purpose of destructive operations may
be as much psychological as kinetic in nature. Mandiant believes that
attempted deniability of such operations highlights the importance of
attribution efforts by our organization and others to hold malign
actors to account. Intelligence and information sharing among private
and public-sector partners can better enable us all to proactively
defend the homeland from the latest tactics and techniques of
operations by such groups as mentioned above.
The increased risk of cyber attacks against critical infrastructure
here in the United States is something the Nation must prepare for.
However, the private sector is in a better position today having
weathered ransomware attacks for the last several years. Collectively,
the private sector has learned how to better prepare for, mitigate, and
respond to disruptive attacks when they materialize, limiting the scope
of destruction and getting organizations back up and running. To that
end, Mandiant has issued guidance to organizations on steps they can
take now to better harden their networks and systems from the types of
destructive attack we are concerned Russian threat actors could
launch.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ ``Proactive Preparation and Hardening To Protect Against
Destructive Attacks''https://www.mandiant.com/sites/default/files/2022-
03/wp-proactive-preparation-and-hardening.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
beyond the crisis
Public and private-sector entities have an opportunity to come out
of this current period of heightened tensions with lessons learned for
strategic readiness and cooperation across sectors. In a similar manner
to the challenges of securing elections and responding to ransomware,
this current crisis can serve as a model for improved coordination
between industry and Government. Organizations must also realize that
maintaining a high operational tempo of increased diligence for an
extended time frame can be costly to network defenders in organizations
already impacted by staffing shortages and limited resources. Security
planning by organizations--in critical infrastructure and other
sectors--should take into account normal, elevated, and high-alert
states of defense through periods of crisis. This involves considering
both proactive and strategic measures to take, as well as operational
changes and constraints at those various stages.
Mandiant applauds passage of the Cyber Incident Reporting for
Critical Infrastructure Act as part of the Fiscal Year 2022
Consolidated Appropriations Act. This is a positive step forward in
achieving critical long-term goals of enabling early detection of
malicious cyber attacks, though it will not be officially implemented
for several more months. In the mean time, it is critical for CI owners
and operators in all sectors to share cyber threat information and
report incidents to the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency, given the on-going geopolitical tensions in Ukraine and the
threat of cyber attacks to the homeland.
This reporting framework enhances the Federal Government's
situational awareness to better partner with and assist private-sector
entities that become cyber attack victims. Broader, timely cyber
incident reporting and bi-directional information sharing within and
across sectors will allow for earlier detection of large, sophisticated
cyber campaigns that have the potential for significant impacts to
critical infrastructure or National security implications. More robust
datasets will lead to faster and more accurate attribution and
understanding of adversary intent; more impactful responses to attacks,
including a greater probability of successful countermeasures or
deterrence; cross correlation and collaboration with international
partners, thereby enabling a multilateral response to State-sponsored
or State-sanctioned cyber criminals; and overall, a much more accurate
cyber risk picture. The significance and necessity of these
capabilities cannot be overstated during this time of war in Ukraine.
conclusion
On behalf of Mandiant, thank you for the opportunity to share our
insights and recommendations for preparing and responding to potential
cyber threats against U.S. critical infrastructure. We stand ready to
work with you and other interested parties in devising effective
solutions to deter malicious behavior in cyber space and to build
better resiliency into organizations' networks.

Mr. Torres. I thank the witnesses for their testimony, for
their service to the country, and the Members for their
questions. The Members of the committee may have additional
questions for the witnesses. We ask that you respond
expeditiously in writing to those questions.
The Chair reminds Members that the committee report record
will remain open for 10 business days. Without objection, the
committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:06 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Honorable Nanette Barragan for Adam Meyers
Question 1. What recommendations do you have to secure our ports
from cyber threats?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. State and local governments often own and operate
critical infrastructure but may lack the resources to properly invest
in cybersecurity. In your opinion, what obstacles remain to
strengthening the security of State and local government-owned critical
infrastructure and what more could the Federal Government do to assist
them?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Ralph Norman for Adam Meyers
Question 1. The National Institute of Standards and Technology has
increased its focus on detecting and preventing harmful intrusion from
foreign entities that pose a risk to our critical infrastructure. Among
these focus areas, application whitelisting is repeatedly flagged as a
viable security measure for protection against cyber attacks by
blocking harmful material before it ever gains access to the system.
How is your organization utilizing tools like application whitelisting
to meet the demands of the modern cybersecurity climate?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. What can be done to incentivize the private sector to
protect themselves?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. A lot of talk today has been about prevention and
mitigation, but I want to talk about what happens once the enemy
strikes. When you have an emergency, you call 9-1-1. When your
organizations are held for ransom by malware, who do you call?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Steven Silberstein
Question 1. How do your international attache offices work with
host country law enforcement and non-U.S. companies to combat the
threat of terrorists' use of digital money? Do you have plans to expand
your international footprints to specifically address your predicted
growth in this threat area?
Answer. As a private global association with strong public-private
partnerships and employees across the world (including regional offices
in Singapore, United Kingdom, and the United States) we support our
financial services members as they navigate threats associated with bad
actors utilizing digital assets. Our focus is on the sharing of
information that would alert and possibly prevent illegal digital
transactions before they happen. While we do cooperate with law
enforcement when contacted, we are not typically involved in anti-money
laundering issues and/or terrorists' use of digital currencies that
take place outside the core financial services space. However, as
digital assets are becoming more prevalent, FS-ISAC is expanding our
footprint in this evolving area. Specifically, in Q2 of calendar year
2022 we are establishing a global Cryptocurrency Community of Interest
to promote threat intelligence and knowledge sharing within our
membership. This community will receive relevant threat briefings,
discuss controls, threats and risks, and share useful practices.
Question 2. To what extent do social media platforms allow for
terrorists and violent extremists to more easily move funds among each
other? What gaps or barriers exist to those platforms working more
closely with your agencies to prevent this movement of money?
Answer. At this time, social media firms do not share with FS-ISAC
when fraudulent identities or transactions are suspected on their
platforms.
Question From Honorable Nanette Barragan for Steven Silberstein
Question. The Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis
Center specializes on cybersecurity for financial services. Do you have
any recommendations for how the Federal Government or private sector
can support our smaller financial institutions' cybersecurity, such as
for our smaller community banks and minority-owned banks, that may have
less resources?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Ralph Norman for Steven Silberstein
Question 1. The National Institute of Standards and Technology has
increased its focus on detecting and preventing harmful intrusion from
foreign entities that pose a risk to our critical infrastructure. Among
these focus areas, application whitelisting is repeatedly flagged as a
viable security measure for protection against cyber attacks by
blocking harmful material before it ever gains access to the system.
How is your organization utilizing tools like application whitelisting
to meet the demands of the modern cybersecurity climate?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. What can be done to incentivize the private sector to
protect themselves?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. A lot of talk today has been about prevention and
mitigation, but I want to talk about what happens once the enemy
strikes. When you have an emergency, you call 9-1-1. When your
organizations are held for ransom by malware, who do you call?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question From Honorable Nanette Barragan for Kevin M. Morley
Question. There are smaller water systems with limited resources
that serve some of our disadvantaged communities. What cybersecurity
resources do these smaller water systems in the United States currently
receive from the Government, nonprofit, and private sectors and what do
you believe they need to ensure their safety and the safety of their
customers?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Ranking Member Andrew Garbarino for Kevin M. Morley
Question 1a. The America's Water Infrastructure Act of 2018 only
requires systems serving more than 3,300 customers to self-certify that
they have developed risk assessments and emergency response plans. That
leaves tens of thousands of smaller systems with less than 3,300
customers unprotected. Long Island has dozens of smaller water
utilities--my constituents deserve the same level of protection as
Americans across the country.
What can the Federal Government do to drive greater cyber
preparedness for all water systems, regardless of size?
Question 1b. What are your thoughts on requiring cybersecurity
plans to be submitted when systems of all sizes apply for Federally-
subsidized loans and grants?
Question 1c. As the Sector Risk Management Agency for the water
sector, do you think the EPA has the capacity to handle cybersecurity
oversight? Are you confident EPA and CISA could appropriately assist
during an emergency like the incident seen in Florida last February?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Ralph Norman for Kevin M. Morley
Question 1. The National Institute of Standards and Technology has
increased its focus on detecting and preventing harmful intrusion from
foreign entities that pose a risk to our critical infrastructure. Among
these focus areas, application whitelisting is repeatedly flagged as a
viable security measure for protection against cyber attacks by
blocking harmful material before it ever gains access to the system.
How is your organization utilizing tools like application whitelisting
to meet the demands of the modern cybersecurity climate?
Answer. AWWA's cybersecurity guidance is directly aligned with the
NIST Cybersecurity Framework. In addition, NIST 800-167 provides
guidance on how an entity can use whitelisting to protect its networks.
However, we have observed that the classification level associated with
some cyber threat intelligence inhibits effective information sharing
across a sector like water, which includes more than 50,000 community
water systems. In one recent cyber incident in which a water utility
was targeted, the associated incident assessment included ``actionable
information'' including IP address that if shared could be blocked as
part of a geofencing defense. Unfortunately, that information was not
shared with the sector for unknown reasons. Most critical
infrastructure entities are dependent on the intelligence community for
active threat information. We cannot take action on threats that are
not communicated in a timely manner.
Question 2. What can be done to incentivize the private sector to
protect themselves?
Answer. Improving information sharing about cyber threats is
essential. This requires better collaboration to ensure the information
being provided is properly contextualized and actionable. The Shields
Up campaign from CISA is an important start, but too often the
information provided assumes a level of cyber proficiency that may not
always exist in the field, which impedes the receiver from taking
action to implement the provided mitigations. Our Federal intelligence
partners need to provide the ``on ramps'' necessary to ensure that all
entities can act on the information those agencies generate. This a key
limiting factor with cyber threat intelligence.
In addition, we have observed the market responding to the evolving
cyber threat, specifically insurance underwriters and credit rating
agencies. The expectations from these entities provide a strong signal
that supports action being taken voluntarily to mitigate cyber
vulnerabilities.
AWWA is an ANSI Standards Development Organization and has prepared
several voluntary consensus standards that collectively provide an all-
hazards approach to security and preparedness. Currently two standards
have received SAFETY Act Designations based on the Department of
Homeland Security's determination that they are effective at mitigating
the impact or harm that could arise from an Act of Terrorism. The
designation provides an important market signal to the sector from DHS
regarding best practice, in addition to the liability protections
provide to AWWA and the users of these standards.

ANSI/AWWA G430.--Security Practices for Operations and
Management

ANSI/AWWA J100.--Risk and Resilience Management of Water &
Wastewater Systems
Question 3. A lot of talk today has been about prevention and
mitigation, but I want to talk about what happens once the enemy
strikes. When you have an emergency, you call 9-1-1. When your
organizations are held for ransom by malware, who do you call?
Answer. We recommend that systems contact law enforcement,
especially the FBI, when it comes to ransomware incidents. The Internet
Crime Complaint Center (IC3) has created a reporting form for
submitting ransomware incidents [https://ransomware.ic3.gov/]. In
addition, the water sector has been promoting CISA's Shields Up program
which includes incident reporting resources. The associations and Water
ISAC frequently distribute advisories issued by ICS-CERT related to
critical vulnerabilities, often in coordination with EPA and CISA.
Question 4. The Environmental Protection Agency notes the risk
posed to utilities and consumer payments by Russian cyber threats. In
the past year alone, there have been 3 ransomware attacks on Water and
Wastewater Systems Sector facilities across the country. CISA's Shields
Up Advisory directs organizations to ``ensure that cybersecurity/IT
personnel are focused on identifying and quickly assessing any
unexpected or unusual network behavior.'' Beyond heightened awareness
based on the recommendations of Federal agencies and regulatory bodies,
how are your companies working to rapidly address any infiltration from
malign entities attempting to undermine American security?
Answer. AWWA's cybersecurity guidance encourages active network/
system monitoring. We recognize that bad actors in the cyber realm are
constantly seeking opportunities to target systems, including water
utilities. Network architecture is a critical part of mitigating cyber
risks in addition to robust access controls for authorized users. These
are key elements of the AWWA guidance that is designed to support a
customized application of the NIST CSF, based on the technology
applications deployed by a utility. This prioritized approach helps
water systems allocate limited resources to those actions that will net
the greatest risk reduction.
AWWA also recognizes that the complexity of the cyber threat and
the scale of the water sector necessitates a new approach to governance
for cybersecurity. We have recommended a co-regulatory model that
provides for a mandatory cybersecurity requirement, leverages the
sector's subject-matter expertise, and maintains oversight with the
EPA.
Questions From Honorable Nanette Barragan for Amit Yoran
Question 1. State and local governments often own and operate
critical infrastructure but may lack the resources to properly invest
in cybersecurity. In your opinion, what obstacles remain to
strengthening the security of State and local government-owned critical
infrastructure and what more could the Federal Government do to assist
them?
Answer. Thank you for this important question. For years, we've
heard from State and local government agencies that they lack the
funding needed to address their cybersecurity needs. State and local
governments often have very limited IT budgets and must make tough
choices about how to allocate that spending. In addition, due to the
expanding attack surface, State and local governments need to address
cybersecurity risks to not only their IT assets, but to Internet of
Things (IoT), Operational Technology (OT) and cloud assets as well.
That's why we've been advocating for a State and local cybersecurity
grant program, which was included in the recently-enacted
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act.
The new program provides $1 billion in cybersecurity grants for
State, local, Tribal, and territorial governments for the full range of
connected assets. The funding is conditioned upon the submission of a
State-wide cybersecurity plan that aligns with established best
practices, covers critical infrastructure, and incorporates the needs
of local governments, which receive 80 percent of the funding. This
funding, which will be made available over the next 4 years, is vital
to ensuring State and local governments have the resources they need to
address cyber risks and threats and protect their critical
infrastructure.
I also applaud CISA's leadership in providing cybersecurity
guidance, resources, and support for State and local government
agencies, especially its ``Shields Up'' campaign, which gives
organizations specific recommendations on threats and how they can
defend themselves.
For all organizations, especially those with fewer resources,
establishing and maintaining a baseline standard of care can thwart the
majority of attacks which come from known vulnerabilities. This
includes strong passwords, multi-factor authentication, and risk-based
vulnerability management. Getting these basics right will go a long way
in securing State and local government agencies.
Question 2. Private patient health information has become more
digital, which makes it an increased target for cyber attacks. Can you
discuss the importance of hospitals' and health care organizations'
cybersecurity and available resources?
Answer. Cybersecurity capabilities vary greatly between
organizations, and it is important for less cyber mature organizations
to recognize that cyber is a part of nearly everything we do now as a
modern society. Health care organizations are a prime target for cyber
criminals and, unfortunately, tend to have less mature cyber risk
management practices. Add to that the reality that many health care
organizations are looking to achieve only the bare minimum for
cybersecurity compliance with HIPAA or other regulations and nothing
more. This means they are often not adequately protecting private
patient information from an increasingly-expanding attack surface.
Organizations must place cyber risk management as a central focus
of overall business risk management and invest in the best security
they can to meet the needs of their patients. Management needs to
understand the role of cybersecurity in broader organizational risk
management. Stronger cyber hygiene practices have to play a fundamental
role in protecting hospital and health care organizations' data,
devices, and systems. The National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) provides resources and guidance through the National
Cyber Center of Excellence that can be leveraged by the health care
sector to achieve stronger cybersecurity outcomes.
Question 3. Community health centers and clinics are an important
safety net for communities of color and underserved groups. These
facilities have less resources than large hospitals. How can the
Federal Government and the private sector better support cybersecurity
for critical community health centers?
Answer. While community health centers and clinics have fewer
resources, that doesn't mean they can't take meaningful steps toward
stopping cyber threats. We know that the vast majority of attacks come
from known vulnerabilities, and so investing their limited resources in
a risk-based vulnerability management system will best enable smaller
health care providers to defend against the most dangerous
vulnerabilities and stop breaches. Getting the basics right, and doing
them well, will help small organizations accomplish stronger
cybersecurity on a smaller budget and keep their networks safe from the
constantly expanding attack surface that impacts not only critical
health care infrastructure, but also overall facility operations. As we
saw with Colonial Pipeline last year, an attack on even just a billing
system can have major consequences.
The Federal Government also has a role to play. CISA can provide
meaningful guidance to help smaller organizations understand what they
need to defend themselves and offer open-source tools like they've done
after major breaches to help health care providers defend themselves.
Questions From Honorable Ralph Norman for Amit Yoran
Question 1. The National Institute of Standards and Technology has
increased its focus on detecting and preventing harmful intrusion from
foreign entities that pose a risk to our critical infrastructure. Among
these focus areas, application whitelisting is repeatedly flagged as a
viable security measure for protection against cyber attacks by
blocking harmful material before it ever gains access to the system.
How is your organization utilizing tools like application whitelisting
to meet the demands of the modern cybersecurity climate?
Answer. NIST has taken steps to move away from terms like
``whitelisting'' and is moving toward updating its terminology to use
terms like ``allow list.'' Application allow lists, while another layer
of defense for cybersecurity, require significant configuration and
tuning to be truly effective. This is suitable for stable environments
with minimal change. Given the speed of technology and, more
specifically, the speed of transformation both to and within the cloud,
the value of these solutions has diminished. In today's rapidly-
changing technology environment, it is critical to assess web
applications for common flaws and component vulnerabilities. Tenable
provides a solution, Tenable.io WebApp Scanning, which provides easy-
to-use, comprehensive and automated vulnerability scanning for modern
web applications. This allows organizations to quickly configure and
manage web app scans in a brief period of time with minimal tuning.
Applying risk-based vulnerability management practices, which serve
as a foundation to adopting zero-trust strategies, enables
organizations to have visibility across their entire attack surface
(IT, IoT, OT, cloud), conduct continuous assessments of vulnerabilities
and misconfigurations, and prioritize vulnerabilities based on the full
context of business risk.
Question 2. What can be done to incentivize the private sector to
protect themselves?
Answer. Cyber risk must be viewed and treated as a business risk.
Too many organizations don't see the risk of not defending themselves,
but rather only the cost of defending themselves. We must change that.
The Security and Exchange Commission's (SEC) recently proposed rule on
cybersecurity risk management, which would require reporting about an
organization's cybersecurity risk management practices, is a critical
step in that direction. In addition, critical infrastructure vendor
procurement processes need to provide stronger incentives for building
cybersecurity into products and services. And CISA should work with
stakeholders and different sector risk management agencies to develop
guidance and a baseline standard of cybersecurity care.
Question 3. A lot of talk today has been about prevention and
mitigation, but I want to talk about what happens once the enemy
strikes. When you have an emergency, you call 9-1-1. When your
organizations are held for ransom by malware, who do you call?
Answer. Organizations should have the option to contact either the
FBI or the Department of Homeland Security's Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) and contact information for both
should be widely disseminated and easy to find. In addition, the FBI
and CISA should be responsible for ensuring that when one agency is
notified of an incident, the other is immediately notified as well. The
FBI can then quickly launch an investigation while CISA can share
information across the Federal Government and industry on cybersecurity
attacks to help organizations protect themselves. If you've been hit by
ransomware or malware, other organizations are at risk of the same
attack. Getting the word out to other Federal agencies and industry
quickly is vital, and CISA is able to alert and inform the right
people.
