- POWERING AMERICA: REEVALUATING PURPA'S OBJECTIVES AND ITS EFFECTS ON TODAY'S CONSUMERS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

POWERING AMERICA: REEVALUATING PURPA'S OBJECTIVES AND ITS EFFECTS ON
TODAY'S CONSUMERS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 6, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-51

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

27-085                   WASHINGTON : 2018
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            GENE GREEN, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                       Massachusetts
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             TONY CARDENAS, California
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           RAUL RUIZ, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
Subcommittee on Energy

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               SCOTT H. PETERS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             GENE GREEN, Texas
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                       Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota               officio)
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     4
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6

Witnesses

Frank Prager, Vice President, Policy and Federal Affairs, Xcel
Energy.........................................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Answers to submitted questions...............................   134
Todd Glass, Counsel, Solar Energy Industries Association.........    25
Prepared statement...........................................    27
Answers to submitted questions...............................   139
Kristine Raper, Commissioner, Idaho Public Utilities Commission..    48
Prepared statement...........................................    50
Answers to submitted questions...............................   149
Stephen Thomas, Senior Manager, Energy Contracts, Domtar Paper
Company........................................................    59
Prepared statement...........................................    61
Answers to submitted questions...............................   156
Terry Kouba, Vice President, Iowa Operations, Alliant Energy.....    78
Prepared statement...........................................    80
Answers to submitted questions...............................   161
Darwin Baas, Department of Public Works for Kent County, Michigan    92
Prepared statement...........................................    94
Answers to submitted questions...............................   165

Submitted Material

Statement of Cypress Creek Renewables, submitted by Mr. Walberg..   129
Statement of the Northwest & Intermountain Power Producers
Coalition, submitted by Mr. Walberg............................   133

POWERING AMERICA: REEVALUATING PURPA'S OBJECTIVES AND ITS EFFECTS ON
TODAY'S CONSUMERS

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 6, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2123 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Fred Upton
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Upton, Barton, Shimkus,
Latta, Harper, McKinley, Kinzinger, Griffith, Johnson, Long,
Bucshon, Flores, Mullin, Hudson, Walberg, Walden (ex officio),
Rush, McNerney, Peters, Green, Castor, Sarbanes, Tonko,
Loebsack, Schrader, Kennedy, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Ray Baum, Staff Director; Elena Brennan,
Legislative Clerk, Energy/Environment; Jerry Couri, Chief
Environmental Advisor; Zachary Dareshori, Staff Assistant;
Wyatt Ellertson, Research Associate, Energy/Environment; Adam
Fromm, Director of Outreach and Coalitions; Tom Hassenboehler,
Chief Counsel, Energy/Environment; Jordan Haverly, Policy
Coordinator, Environment; A.T. Johnston, Senior Policy Advisor,
Energy; Ben Lieberman, Senior Counsel, Energy; Mary Martin,
Deputy Chief Counsel, Energy & Environment; Alex Miller, Video
Production Aide and Press Assistant; Brandon Mooney, Deputy
Chief Energy Advisor; Mark Ratner, Policy Coordinator; Annelise
Rickert, Counsel, Energy; Dan Schneider, Press Secretary;
Madeline Vey, Policy Coordinator, Digital Commerce & Consumer
Protection; Jeff Carroll, Minority Staff Director; Jean Fruci,
Minority Energy and Environment Policy Advisor; Rick Kessler,
Minority Senior Advisor and Staff Director, Energy and
Environment; Alexander Ratner, Minority Policy Analyst; Andrew
Souvall, Minority Director of Communications, Outreach and
Member Services; Tuley Wright, Minority Energy and Environment
Policy Advisor; and C.J. Young, Minority Press Secretary.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Good morning, everyone.
Today, we are going to continue our Powering America series
by examining the statute that has played an important role in
supporting certain electric generating resources over the past
40 years.
Under the law, PURPA provides preferential rate and
regulatory treatment to resources known as qualifying
facilities, or better known as QFs. These resources include co-
generation facilities such as industrial plants and certain
small power producers that use renewable resources such as wind
and solar. And today's panel witnesses include folks
representing various types of QFs including solar developers,
an industrial paper manufacturer, and a municipal waste
facility in Grand Rapids, Michigan, that can generate 18
megawatts of electricity by burning solid waste.
Under PURPA, the FERC is tasked with implementing the law
in coordination with state regulatory authorities. This
framework of cooperative federalism allows for each state to
enact and administer its own program within limits established
by the federal standards. And, not surprisingly, since each
state has different energy needs, resources, and policy
objectives, the terms and conditions of each state's QF
policies, indeed, vary. On that point, I would like to welcome
the commissioner from Idaho for appearing here today to share
her thoughts and perspectives as a state regulator.
The Energy Policy Act of '05 did make some modest revisions
to PURPA. However, the law has largely remained unchanged since
1978. During the intervening decades, tremendous changes have
occurred in the electricity industry, a point that is
underscored by the DOE staff report that was released last
week. The evolution of the industry has occurred in many ways
including the development of the electricity markets in the RTO
and bilateral regions, the advent of open access transmission
policies, and the influence of new lower cost technologies. All
of these factors have changed how electricity is generated,
transmitted, and used by consumers.
Additionally, it is important to note that renewable
sources of energy, particularly wind and solar, have
experienced exponential growth in recent years. Last year
alone, capacity additions from utility scale renewable
resources surpassed the net additions of all other fuel sources
combined. There is no question that renewable resources now
play a significant role in the nation's fuel mix and are a
major contributor in decreasing U.S. greenhouse gas emissions.
Considering these changed circumstances, this subcommittee
must review whether revisions to PURPA are necessary or
appropriate. This examination will continue the arguments both
in support and opposition to making reforms to PURPA. Among
them, certain utilities contend that the PURPA provision
requiring utilities to purchase QF energy is outdated and
should be modified or repealed. Conversely, QFs argue that
PURPA's mandatory purchase obligation remains a necessary
backstop to support renewable energy in parts of the country
that are not receptive to such development.
This oversight hearing will be the first step in
reevaluating whether the intent and purpose of PURPA is still
being met or if it has already been fulfilled. Additionally,
today we are going to be looking at what effect the law is
having on consumers and repairs in 2017 and beyond.
With that, I want to thank the panel for being here and I
will yield to the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, for an opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Good morning. Today we continue our Powering America series
by examining a statute that has played an important role in
supporting certain electric generating resources over the past
40 years. The Public Utilities Regulatory Policies Act (or
``PURPA'') was enacted in 1978 in response to the energy crisis
during the Carter Administration, and this law was intended to
promote energy conversation and support the use of domestic
energy, including renewable resources.
Under the law, PURPA provides preferential rate and
regulatory treatment to resources known as ``Qualifying
Facilities'' or better known as ``QFs''. These resources
include cogeneration facilities, such as industrial plants, and
certain small power producers that use renewable resources such
as wind and solar. Today's panel includes witnesses
representing various types of QFs, including solar developers,
an industrial paper manufacturer, and a municipal waste
facility in Grand Rapids, Michigan that can generate 18
megawatts of electricity by burning solid waste.
Under PURPA, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission is
tasked with implementing the law in coordination with state
regulatory authorities. This framework of ``cooperative
federalism'' allows for each state to enact and administer its
own program within limits established by the federal standards.
Not surprisingly, since each state has different energy needs,
resources, and policy objectives, the terms and conditions of
each states' QF policies vary. On that point, I'd like to
welcome the commissioner from Idaho for appearing here today to
share her thoughts and perspectives as a state regulator.
The Energy Policy Act of 2005 did make some modest
revisions to PURPA, however, the law has largely remained
unchanged since 1978. During the intervening decades,
tremendous changes have occurred in the electricity industry--a
point that is underscored by the DOE Staff Report that was
released last week. The evolution of the industry has occurred
in many ways, including the development of the electricity
markets in the RTO and bilateral regions, the advent of open
access transmission policies, and the influence of new, lower-
cost technologies. All of these factors have changed how
electricity is generated, transmitted, and used by consumers.
Additionally, it is important to note that renewable
sources of energy, particularly wind and solar, have
experienced exponential growth in recent years. Last year
alone, capacity additions from utility-scale renewable
resources surpassed the net additions of all other fuel sources
combined. There is no question that renewable resources now
play a significant role in the nation's fuel mix and are a
major contributor in decreasing U.S. greenhouse gas emissions.
Considering these changed circumstances, this Subcommittee
must review whether revisions to PURPA are necessary or
appropriate. This examination will consider the arguments both
in support and opposition to making reforms to PURPA. Among
them, certain utilities contend that the PURPA provision
requiring utilities to purchase QF energy is outdated and
should be modified or repealed. Conversely, QF's argue that
PURPA's mandatory purchase obligation remains a necessary
backstop to support renewable energy in parts of the country
that are not receptive to such development.
Today's oversight hearing will be the first step in
reevaluating whether the intent and purpose of PURPA is still
being met or if it has already been fulfilled. Additionally,
today we will be looking at what effect the law is having on
consumers and ratepayers in 2017. With that, I'd like to thank
this panel of distinguished witnesses for appearing today and I
look forward to your testimony.

Mr. Pallone. What happened to the green? They got rid of
it.
[Laughter.]
I am sorry.
Mr. Upton. Maize and blue.
Mr. Pallone. Oh, OK.
Mr. Upton. The block M will be over that.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. All right.
Mr. Chairman, a lot has changed in the electricity sector
since Congress passed Section 210 of the Public Utilities
Regulatory Policies Act in 1978 and more changes are still to
come.
However, a number of the goals of PURPA are still valid
today, in particular, the goals of increasing competition,
encouraging development and deployment of more clean and
efficient electricity generation, and ensuring equitable
affordable rates for consumers are still important.
PURPA has been successful in encouraging competition,
fostering electricity market development, and in bringing new
generation and efficiency technologies onto the grid, and as a
result, we now have a more competitive and diversified
electricity sector.
Of course, PURPA alone is not the only driver of change in
the electricity sector. State policies on renewable energy and
energy efficiency expanded wholesale markets, connected
technological change, growth of natural gas supplies, and
changes in consumer expectations and demand are all reshaping
this sector. And I expect we will hear a variety of opinions
today about the need for further PURPA reform and the direction
that any administrative or legislative reform should take.
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission recently examined
these issues at a technical conference and I believe a number
of our witnesses participated and even a few members weighed in
on that conference, including myself and Ranking Member Rush.
And I realize that some of our members believe that the statute
needs to be revised, particularly on issues like estimation of
avoided costs, the mandatory purchase requirement, and FERC's
definition of a qualifying facility as it relates to the
distance between facilities.
However, the Energy Policy Act of 2005 as passed by this
committee under Chairman Barton and signed into law by
President Bush provided significant changes to Section 210.
Those changes allow utilities in competitive areas to avoid the
mandatory purchase obligations. The law also provided greater
discretion for state utility commissions to establish methods
for determining avoided costs and the duration of power
purchase agreements. This change allowed states even greater
flexibility to address their individual situations. For
example, the state of Idaho, which we will hear from today,
made radical changes to its standard contract and avoided cost
calculation. These are changes that I do not support but they
reinforce the fact that many different outcomes are possible
under the current PURPA structure.
We will likely hear about the fact that some markets today
are saturated with electricity generation. This is due
principally or primarily to reduce costs of new generation
technologies and the fact that electricity demand is flat in
many markets. There is also a real issue in some regions today
where competition now exists among different generation assets
that are all trying to earn sufficient revenue within markets
where rates are stable or falling due to flat demand.
In some areas I suspect there is a reluctance to add new,
more efficient cleaner energy resources into areas where
existing fossil and nuclear generation assets are struggling
financially. But when Congress made the decision to encourage
more competition in the development of wholesale markets, there
were bound to be winners and losers in those markets to the
larger benefit of the consumer.
Consumer preferences, state policies, technological change,
and economic trends are favoring renewable resources over
traditional fossil and nuclear generation, and this transition
is bringing us a clean and more efficient grid and these are
positive developments and I would not want to see this
committee reversing course on competitive market development
without a much more serious and longer consideration of the
impacts of such a move away from competition.
FERC has authority to make some changes in the
implementation of PURPA. The recent technical conference
provided the commission with information to evaluate the
effectiveness of its implementation and enforcement of PURPA.
So we have an excellent panel of witnesses here this
morning. I look forward to hearing their testimony. Thank you
again, Mr. Chairman, for holding this important hearing and for
working with us on this series of bipartisan hearings on the
current status of the electricity sector.
And I did like the green better. Sorry. Well, actually, you
liked the green better.
Mr. Upton. So Oregon green is gone.
[Laughter.]
The chair would recognize the----
Mr. Pallone. Just trying to go blue here.
Mr. Upton. It was a nice win over Florida. Sorry they are
not here today. The chair would recognize the chair of the full
committee, gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Walden.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. I thank the gentleman.
Nearly 40 years ago, as we have all heard, Congress passed
the Public Utilities Regulatory Policies Act, commonly known as
PURPA. As many of you are aware, this law was passed during the
time when the country was overly dependent on foreign supplies
of energy, resulting in national energy shortages and economic
instability. And in response to these challenging
circumstances, Congress passed PURPA with the goal of promoting
energy conservation, and increasing domestic energy supplies.
Now that PURPA has been in place for multiple decades, we
can see how it has helped transform the U.S. energy sector,
bolstered renewable energy, and reduced greenhouse gas
emissions. Gone are the days of Americans relying heavily on
overseas sources of energy and unstable global markets to meet
energy needs. Instead, the country now has access to many forms
of abundant domestic energy which has been spurred by
innovative technologies and competitive energy markets.
In passing PURPA, Congress took the first steps toward
competition within the electricity markets by allowing
electricity generation to be independent of regulated
monopolies for the first time. Since then, Congress and FERC
have continued to take actions to increase competition,
resulting in tremendous benefits for consumers across the
country. We on the committee want to continue down the same
path of increased competition and innovation. Our aim is to
strengthen energy markets and encourage innovation throughout
the electricity sector, giving consumers more choice and
greater control over their energy decisions while also
benefitting the environment.
Today's hearing gives us the opportunity to look at PURPA
with fresh eyes and evaluate what effect it is having on
evolving electricity markets and the modern-day consumer. Given
the fact that PURPA was written nearly 40 years ago and the
U.S. electricity system is undergoing significant
transformation, now is the time for the committee to review
PURPA and its associated impacts. This review includes
discussing the original intent of specific PURPA provisions and
determining if these provisions are still working successfully
today. For example, in today's hearing we will review the
requirements connected to the mandatory purchase obligation,
the effectiveness of the 1-mile rule when designating
qualifying facilities and the various methods states are using
to calculate avoided costs.
The committee understands that many stakeholders in the
electricity sector are closely following potential PURPA
reforms. In fact, I know this is true for my constituents in
eastern Oregon where we have more than 100 qualifying
facilities operating as a direct result of PURPA. So in
addressing this topic, we want to make sure that all
stakeholders, all of them, have an opportunity to be heard,
which is why we are holding the hearing today and why we will
continue to engage proactively with all stakeholders, moving
forward.
In all that we do on the Energy and Commerce Committee, we
strive to focus on the needs and interests of American
consumers. When we are successful in this pursuit, I am
confident that everything else will find its proper place.
With that, I look forward to the remainder of the hearing
and better understanding how PURPA is affecting consumers
across the country.
And with apologies, I know we have a couple of hearings
going on so I've got to go to another one and be back and
forth. But thank you for your testimony. It is most
enlightening and helpful in our work, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Nearly 40 years ago, Congress passed the Public Utilities
Regulatory Policies Act, now commonly referred to as PURPA. As
many of you are aware, this law was passed during a time when
the country was overly dependent on foreign supplies of energy,
resulting in national energy shortages and economic
instability. In response to these challenging circumstances,
Congress passed PURPA with the goal of promoting energy
conservation and increasing domestic energy supplies.
Now that PURPA has been in place for multiple decades, we
can see how it has helped transform the U.S. energy sector,
bolstered renewable energy, and reduced greenhouse gas
emissions. Gone are the days of Americans relying heavily on
overseas sources of energy and unstable global markets to meet
their energy needs. Instead, the country now has access to many
forms of abundant domestic energy, which has been spurred by
innovative technologies and competitive energy markets.
In passing PURPA, Congress took the first step towards
competition within the electricity sector by allowing
electricity generation to be independent of regulated
monopolies for the first time. Since then, Congress and FERC
have continued to take actions to increase competition,
resulting in tremendous benefits for consumers across the
nation. We on the committee want to continue down this same
path of increased competition and innovation. Our aim is to
strengthen energy markets and encourage innovation throughout
the electricity sector, giving consumers more choice and
greater control over their energy decisions, while also
benefiting the environment.
Today's hearing gives us the opportunity to look at PURPA
with fresh eyes and evaluate what effect it is having on
evolving electricity markets and the modern day consumer. Given
the fact that PURPA was written nearly 40 years ago and that
the U.S. electricity system is undergoing significant
transformation, now is the time for the committee to review
PURPA and its associated impacts. This review includes
discussing the original intent of specific PURPA provisions and
determining if these provisions are still working successfully
today. For example, in today's hearing we will review the
requirements connected to the mandatory purchase obligation,
the effectiveness of the 1-mile rule when designating
qualifying facilities, and the various methods states are using
to calculate avoided costs.
This committee understands that many stakeholders in the
electricity sector are closely following potential PURPA
reforms. In fact, I know that this is true for my constituents
in Eastern Oregon, where we have more than 100 qualifying
facilities operating as a direct result of PURPA. In addressing
this topic, we want to make sure that all stakeholders have an
opportunity to be heard, which is why we are holding this
hearing today, and why we will continue to engage proactively
with all stakeholders going forward.
In all that we do on the Energy and Commerce Committee we
strive to focus on the needs and interests of American
consumers. When we are successful in this pursuit, I am
confident that everything else will find in its proper place.
With that, I look forward to the remainder of this hearing and
to better understanding how PURPA is affecting consumers across
the nation.

Mr. Upton. And we have a bill on the floor.
Mr. Walden. And we have a bill on the floor and a Korean
briefing and oh, lots going on.
Mr. Upton. Gentleman's time is expired. Any on the minority
side wishing at this time? Seeing none, we will go right then
to the testimony by our witnesses.
We are joined first by Mr. Frank Prager, Vice President of
Policy and Federal Affairs for Xcel Energy. Welcome. All of
your testimonies are made part of the record and if you would
take no more than 5 minutes to give a summary of that, that
would be great and we will start with you.
Thank you. Welcome.

STATEMENTS OF FRANK PRAGER, VICE PRESIDENT, POLICY AND FEDERAL
AFFAIRS, XCEL ENERGY; TODD GLASS, COUNSEL, SOLAR ENERGY
INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION; KRISTINE RAPER, COMMISSIONER, IDAHO
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION; STEPHEN THOMAS, SENIOR MANAGER,
ENERGY CONTRACTS, DOMTAR PAPER COMPANY; TERRY KOUBA, VICE
PRESIDENT, IOWA OPERATIONS, ALLIANT ENERGY; DARWIN BAAS,
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS FOR KENT COUNTY, MICHIGAN

STATEMENT OF FRANK PRAGER

Mr. Prager. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Members of the committee, my name is Frank Prager. I am
vice president of policy and federal affairs at Xcel Energy. I
am pleased to be here today to talk to you about PURPA and
PURPA reform.
Xcel Energy is a public utility holding company
headquartered in Minneapolis, Minnesota. We serve parts of
eight Western and Midwestern states including Denver, where I
am from.
We are the nation's number-one utility provider of wind
energy. We have held that distinction for a dozen years. Xcel
Energy currently has over 6,700 megawatts of wind on its system
and is currently in the process of adding an additional 3,400
megawatts of wind.
Renewable energy is a big part of our energy portfolio. We
are also in the process of decarbonizing our electric grid.
Xcel Energy has already reduced its CO
2
emissions by
30 percent from 2005 levels and are on a path, if we continue
to see technological advancement in the renewable energy area,
to achieve a 60 percent reduction by 2030.
Our customers like renewable energy. They like the fact
that we are decarbonizing our electric grid. But they love the
fact that we are able to do it at a low price. We actually are
now in the process of implementing a strategy we call steel for
fuel under which we are actually reducing our carbon dioxide
emissions while at the same time reducing our customers' energy
rates. And as I say, our customers are very fond of that
strategy.
As strong proponents of cost-effective renewable energy,
Xcel Energy believes it is time for Congress to reform the
outdated PURPA statute. As described in my written testimony,
the energy market fundamentals that led to the adoption of
PURPA no longer exist. Today, we live in an era of relative
energy abundance rather than the energy crisis that existed at
the time PURPA was first adopted. Customer energy use is flat.
Renewable energy is no longer a niche technology but a growing
part of our energy portfolio. Robust wholesale energy markets
and least-cost resource planning have facilitated market-based
acquisition of energy.
PURPA was designed to address energy challenges of the
1970s that no longer exist and are inconsistent with the modern
energy marketplace. Under PURPA's must take provisions, QFs can
displace energy from existing more efficient power plants,
thereby raising costs for our customers. QFs can force
utilities to take power outside of the state utility planning
processes. Those are the processes that states use to assure a
reliable and cost-effective energy system. For example, in
Colorado, a QF developer informed Xcel Energy that it had
intended to develop 19 separate QF facilities, each of 80
megawatts.
Although Colorado PUC regulations are clear that those QFs
must participate in the resource planning process, this QF
developer declined to do so. It demanded that we enter into a
long-term contract for its contemplated 1,520 megawatts of QF
energy. Litigation with that developer is ongoing. However, its
claims demonstrate one of the key problems associated with
PURPA. QFs can operate outside state resource planning and thus
force electricity consumers to pay for energy they do not need.
PURPA can also interfere with transmission planning. That
same QF developer has proposed to put 480 megawatts, almost a
half a gigawatt, of its power in a remote location far from our
load centers in an area where we do not have adequate
transmission capacity and an area where the existing
transmission capacity is subscribed by existing solar
facilities that are under contract to Xcel Energy.
If this QF is successful in putting its power to Xcel
Energy, we will be required to spend millions of dollars in
transmission of upgrades and will have to work in order to make
sure that our existing solar facilities have access to the
electricity marketplace. The other problem with PURPA, which is
one the chairman identified, is the ability of some QFs to game
the PURPA regulations in particular with regard to the 1-mile
rule. Under its terms, the QFs are limited to 80 megawatts and
PURPA--and FERC has implemented that 80 megawatt limit through
the 1-mile which requires the two QFs be separated by at least
a mile.
Unfortunately, FERC has allowed some developers to
circumvent this rule. In our Texas service territory, FERC
found two separate segments of a larger wind project with a
single owner and a single interconnection--literally, one
project considered to be two separate QF projects because the
developer had made certain that no two wind turbines from that
project were located within a mile of one another. Thus, a
project that greatly exceeded PURPA's 80 megawatt limit was
able to force Xcel Energy to buy power from it at the avoided
cost rate.
We encourage Congress to consider legislation that would
help address these and other problems with PURPA. Even without
PURPA, the renewable energy market has never been stronger and
QFs would have the opportunity to compete for a growing piece
of the renewable energy pie.
Thank you again. I would be happy to answer any questions
that you have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Prager follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
We are joined next by Todd Glass, counsel to the Solar
Energy Industries Association. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF TODD GLASS

Mr. Glass. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, distinguished members of the subcommittee,
good morning. My name is Todd Glass. I am an energy lawyer who
represents developers and financiers of independent solar-
powered projects and the solar industry in energy regulatory
matters. I am delighted to appear on behalf of the Solar Energy
Industries Association with regard to PURPA, its original
objectives and its relevance to customers today.
SEIA is the national trade organization for the solar
industry in the United States, representing more than a
thousand organizations that promote manufacture, install, and
support the development of solar energy around the United
States. SEIA seeks to expand markets, remove market barriers,
strengthen the industry and educate the public on the benefits
of solar energy.
PURPA's original objectives were to do two primary things:
to increase the diversity of supply by type fuel source, size,
and ownership, to strengthen national energy security in the
nation's electric supply. Fuel diversity remains essential to
our national energy security and PURPA continues to provide the
means to ensure the increased diversity of supply, particularly
with regard to fuel-less generation resources.
PURPA's second major contribution was to create competition
that forces prices down, that benefits consumers by eliminating
utilities' anti-competitive actions against competitive
generation. Independent generation puts downward competitive
pressure on prices and benefits consumers by reducing the cost
of electricity. As new technology such as solar are deployed,
the price of delivering power to consumers will continue to
decrease. Those two objectives have yet to be fully achieved.
PURPA remains an essential federal legislation underpinning
both diversity as well as competition in the electric power
industry.
The U.S. solar industry can compete. As outlined in my
testimony, solar energy has experienced a rapid decline in cost
over the past decade to become a true economic alternative and
competitor to traditionally-owned utility generation. Solar
prices have become competitive with wind and natural gas fuel
generation. Solar installations, however, are principally owned
by independent power producers who, through innovation and
persistence, have been able to withstand the competitive
pressures today to build and finance their project.
With only a fraction of those installations actually
contracted for under PURPA's must purchase obligation, PURPA as
a whole remains an essential backstop against anti-competitive
conduct for all independent power and a backstop for financing
these independent power projects.
Electric utilities in the United States are among the most
enduring long-lived monopolies in the United States. As
Congress recognized in 1935, electric utilities must be
regulated in order to protect the public interest.
In 1978, Congress created PURPA. PURPA is not an
environmental law. Rather, its provisions provide for energy
conservation in a unique federalism system that eliminates
discrimination against co-generators and small power producers,
which you correctly called QFs, by requiring interconnection,
wielding of their power, and purchasing their power at a price
no greater than the incremental cost of buying that electric
power from alternative sources.
With its passage, PURPA became the bedrock federal law
ensuring competition in wholesale power markets. Soon after
FERC promulgated the regulations, utilities started fighting
PURPA and its mandates. Indeed, 40 years later, they are still
fighting its mandates. Why? Utilities would simply prefer not
to have to buy generation from small diverse QFs that don't fit
neatly within their plans. They would rather build and rate
base larger generation facilities and maintain a controlled
vertically-integrated monopoly or buy through power purchase
agreements through our RFPs. They have never liked PURPA and
they still don't like PURPA today. Solar power PURPA projects
are not a real problem.
As shown in my testimony, in 44 states solar energy in the
last year totaled less than 5 percent of the total energy used
and in a vast majority of states it is less than 1 percent. Of
that amount of total installed solar capacity, only 20 percent
is actually based upon a PURPA must-purchase obligation. Due to
land usage and power density, solar power is not an industry
that is abusing FERC's 1-mile rule. Notwithstanding the
penetration, our industry is putting competitive pressures on
energy prices and benefitting those consumers by forcing the
utilities to look at lower cost power.
So PURPA is about diversity: fuel size, type, and ownership
and competition. U.S. solar industry is here to compete, to
create jobs, and investment and create tax base in both urban
and rural America and to make the electric grid more diverse
and secure. SEIA strongly encourages Congress to continue
supporting competition by ensuring independent generators like
solar can compete.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Glass follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. We will next hear from Kristine Raper,
commissioner for the Idaho Public Utilities Commission.

STATEMENT OF KRISTINE RAPER

Ms. Raper. Thank you, Chairman Upton.
Distinguished representatives, my name is Kristine Raper. I
am a commissioner with the Idaho Public Utilities Commission
and I want to thank you for the opportunity to come and
participate in this panel today and I look forward to any
questions that will be asked after the presentations.
A couple of initial matters that I feel like I need to
address, issues that often get conflated within this PURPA
discussion but are truly separate and distinct. One is
promoting renewable generation and maintaining PURPA are not
interchangeable concepts. They are not the same thing. One can
exist without the other. And number two, there is a
misconception that anyone who seeks changes to PURPA is somehow
anti-renewable or opposes a diverse resource portfolio, which
is not true. Arguing that renewables are beneficial
alternatives to fossil fuels and touting the value of a diverse
resource portfolio misses the point. This is about a law which
is being manipulated to the detriment of ratepayers and state
commissions are struggling to balance the requirements of the
act with reliability of the grid and ratepayer indifference,
all of which the act requires.
PURPA is not the only way to develop renewables but too
much PURPA on the grid does stifle the development of non-PURPA
renewables. PURPA developers want to make it look like this is
an attack on renewables as a whole. It is not. This is not an
apples to apples comparison. The must-purchase obligation makes
a QF project very different from other renewable projects.
Utilities must absorb energy whether it needs the energy or
not.
It is not dispatchable energy that the utility can pull
onto the grid when it needs it. QF projects are gaming the
parameters of PURPA to maximize profit without any regard to
the effect on ratepayers and there are no realistic curtailment
allowances that the states or utilities have been able to
utilize. These things do not apply to non-PURPA non-QF
renewable resources.
Mr. Glass' reference to falling costs actually proves my
point. If the price of solar has dropped dramatically from 2009
until now, well, we have multiple dozens of contracts where in
2009 they signed onto a 20-year agreement at the prices in
2009. If prices have dramatically reduced since 2009 and we are
only eight years out, imagine over the 20-year life of that
contract how much those prices inflate each year with the
reduction of true costs of solar, and the longer the contract
the greater the discrepancy.
If PURPA is to remain, then there need to be some changes.
I urge you to consider some of the following solutions.
Lowering the 80 megawatt qualifying threshold for small
renewable projects--Congress' Energy Policy Act of 2005 changed
a threshold for QFs within organized markets to a 20 megawatt
threshold for a presumption that they could be competitive
within the market. Well, that is a huge difference. Is 80
megawatts small or is 20 megawatt competitive? So I would urge
you to look at that 80 megawatt threshold that exists.
If a QF is within a balancing authority of an energy
imbalance market like we have in the West, I also urge you to
consider applying that threshold under the Energy Policy Act to
QFs within an energy imbalance market. I recognize that there
are none in it now and that perhaps is because they wouldn't
get the prices that they can otherwise get under QF contracts
within the states. But that doesn't mean that they are not
meeting the requirements of the Public Utility Regulatory
Policies Act. It means that the QF isn't making as much money.
But it doesn't mean that QFs aren't competitive within that
environment.
Please allow states the discretion to address gaming. It
violates the intent of the act and it is harmful to ratepayers.
I ask that you modify the must-purchase to consider need and
allow for reasonable curtailment. Consider what battery storage
is and whether it meets the parameters of the act. And finally,
implement a statute of limitations on how long a QF can file a
complaint with FERC.
I have 13 seconds and I know this wasn't in my written
testimony but there is currently no existing statute of
limitations for when a QF can take a state decision and file
with FERC for alternative treatment.
I look forward to answering any questions that you have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Raper follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Stephen Thomas, senior manager energy contracts, Domtar
Corporation. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN THOMAS

Mr. Thomas. Thank you, Chairman Upton, members of the
committee.
My name is Steve Thomas. I have worked for Domtar and I am
here representing IECA, or I-E-C-A, which is the Industrial
Energy Consumers of America. They are a member-led nonpartisan
organization that is made up of leading manufacturers. Domtar
itself has 23 manufacturing facilities across the U.S. The
largest eight or nine of these are our PURPA-qualifying
facilities. As such, we believe that PURPA has done its job and
in its current form is doing what it is supposed to.
If there are issues that need to be addressed, we filed, I
think, 12 recommendations either through new legislation or
through guidance from the FERC to state commissions that we
think work for us. But one thing that is important is I want to
really make a distinction between QFs that are co-generators,
like ourselves, and QFs that are small power generators. And
co-generators, what we do is we take either heat before it is
used in a process or heat that is a by-product of a process and
create electricity, and PURPA allows us to do that. And that is
really important as manufacturers because it helps reduce our
costs, makes us more competitive in global markets.
By doing this, there's something else that happens. We are
more efficient than generation from a utility because we not
only use that heat to create electricity, we use that heat to
create products. And another important distinction, from co-
generating manufacturing facilities is we have a very large
permanent job base.
So from an economic development standpoint, once the
facility is built, we support a huge number of sustainable jobs
going forward. We are not against renewables. We use renewable
energy in our own generation. More than 70 percent of the
energy we create at our mills is from renewable sources. So the
important thing is, again, that distinction between the co-
generators and small QFs. So all of our recommendations that we
have offered are based on that clear distinction, a lot of
which we have already talked about.
So what are some of those avoided costs is a major issue
for us because as co-generators there's something that doesn't
get realized. As an industry, we still buy 85 percent of our
power so we are net consumers, and things that affect the price
of electricity, the reliability of electricity hurt us. So our
interests align squarely with consumers. We want affordable
power that is reliable.
So the avoided cost issue is a really big deal. I think
four or five of our points are around avoided costs. We don't
think utilities should be forced to buy capacity when they are
flush with capacity and have adequate reserve margins because
that hurts us as consumers, whether we are consuming at home or
at our place of business.
The 1-mile rule--our footprints are large. Industries like
ourselves have a very large footprint a lot of times in rural
areas of the country, and that large footprint--the 1-mile rule
is small.
We think that should be larger. Again, so we are not forced
to pay for capacity that is not needed on the system and the--
another one that is critical to us is curtailment. When the
grid is surplus generation, we want to be lower in the stacking
order than renewables because we are supporting jobs, because
we are creating products that are important to the communities
that we serve.
So with that, I will look forward to taking any questions
you have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thomas follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Next, Terry Kouba, Vice President of Iowa Operations of
Alliant Energy. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF TERRY KOUBA

Mr. Kouba. Good morning, Chairman Upton, and members of the
subcommittee.
My name is Terry Kouba and I am the Vice President of Iowa
Operations for Alliant Energy, which is a Midwest utility
serving 1.4 million electric and gas customers throughout 1,300
communities in Iowa and Wisconsin.
First, let me thank the subcommittee for holding this
timely oversight hearing. The main focus of my testimony today
is to re-evaluate PURPA in light of the law's negative effect
on increasing wind energy costs for our customers in Iowa.
Iowa is a national leader in wind energy deployment,
deriving 36 percent of the state's electricity from wind, a
statistic to which Alliant Energy is a very proud contributor.
Currently, we have more than a thousand megawatts of owned
and operated wind plus purchase power agreements from
independent power producers and we are in the cusp of executing
a plan to add an additional gigawatt of wind energy, a $1.8
billion investment in Iowa to help serve our customers. We are
a long way from 1978 when PURPA was enacted and I was a
sophomore in college. Forty years ago, the country endured an
energy crisis while renewable energy was in its infancy as a
cost-effective generation resource. Now, two-thirds of the U.S.
is served by wholesale region electricity markets like the
Midcontinent Independent System Operator, or MISO, in Iowa.
States across the country in organized and unorganized
markets are able to competit`ively solicit renewable energy.
Despite the market-driven deployment of renewable energy in
Iowa and across the nation, we are still subject to PURPA's
outdated mandatory purchase obligation which has increased
electricity cost for our Iowa customers.
Let me explain. Under the law, we are required to purchase
power from PURPA-designed qualified facilities. These QF
resources are not procured through a competitive bid process
despite having access to the MISO market. We cannot negotiate
on the price paid for this energy and project locations are
chosen for the benefit of the QF investor, not for the benefit
of our customers. These QFs that violate the intent of PURPA by
structuring their projects into separate LLCs to get around
FERC's 20 megawatt size cap in organized markets.
If my company went to the Iowa Utility Board to obtain
regulatory approval for one of those projects under a purchase
power agreement with an independent power producer like that, I
am confident we would be rejected because the cost premiums
associated with that power would be too high. The IUB would
likely question the need for this expensive renewable power
when it is possible to obtain cheaper renewable electricity,
especially in Iowa through other means, and the IUB would have
an excellent point.
The real losers in this situation are not utilities,
rather, customers who are forced to pay higher costs for
renewable generation that can otherwise be procured at
competitive prices. And when a quarter of our customers' income
is under $25,000 per year, that is a real concern for our
company and our customers.
We believe that these larger QFs should be treated like any
other independent power producer and be required to sell energy
directly into the organized markets like MISO or negotiate for
PPA contracts with a utility like any other independent power
producer. Doing so would reduce cost to customers and minimize
system impacts that might impair reliability. Congress can take
steps to improve implementation, mitigate negative impacts on
customers in the grid, and better reflect current market
conditions by modernizing this law.
We are encouraged by legislative interest to reform the law
in several key areas and we encourage FERC to implement several
recommendations found in my written testimony on an
administrative basis.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the
subcommittee today and I look forward to the discussion and any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kouba follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Mr. Baas, good to see you. Director of the Public Works for
Kent County, Michigan.

STATEMENT OF DARWIN BAAS

Mr. Baas. Good morning.
Mr. Upton. Sorry about the color change, but welcome.
Mr. Baas. Go blue.
Mr. Upton. Go blue is right.
Mr. Baas. Thank you, Chairman Upton, for providing an
opportunity for me to testify this morning. I am the director
of the Kent County Department of Public Works in Michigan. I
want to discuss this morning how PURPA relates to our waste
energy facility.
I would also like to express support for the mandatory
purchase obligation under PURPA and encourage Congress to
consider modifications that could enhance PURPA in its
application and effectiveness for waste energy qualified
facilities. PURPA has been a critical part of Kent County's
waste energy facility for the last 27 years. Kent County DPW
allocates funds for municipal infrastructure for five public
services. The waste energy facility is critical in that
mission. We provide a sustainable and integrated solid waste
management system. We provide base load renewable electricity.
We offer grid support and reduce the need for long-term or long
distance transmission.
Energy from 76 waste energy facilities nationwide account
for more than 2,500 megawatts of renewable energy, 14 billion
kilowatts of electrical generation, and avoids 13 million tons
of greenhouse gas generation. Our facility in Kent County
provides an alternative to land filling that many local
residents, businesses, and industry desire. Facilities like
ours are a municipal infrastructure and we must remain
competitive in the energy markets. Unfortunately, many have
closed and more are at risk of failure, which will strand these
local government assets. A significant contributing factor is
the outdated and inadequate elements of PURPA policy that fails
to value local government and the role that these power plants
have.
I have submitted detailed documentation of these challenges
so I will just highlight a few. Mandatory purchase contract
lengths are unrealistically short and the avoided cost pricing
has eroded. It is no longer reflecting the intent of PURPA and
the value of our system. Even the facilities between 20 and 80
megawatts are experiencing the same challenges. In Michigan, we
are engaged with the Public Service Commission to fight for
fair, reasonable, and stable ablated cost.
While the utility we work with has received $759 million in
rate increases since 2008 and has another $172 million pending
before the PSC, the PSC is attempting to devalue the value of
our electrical generation by 24 percent. By doing that, they
would take us back to rates that were paid to us 20 years ago.
The utility is also attempting to unilaterally cancel our
contract with one year's notice, which is very difficult for
us.
Local governments also own assets where electricity
regulations hinder using our power. For example, we have
airports, wastewater treatment plants, and courthouses and many
other facilities that require electricity. But it is very
difficult to move that electricity to those facilities. That's
why it is so critical that when we receive realistic pricing
that we are in such a better place.
Kent County uses a 10-year planning horizon for capital
refurbishment as does any utility that invests in plan
reliability. Should we face a situation where we would have a
contract cancelled with one year's notice it could very well
lead us to early closure. Without certainty in energy revenue
and contract length, we face a lot of uncertainty in how to
make investments, how to invest in maintenance and in our
operations.
Modifications to PURPA are necessary to ensure long-term
viability of this municipal infrastructure. I would welcome
opportunity to work with staff on modifications to address
these issues.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today. I will be pleased to answer any questions you might
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Baas follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you all, and we are going to now
move to questions from members here and we will limit our
questions and answers to 5 minutes.
I guess the first question that I have for each of you is
we, first of all, appreciate your testimony. Let us talk just a
little bit about the statutory and regulatory changes to
eliminate the abuse or gaming, as Ms. Raper talked about the 1-
mile rule. Would you oppose or support regulatory changes to
eliminate such and what might that look like?
Ms. Raper, since you raised it we'll start with you and
we'll go in reverse. What should we do about the 1-year rule?
Ms. Raper. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Upton. Or the one--I am sorry, the 1-mile rule. Sorry.
Ms. Raper. Sure, Representatives. I think the 1-mile rule
alone it is neither here nor there. I think changing the 1-mile
rule to a 5-mile rule doesn't eliminate the problem.
The issues with the 1-mile rule that allow things like wind
and solar to overbuild, in my opinion, are that if there's only
1 mile between projects they have the same interconnection.
They are financed by the same thing. Just because they are
named alpha bravo charlie delta echo doesn't make them
different projects. And so changing the 1-mile rule only
without changing some of the considerations for what truly
makes it a separate entity it wouldn't solve the problem.
There need to be other considerations taken into account
because my understanding of the 1-mile rule is that it was
intended to make sure that they were separate entities that
were doing these builds and it hasn't worked to that effect.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Thomas.
Mr. Thomas. Thank you. Again, as a manufacturer our
footprints are so much larger than that 1-mile. Our concern,
again, goes back to reliability.
A lot of times the 1-mile or 3-mile circle, the generation
is all the same type. If it is all solar, it is all going to go
down when the sun is not shining. If it is all wind, it is
going to go down when the wind is not blowing. Or it is going
to over produce when the wind is blowing.
So, the generation type comes into effect there, too, and,
again, a much larger footprint would not affect manufacturing.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Kouba.
Mr. Kouba. Yes. As I answer that question, let me make it
clear that I am here today advocating on behalf of our
customer. I, along with my company, am also an advocate for
renewable energy.
As I said in my opening statement and my written statement,
we have significant renewable energy resources, primarily wind,
and we are adding a significant amount more. We are also about
to energize the most powerful solar facility in the state of
Iowa so we are definitely advocates of renewable energy. With
respect to this issue, what we have is sophisticated foreign-
owned companies that are planning, proposing, and investing in
projects in Iowa that in total exceed the 20 megawatt PURPA
cap.
Because they evidently do not want to compete with the
generation market in Iowa and MISO, and make no mistake about
it, the generation market in Iowa with all our wind is
extremely competitive, they disaggregate these facilities into
much smaller projects, organize under separate LLCs but
ultimately through the same ownership. They then take those
smaller facilities that get below the 20 megawatt cap. They
spread them apart so they are a mile apart and then they can
qualify for PURPA plus we can't challenge that.
So we would propose to eliminate that 1-mile rule so we can
challenge these projects that are, clearly, disaggregation that
ultimately end up costing our company, in one case, 20 percent
more than what we could get with other projects.
Mr. Upton. I know that I am running out of time. Mr. Baas,
it doesn't really impact your folks all that much.
Let me go to Mr. Prager and Mr. Glass and my time will have
expired.
Mr. Prager. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We actually have an actual experience, which I mentioned in
my oral testimony, in Texas where we had someone come in and
actually game the system in order to use the 1-mile rule to
separate a much larger wind project into two different QFs and
be able to force the avoided cost pricing.
I think Commissioner Raper really hit it on the head. We
need to have a process in place at FERC where FERC looks at the
reality of what's happening. It doesn't elevate the form of its
1-mile over the substance of what's actually happening on the
ground. If you have one project subject to common control,
subject to common interconnection, treated in every respect as
one project, even if particular segments of that are a mile
apart, they should be treated as one project and therefore not
subject to the PURPA requirements.
Mr. Upton. And Mr. Glass, quickly.
Mr. Glass. We don't think the 1-mile rule is really an
issue for the solar power industry. We use the land more
intensively on, like, for instance, a wind farm our average
project sizes are such that it just doesn't make sense. We
think it works and we have no problem with actually FERC taking
a look at the 1-mile rule. However, the one thing that should
happen is that the rule needs to be clear and easily determined
without an administrative review or result because there's no
way to invest capital if the utility or the utility commission
is going to gotcha after you've tried to finance a project. It
is just not going to happen.
Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Mr. Peters.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to say, first of all, I grew up in a Wolverine
household, not a Spartan household. So I am OK with the color.
So one of the themes of this testimony has been that since
1978 the renewables markets have matured in a way that what was
originally conceived under PURPA is probably less important now
or maybe less needed now.
Mr. Thomas, you raised the issue I wanted to explore about
co-generation. Is it your contention that the nature of that
particular energy is something that still PURPA needs to rely
on? Can you explain a little bit more about how you were
distinguishing cogen from other kinds of renewable energy
generation?
Mr. Thomas. Sure, and thank you for the opportunity to, you
know, further emphasize. The idea of co-generation is that
generation is co-located with load.
So we use what is steam or heat that would otherwise go to
waste to create electricity that we use on site. So that part
of it is all about the economics of producing our products
cheaper.
It has side benefits for the grid. If we were just a load
on the grid, the utilities would supply us from a distance. I
think 7 percent line losses is not uncommon. So by providing a
lot of our energy ourselves we reduce that need.
Mr. Peters. Right. So you are doing co-generation because
it supports your facility's operations. It lowers your costs.
You are not trying to produce energy offsite--you are using it
on site?
Mr. Thomas. Right. We sell----
Mr. Peters. So you are really not incentivized by PURPA to
do co-generation?
Mr. Thomas. Not at all.
Mr. Peters. OK.
Mr. Thomas. We are consumers. We don't want high prices. We
want----
Mr. Peters. I got it.
Mr. Thomas [continuing]. Because we don't sell power back
to the grid except for just rare short periods. None of our
facilities are net generators month to month. They might, from
one hour to another, generate a little bit. But for the most
part----
Mr. Peters. I see. Does anyone have a reason why there's
not a statute of limitations on these challenges? Does anyone
understand or think that that is a good policy? Some heartburn
about changing that? No?
Mr. Glass, I would just like you to maybe respond to this--
with lower renewables costs maybe the role for PURPA has
changed.
Can you tell us what kind of easing could happen and what's
the role of PURPA, going forward, and encouraging renewables?
Mr. Glass. Well, and one of the fine testimonies that was
submitted talked about disco balls and shag carpeting, and I
commend you for that. I grew up in Spokane, Washington, in the
'70s. It was a great time.
But competition is not out of style and it didn't go away
with the '70s. I think that if you look at the renewable energy
industry, we are up but really natural gas has taken the
position of coal and a little bit of nuclear and taken over for
petroleum-based generation for that.
But overall, we have not yet achieved the diversity that we
need. The more important point is that this idea that somehow
or another avoided costs are too high, that is just wrong. And
I would like to think that the committee needs to look into
that. The subcommittee needs to look into that because the
utilities and the utility commissions control avoided cost.
There are a number of methodologies by which they do that.
We've been in a declining cost system and in some cases some
utilities and state commissions haven't got to avoided costs
that reflect the true market price. That is not a reason to do
away with legislation itself. It is a reason to fix the avoided
costs if that is what needs to happen.
Mr. Peters. OK. Would someone like to respond--maybe Ms.
Raper or Mr. Kouba--on that issue, the avoided cost issue?
Ms. Raper. I would be happy to. Thank you.
Congressman, regarding the avoided cost issue, could we
change our avoided cost in Idaho to be more reflective of a
market price? Yes, we could.
Would we damage things like the co-generation that is
really not manipulating the system, not attempting to take
advantage at the harm of rate payers? They're just using a by-
product of what their normal market is.
We would rather be able to have an avoided cost that truly
supports what PURPA intended it to be--to be able to bring on
those small power producers--renewable power producers and if
we reduced it to a market price then we would see probably
complete elimination of any of those PURPA projects. Maybe that
is the answer.
Mr. Peters. Mr. Kouba.
Mr. Kouba. I will make one quick comment. We did recently
change our avoided costs and one of those foreign developers
working on a new project then complained that it was too low
and is in with the Iowa Utility Board wanting us to basically
double the avoided costs.
So I think there are some things that all of us can do to
make the avoided costs more realistic. But we still have to
agree that no matter how you offset we have a very volatile
market out there that changes often. So we are going to have to
make sure that we are constantly updating the avoided costs.
Mr. Peters. Thanks for the testimony. My time has expired.
Mr. Walberg [presiding]. I thank the gentleman.
Now I recognize the gentleman from West Virginia, Mr.
McKinley.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Glass, I think we are all familiar with the fact that
the electric consumption in this country has been growing about
the last 8 years. So there has been this ongoing conflict in
the producers of electricity to maintain their market share and
I support the idea of the renewables in a big way. I am
delighted, but as a result of that, someone's losing.
There are coal producers, coal generating, gas generated,
at the expense that seemingly the federal government is trying
to support through PURPA and others and tax credits--the use of
more solar, wind. We are currently around 15 percent of
renewables, I believe, creating power in America. If we
continue this, what is the magic number?
And we are subsidizing it at a pretty good clip. I think it
is $28 per megawatt hour. Wind has $28 per megawatt hour. I
don't know what solar is with that. What's the right level?
Should we continue to be providing subsidies and where did
we reach a point that we stopped the subsidies? Is it do we
want to get to 50 percent renewables in this country?
Were we trying to get to 100 percent? When do we stop the
subsidies?
Mr. Glass. Thank you for the question.
The first thing I would say is that I think the DOE staff
report that came out made very clear that it is not renewables
causing the issues that you are talking about.
Rather, it is the low cost of gas, which is a great
domestic source of energy in this country and all of that. So--
--
Mr. McKinley. No, no, no. I want to stop you on that,
please. Five of the last 8 years there has been a rather--I am
not arguing over the price of gas. Renewables are continuing to
expand, and I applaud that. But it is at a cost. Somebody is
losing out market share as a result of that, and it could be
gas. It could be coal. It could be nuclear. Somebody is being
affected. Where do we go?
If it is 15 percent, should we still be subsidizing
companies when they represent 50 percent of the market share?
Mr. Glass. Well, I----
Mr. McKinley. Could you answer that, please? It is a yes or
no.
Mr. Glass. Sure. Sure.
I don't have a particular goal. I don't have a federal RPS
goal, renewable portfolio standard goal, and I am at least not
prepared to speak on behalf of SEIA as to what that might be.
The one thing I would say is that solar right now is less
than 1 percent or just about 1 percent of the total, and I
think it could grow more, because the reason is I am not so
much worried about who is winning and losing market share. I am
more interested in reducing the cost of power for consumers and
if----
Mr. McKinley. Well, I am interested in keeping jobs for the
people that are in the producer----
Mr. Glass. I would love to talk about it. The solar
industry----
Mr. McKinley. So, Mr. Thomas, if I could reclaim my time to
Mr. Thomas under Domtar, you made a remark in your statement.
The renewable energy QFs should not, in your opinion, be
allowed to include production tax credits or the value of
renewable energy credits in their calculation when they bid
into the system. Could you explain that a little bit?
Mr. Thomas. Sure, and thank you for the opportunity.
Basically, what we are saying is, we know renewables are
subsidized. We don't object to that. It has done a good job of
creating a renewable market.
But when we start bidding into cost-base market systems,
those subsidies should not be allowed to be bid in, and that
just keeps it on a competitive process because at face value it
looks like bidding in, including your subsidies, lowers the
price and it does in the immediate.
But in the future, it causes generation assets that are
built by utilities to have to be shut down because they can't
compete. They're not subsidized.
Once they are shut down for any length of time, then they
end up getting mothballed. Their customers are stuck with
capital payment on a resource that is not being used.
Mr. McKinley. This may be a fundamental question. My time
is almost up. If a utility is required to purchase from a QF
facility and yet they have not been successful in bidding into
the PJM for that market for that day, are they still required
to purchase?
Mr. Thomas. I don't know that I understand the question
entirely.
Mr. McKinley. If a utility company is not providing power
into the grid but yet are they still required--they are not
providing power to the grid that day or that week but yet are
they still required to purchase power from a QF?
Mr. Thomas. And PJM is a competitive market. I don't know
the answer----
Mr. McKinley. OK.
Mr. Thomas [continuing]. How a utility would react to that.
I know in our situation at PJM where we might sell generation,
if we don't make the bid we don't generate into the grid.
Mr. McKinley. Yes. I just wondered whether you are
required, though, to still purchase power under QF. Thank you.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Walberg. Gentleman's time has expired. I now recognize
the gentleman from the state in all of our thoughts and
prayers, Mr. Green.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would like to
thank you and our Ranking Member Rush for having the hearing
today.
PURPA is an interesting program borne of unique
circumstances in the '70s and I look forward to hearing a
variety of perspectives on its modernization from witnesses.
Mr. Prager, in your testimony you talk about PURPA's must-
take provisions and how they affect state resource planning.
Can you elaborate on how the right of a qualifying facility
under PURPA can interact with local state procurement processes
for independent power producers?
Of course, you have to realize I come from Texas and we
have ERCOT. So it is different from the rest of the country.
Mr. Prager. We actually operate in the Texas Panhandle,
just outside of ERCOT. So our Texas facilities are actually a
little bit different than the ERCOT facilities. But the
fundamental issue with PURPA and state resource planning is
PURPA is a must-take requirement. It is a must contract
requirement that happens independent of the state resource
planning processes. So you can see in that that what happens is
you end up with a independent power producer that comes in as a
qualifying facility and it puts the power to the utility
outside of the resource planning process. Because for the
renewable energy component of PURPA, those facilities are
intermittent. It is very difficult for a state which is
responsible for maintaining a reliable and a cost-effective
power supply to ensure that those facilities are integrated
appropriately into the system. That is why we think it is so
important that we begin to find a way to integrate the
renewable energy requirements that are coming out of states,
which are really significant right now and are driving a lot of
the renewable energy growth we see on our system with the PURPA
must-purchase requirements.
Mr. Green. OK. And your area you serve in Texas I know in
west Texas windmills--do you have any of that alternative
rather than solar?
Mr. Prager. We do have some solar and we are adding more in
Texas. Solar is a tremendous growing resource and Mr. Glass
quoted my disco ball quote from my testimony.
I will say that we are excited about the potential for
solar, especially in west Texas and in New Mexico. But, again,
it is important to do it the right way, because if you do it
the right way you can bring a lot of renewable energy to your
customers and do it in a way that is extraordinarily cost
effective and reliable. The best way to do that is through the
state planning processes.
Mr. Green. Well, obviously, from Texas I would love to see
us do with solar what we have done with wind power, and for my
California friends I am always bragging about how we produce
more wind power in Texas than California. So and we like to do
solar----
Mr. Peters. There is a lot of hot air.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Green. Well, I offered to send you a whole lot of water
last week.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Green. Mr. Glass, in your testimony you talk about how
SEIA's members are driving down the price of solar to compete
favorably with all the other forms of power generation.
Can you elaborate on how current technological innovations
and efficiencies of scale have changed PURPA contracts from
high-cost contracts of the past to today?
Mr. Glass. Well, thank you for the question.
I've been developing and financing solar projects for about
12 years now and the price of the installed capacity has come
down to about one-sixth of where it actually began when I
started practising. And this has been done through
technological innovation, massive investment in capacity
manufacturing as well as a lot of technological and business
model innovation that has driven down these costs to the point
where, we have PPAs that are now less than $20 per megawatt
hour that are being executed in various places.
We are able and look forward to installing and selling to
utilities at those prices.
But the avoided costs we don't control that at all. We are
a price taker under the avoided cost methodology that the
utility and the utility commission set.
So I would like to encourage to the extent that there are
problems with avoided costs that they review those costs and if
solar is the best and cheapest alternative, let us set on that
and let us get more solar installed because we have 260,000
jobs that have been built over the last 12 years and we'd love
to add more.
Mr. Green. Well, the original intent of PURPA was to push
for alternative sources of power during an energy crisis in the
1970s.
Alternatives today are a booming market, and from your
testimony I get the sense that you see the primary purpose of
PURPA is increasing competition and putting downward pressure
on utility companies to reducing prices for consumers. Is that
an accurate characterization?
Mr. Glass. Yes.
Mr. Green. OK. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for holding the
hearing. because, again, in the 1970s we also had an embargo on
exporting crude oil and we changed that. So maybe we need to
look at PURPA and bring it up to date. Thank you.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman.
I recognize now the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
And I want to thank all of our panellists for being here
today. I appreciate it. Important topic.
Commissioner Raper, in your testimony you state utilities
prepare detailed integrated resource plans and make investments
based on perceived need. When discussing PURPA, I think it is
important to get a better understanding of this process,
especially, as you state, when a QF steps in it changes many of
the factors that led to the utility's original conclusions. New
QF resources are not contemplated by integrated resource plans
because they are not known or measurable by the utility.
So can you describe that process? In other words, how does
a utility prepare their integrated resource plans and make
investments based on their needs? What is that process?
Ms. Raper. Thank you, Congressman, and it actually goes a
little bit to Congressman Green's question about the renewable
portfolio standards and perceived need.
A utility, every 2 years, does a 20-year plan of what their
resource needs might be based on growth and customers and
anticipating, based on history, what it is going to look like
into the future.
But when a QF comes on, it just puts in a contract, it is a
must-purchase. They say, here you go, we want to build. So when
rates are favorable to a QF they just come in. There's no way
for the utility during that integrated resource planning
process to say OK, we are going to have six new QFs that we are
going to bring on. They're not allowed to limit that. They're
not allowed to say we are going to have five new wind resources
and six new solar resources and that is all we are going to
take and so we can plan for that, and we have enough caseload
in order to cover the intermittency of those resources. They
don't have the ability to plan for that. So what our utilities
have been forced to do, and we have watched it with the
integrated resource planning process, is it's one step forward,
two steps back.
They make their plan. But then they have to adjust. It's a
good thing they file a 20-year plan every 2 years because they
are having to adjust each time they come to anticipate
different base load resources to guess at where rates are at
right now and what QFs may come online.
Mr. Green. I was going to ask you, and maybe you answered
this, how long it takes to develop those plans. So if they do
it every 2 years for a 20-year out cycle, does it take the full
2 years? Are they working on that for 2 years?
Ms. Raper. Well, Mr. Kouba may be able to answer that more
directly as a utility. But it is my understanding that they are
constantly planning. They are constantly modifying and
anticipating and doing studies on what they may need.
Mr. Green. OK. Continuing on then, can you explain the
changes that might need to be made to a utility's resource plan
when integrating a small power production facility?
Ms. Raper. Well, if it's a true small power production
facility, if it's a 5-megawatt, a 10-megawatt geothermal plant,
then there are incremental modifications that have to be made
in order to balance out those resources. But when you get 100
megawatts that is disaggregated into five 20-megawatt projects,
then for our utilities, it's different in the east than it is
in the west.
Idaho Power, during a shoulder month when the wind is
blowing, their peak load can be as low as 1,100 megawatts.
Well, they have more QF resources online than their peak load
on those days.
So the ability for them to try to balance that is enormous.
Mr. Green. OK. So how do these changes compare when a
utility is required to accommodate generation for multiple QFs?
Ms. Raper. How do the utilities compare?
Mr. Green. Yes. Does the process change when a utility is
required to accommodate generation for multiple QFs? Does it
make it more complicated?
Ms. Raper. Absolutely. Yes, because you are bringing on a
hundred megawatts of resources that are, one, intermittent,
that are, two, must take and they are not necessarily being
provided at an hour--at a time of year and time of day when the
utility needs those resources, and the base load resources of
the utilities can only be backed off so far.
Hydro can't be shut off. Coal plants can't be shut off.
There's a minimum, you know, must run on those base load
facilities.
Mr. Green. OK. All right. Well, thank you very much. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman.
Now I recognize my friend from Illinois, the ranking
member, Mr. Rush.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I had a question for Mr. Glass and Mr. Baas. The question
might have been asked and answered but I really want to know,
one of the most contentious issues that critics have cited
PURPA's mandatory purchase obligation. Critics argue that the
purchase obligation under Section 210 requires them to purchase
power that they may not need from small QFs and above market
rates.
They claim that this misplaces lower cost resources and
unnecessarily increases rates to consumers. And I'd like to get
your response, Mr. Glass and Mr. Baas.
Mr. Glass. Glass before Baas?
Mr. Rush. Any way you want to do it.
Mr. Glass. Thank you for the question.
I have already spoken to the fact that if avoided costs are
being created and approved by a regulatory agency, there should
not be a situation in which the utility is buying at greater
than its incremental cost of buying energy. If PURPA and its
implementing regulations are being administered correctly, that
is not a situation you'll find it in.
I actually think that--and thank you for the question
because I think there are a lot of other issues that we haven't
really talked about yet that are being created in the PURPA
environment. I think that there are some states that are taking
particular steps to eliminate QF projects altogether. They are,
for instance, reducing the term to something that is not
financeable. They are introducing other requirements such as
RFPs and other things that need to be satisfied before a QF can
locate.
But the ultimate thing that you have to understand if you
are going to have a competitive independent generation capacity
in this country, you need to have the ability to have a long-
term stream of revenues to be able to finance these facilities.
Utilities have the ability to put costs onto their customers
over a 20-, 30-year period. A utility, when it's planning to
build generation, does not do it on a 2-year basis, it does it
on a longer term.
Well, independent power is looking for the same type of
thing. If we are going to put money to work we need to have
that long-term stream of revenues and certainty.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Baas, you want to charge at this?
Mr. Baas. Yes. Thank you for the opportunity to comment.
In Michigan, the utilities receive full cost recovery and
so when the Public Service Commission does rate reviews they
are ensuring that the utilities are being paid their full cost
of operation. Our facility is a base load facility. It's been
providing electricity for 27 years. We certainly are in the
planning of the utility and have been there for a long time.
When we look at what the Public Service Commission is doing
in terms of determining avoided cost versus what the utilities
are being paid, there is a significant difference. And so we
believe we are very competitive and we are seeing utilities
actually attempt to build new generation capacity at our
expense.
When they want to move us to a 1-year notification on a
contract it's difficult for us to invest millions of dollars in
refurbishment. It's difficult for us to take our 10-year
planning horizon to determine what are we going to pay for in
the future when it's set up like that.
Mr. Rush. I want to ask and want to quickly go down the
line and simply ask one question. We can start with you, Mr.
Baas.
Give me a yes or no if Congress should make tweaks to PURPA
or leave it as it is. Yes or no.
Mr. Baas. Yes.
Mr. Kouba. Yes, we should modify PURPA.
Mr. Thomas. No, we prefer it in the current form.
Ms. Raper. Yes, update, Congressman.
Mr. Glass. No, leave it as it is.
Mr. Prager. Yes, we believe it should be modified.
Mr. Rush. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman, and I recognize the
gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Long.
Mr. Long. I might have to watch that on replay. That
reminded me of ``What's My Line?'' when they are yes, no, leave
it as it is.
I think I stepped out of the room for just a minute and I
believe Mr. Johnson stole my notes so this might sound like
familiar territory to what he was asking but I am going to ask
these questions of Mr. Prager. Under PURPA's mandatory purchase
obligation, a host utility is required to purchase a qualified
facility's output even if the utility has no need for
additional power.
How does the utility respond to these types of situations?
Mr. Prager. Well, I provided the congressman an example of
what we are going through in Colorado right now with the
particular QF developer that is trying to put to us 1,520
megawatts of power. It presents a very big problem to us. It
really does. It means that we can't be certain about what our
generation capacity is going to be. It raises costs for
customers. We had some discussion earlier about avoided costs.
Reality with avoided costs is that the avoided costs
calculations that are done under PURPA are supposed to make the
customer indifferent to whether or not the project is financed
or not. That is not the case when a PURPA cost comes in above
what would have to be bid into a competitive process. That's
one of the concerns we have about it. It also, when you have a
PURPA facility coming on to the system, it locks the ability of
other independent power producers to be able to access the
marketplace.
I mentioned we have a lot of wind on our system. Sixty-five
percent of that is not owned by our company. It's owned by
independent power producers. If a QF comes in and it occupies
that field, it will be impossible for those IPPs to come in and
take their position. And finally, it also presents for our
state and our system some significant challenges in terms of
the reliability and protecting the reliability and cost
effectiveness of the system.
Intermittent renewables are a technical challenge from an
electric system standpoint. You can make it work. We have made
it work. We are very optimistic about the future. But you've
got to do it in the right way.
The problem with PURPA is these projects show up at a time
and location of their choosing and it's very difficult for us
to plan around those projects.
Mr. Long. And what impact does this have on cost to the
consumer?
Mr. Prager. We believe that PURPA has the potential to
raise consumer costs because we have got to accommodate these
higher cost resources and we have to do it in a way that will
result in additional investment in our system to accommodate
the location in which they would be built.
Mr. Long. And you talked specifically about how it affects
the utility's output?
Mr. Prager. Utility output.
Mr. Long. The utility output, how it affects the QFs?
Mr. Prager. We believe it's very important that the utility
have the ability to plan around the system as it's currently
designed and so we think it's extremely important that the
state have the leadership role in terms of setting the strategy
that the utility must follow in order to achieve not only a
reliable and low cost electric system, which are both critical,
but also achieve those public policy goals whether it's
emission reduction or renewable energy.
We found that our states do an extraordinarily good job of
that. They do an extraordinarily good job of it and in fact the
renewable----
Mr. Long. So you think they can anticipate and plan for
integration?
Mr. Prager. It's hard for them to do it when these projects
just show up whenever they want to. It's very difficult.
Mr. Long. OK. And so should the state commissions be able
to suspend the mandatory purchase requirement if it determines
the utility does not need the additional power----
Mr. Prager. We believe they should.
Mr. Long [continuing]. In your opinion?
Mr. Prager. We believe they should. Yes, sir.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman. And I recognize the
gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Loebsack.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you, Mr. Chair. It's always great to
have these hearings so we can hear from a lot of different
perspectives.
For me, being from Iowa and particularly proud, obviously,
of what we do with wind, Mr. Kouba, you and the other principal
utility in the state of Iowa, very, very important when it
comes to that.
I do have one quick question. Is there any way we can get
to 40 percent of electricity by the end of the year or is that
a pipe dream?
Mr. Kouba. I wouldn't say it's a pipe dream and we are
working hard to get there.
Mr. Loebsack. Yes. It's going to be hard, because to get
there we're 36 percent now. I do want to say, though, first, I
want to mention solar because there is more and more solar in
Iowa all the time as well.
A lot of people don't think of Iowa as having a lot of
solar. But it really does, and I really want to thank Alliant
for doing what it is doing. We have a lot of RACs that are
working on this.
SIPCO is providing solar to five and maybe even more now. I
know they are planning to do even more. And we have got a lot
of folks, ranging from schools to farms to hog farmers who are
installing solar panels.
The ITC, I think, has been very, very good for that. I know
there are many concerned about these particular programs and
subsidies. But the ITC, I think, has served its purpose and the
PTC for wind. There is no question about that. So I am very
proud of what I was doing at this point. We have a great story
to tell when it comes to wind, and we may be behind Texas when
it comes to wind power but we are still ahead of California,
nonetheless, and it's great.
But I am pleased to hear, obviously, the $1 billion
commitment to build more wind in Iowa too on the part of
Alliant Energy. 4It's great news, and as for PURPA
modernization, I want to ensure, I guess, that wind energy is
deployed in the most cost effective manner for my constituents,
for all of Iowa, for the entire country, while ensuring that
the federal government continues to promote renewable growth
energy in my state.
And I think there is a story to tell there. You can
elaborate a little bit more. I guess the question that I would
have at the outset is has PURPA actually served to drive
extensive renewable energy development in the past and where
are we to go from there?
You have some policy recommendations. You mentioned the 1-
mile rule. But, did it work in the past but now we are just
having some difficulty with it at the moment and reforms are
necessary? Is that fair to say, Mr. Kouba?
Mr. Kouba. I would agree it has worked in the past. In some
respects, it's still working. I think for us specifically what
we see in Iowa is foreign companies abusing the intent and
spirit of PURPA when they disaggregate these projects, move
them down to the distribution system which causes all sorts of
reliability problems in and of itself.
So it's those companies we think that are abusing that.
Just instead of competing in Iowa in the renewable market,
disaggregating the systems, moving down to the distribution
system, claiming they are PURPA facilities, spread them 1 mile
apart so we can't even challenge that.
The IUB can't challenge that. So that is our main concern
with what's going on right now with respect to abuses of PURPA.
Mr. Loebsack. Do you have other policy recommendations
beyond the 1-mile rule issue?
Mr. Kouba. We do have policy recommendations. The 1-mile
rule is one of them. The other one is to be able to challenge
this disaggregation of larger projects.
Also, for the states to be able to say that utilities do
not need to buy that capacity and energy when it is not needed
and, really, a number of the panellists have talked about how
you get that integrated resource planning process in itself and
just make that more of a competitive process instead of just
those QFs that are disaggregate on those projects and putting
it on the utilities.
Mr. Loebsack. Right.
Mr. Kouba. We're looking for competitive resources for our
customers.
Mr. Loebsack. Right. And then, ultimately, obviously, it is
to make sure that we have competition so that the cost to the
consumer is driven down as well.
And so that is really important and I know Mr. McKinley
mentioned jobs. In the state of Iowa wind has created thousands
of jobs. Solar is creating more jobs every day. Wind certainly
has.
In my district alone, I often mention in these hearings
that I have a number of wind energy plants in my congressional
district alone, two of them in Newton, Iowa, where we once had
Maytag, Whirlpool. No longer.
But the wind energy industry has come in and really created
a lot of great new jobs, and so I want to continue to do that
as best I can.
But thinking also our consumers of energy and making sure
that the regulatory framework we have in place, going forward,
whatever that may be is going to serve those energy consumers
as well.
So with that, I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I thank
the panel.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Kinzinger.
Mr. Kinzinger. Well, thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you
all for being here. A lot of the questions I wanted to ask have
been asked so I will just hit a couple.
Ms. Raper, the driving factor behind PURPA was national
security through field diversity after the oil embargo. We have
seen great success in energy efficiency in the development of
domestic renewables since the '70s.
Today, however, energy security means more than just
security of supply. It's reliability, particularly during and
after extreme weather. It's grid resiliency. It's mitigating
cyber attacks and some other concerns.
As a state regulator, do you see circumstances where PURPA
may impact grid reliability or not allow you the most efficient
plan for energy security in your state?
Ms. Raper. Thank you, Congressman. I do see circumstances
where PURPA could impact grid reliability because as a must-
take resource we are forced to approve contracts and the
utility is forced to accept that energy onto their system and
they need to find a way to balance that energy.
I don't know about national security risks so much,
although I do appreciate you bringing that up because that is
becoming a greater and greater concern for the state regulatory
commissions.
But it absolutely affects and impacts reliability of the
grid when you have more megawatts entering onto distribution
and transmission systems than what's being taken off because of
flat load and reduced load by energy efficiency measures.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you. And to the rest of the panel,
does anyone else want to comment on the role of PURPA in light
of the much broader definition of energy security?
Mr. Baas. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Kinzinger. We'll go over here and then over here. I am
sorry. So we'll start with Mr. Glass.
Mr. Glass. Thank you.
Actually, I think it's a great question. It's something
that all utility commissioners, and Congress and FERC should
all be paying attention to.
I think that we are looking at new types of risks. Not just
weather risks, but national security risks of all different
types.
I think that there has been a recognition within the
utility industry in the last 10 years that with a greater
diversity of resources on the system located at different
places on the grids, while it might be more complicated, it
certainly is a lot more robust in a variety of situations.
And sure, the utility commissions need to know how to use
these resources but solar resources in particular and, more
broadly, distributed smaller resources throughout the system
actually adds a great deal of energy security to the extent
that it can be managed better. So I think greater diversity
helps with security.
Mr. Baas. My comment was going to be not to forget existing
base load renewable energy such as waste energy. The utilities
in Michigan are looking to build and construct new capacity
when they are really beginning to frown on existing renewable
under PURPA. And so I would ask that you consider that.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you.
Mr. Prager. In terms of the security of the grid,
especially when you think about cyber security, it's never
completely clear that you actually are making the grid more
secure with more distributed resources.
There is some real value in having greater diversity on the
grid to help protect from having one massive failure. The
problem is is that with a lot of different facilities on the
grid they represent doors into the system where cybersecurity
threats can enter in.
We spend a lot of time thinking about this and it is one of
the growing concerns as you add more distributed resources to
the system and that is true for a lot of these QFs as well.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you.
To the panel, you all provided the areas that PURPA could
be modernized and improved. With energy technology almost
constantly evolving and rapid changes to the kinds of energy
security threats we face, what, if anything, should this
committee consider in order to make it effective for the next
40 years? And I guess those that participated maybe can answer
that question.
Mr. Prager. As the energy markets evolve, the best thing to
do is let them evolve and to no longer have these kind of
forced mandates over the top of the energy markets.
States do a great job in terms of protecting the
reliability of the grid. They do a great job in terms of
protecting the cost effectiveness of it. There's lots of market
opportunities out there right now. There's lots of least cost
resource planning. The best thing that could happen would be
for PURPA to get out of the way and that is really the ultimate
advocacy that we are supporting.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you.
And Ms. Raper, do you have anything to say on that at all,
in terms of what we should consider?
Ms. Raper. Although I don't want to disagree with Mr.
Prager but I don't think PURPA is the worst thing on the
planet.
I think it's being abused. And so I think that if we
removed the abuse--Idaho's been implementing PURPA since the
early '80s and there was not a problem until the last decade
when the large generators coming in and gaming the system, were
manipulating the loopholes in the act, complying with the
letter but not the intent of the act.
And I do agree that there is a balance of what Mr. Glass
and Mr. Prager said and that is that you put too many
renewables and QFs on the system and you actually create a
worse environment for them. We believe in distributed
generation and the value of distributed generation and keeping
the grid consistent and reliable as well.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you. Thanks to all of you. I yield
back.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. Gentleman's time has expired.
Now I recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. I thank the chairman. I thank the witnesses
for coming here today. Interesting testimony and informative.
I got a couple of things out of your testimonies, some ways
to improve PURPA. One is to improve the 1-mile rule and to
allow states to address gaming. I think that was Ms. Raper and
Mr. Thomas. Thank you.
Subsidies are not included in contract negotiations. Mr.
Thomas. Large gifts should sell power more competitively--Mr.
Kouba--and the need to add QFs to integrated resource planning.
Am I mistaken or am I misinterpreting what anyone said on those
comments? No?
I think PURPA can be revised to encourage low-emission or
zero-emission--carbon emission without increasing cost to
consumers. Does anyone disagree with that?
Sure. Go ahead.
Ms. Raper. If I can just qualify that. I think that that is
possible. But I know that Idaho has taken a lot of criticism
for their two-year contracts and part of what Mr. Glass is
talking about about a correct avoided cost it may be a correct
avoided cost right now based on the factors that you use to
predict what that avoided cost ought to be. But the longer the
term of the contract because we are in a volatile energy market
and it is always volatile, the longer the contract the more
disparity there will be between actual avoided cost and what
the utility is paying those.
So 20-year contracts, in our opinion, are never going to be
representative in the end of what the incremental cost to the
utility is.
Mr. McNerney. Well, that may be true. But as a small power
producer, it is almost impossible to get financing without some
sort of long-term guarantee or contract.
Ms. Raper. May I address that, Congressman?
Mr. McNerney. Yes.
Ms. Raper. It's our opinion that as long as PURPA exists
and there is a must-purchase obligation there that the utility
has to take that energy, then there is something reliable to go
and get financing based on you show them the federal act that
says that the utility has to take this energy on an ongoing
basis or the modification that can be made.
As we read PURPA now, it says that the cost of that power
is either determined at the time that the contract is entered
into or upon delivery of the energy.
So to us, if you have a 20-year contract, you determine at
the time the contract is entered into what that avoided cost
would be. All we tried to do with----
Mr. McNerney. But that is a risk to you and also just a
kind of a risk to the power producer because costs may go up,
in which case the power producer is stuck at a lower cost.
That is just futures gaming. Whether it's the utility or
the producer, you are both taking a risk. Yes?
Mr. Kouba. Yes, could I comment on that?
Mr. McNerney. Sure.
Mr. Kouba. When we go to add resources at our utility and
we walk into the Iowa Utility Board to get those approved for
20 years, 25 years, 30 years, we come in there with a whole
study for that time period with various scenarios on what
happens if gas prices change, what happens if an environment
rule changes, carbon taxes change.
So we have the whole gamut of scenarios for 20, 25, 30
years that then they can look at and say yes, this is still a
good decision to add this resource over all those scenarios for
20, 25, years.
That's not the case with these folks gaming the system.
They come in with no 20-year plan showing that is going to be
beneficial to customers.
Mr. McNerney. Right. Well, that is one of the improvements
that I think could be made is giving states some ability to
fight gaming. Mr. Glass.
Mr. Glass. Congressman, I would say if they are doing that
analysis and they know what the long-term costs are, use that
to set your avoided costs. It's very simple.
There's no reason why when you are entering into a 20-year
PPA as utility that you would use a different set of data than
your avoided cost. In order to develop and finance a solo
project or any independent power contract you need a long-term
stream of revenues.
You cannot depend upon the market price in any part of this
country. Merchant generation in this country is dwindling.
There's very little of it actually happening, especially
outside organized markets where you can't effectively hedge
against such things.
To allow only 2-year contracts or to require these people
to ride the market means the end of PURPA QF contracts and it
means the end of independent power.
Mr. McNerney. Right. No, I understand and I agree with
that.
How does storage affect PURPA's viability as a long-term
requirement as a regulation?
Mr. Glass. Right now storage is not specifically
contemplated in PURPA or in the implementing regulations, to my
knowledge. I would say this. The implementing regulations were
very sensitive to the difference between energy and capacity
and also the other ancillary services that these types of
resources can build. I would simply put it this way. Get more
sophisticated about the avoided costs. Get sophisticated about
the energy, the capacity, and if it makes sense to build in a
financing way, to build and install battery we'll build it and
there's greater capabilities that will come with getting
compensated with that.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. McNerney. I was about to say that.
Mr. Walberg. We have got votes coming. We are trying to
move it on a little bit, and so now I recognize the gentleman
from the inspiring state of Texas, Mr. Barton.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be, I think,
relatively brief.
I didn't hear the opening statements of the panel. But in
answer to Mr. Kinzinger's questions, Mr. Prager, does your
company support repeal of PURPA?
Mr. Prager. We provided several different options in the
end of my written testimony. But one of them is yes, we would
support the repeal of the Section 210 requirements under PURPA
for a forced purchase.
Mr. Barton. I am open to that, and I wasn't here in '78,
believe it or not, but I got here in '84, and we thought about
repealing it in the Energy Policy Act of 2005. We did add or
change it, which the FERC implemented in Order 688.
Mr. Glass, could you tell me what the average size a solar
plant is today?
Mr. Glass. The average size of a PURPA----
Mr. Barton. New construction.
Mr. Glass. Yes. The average size of a PURPA solar project
is 8 to 10 megawatts in total. There are some larger and there
are, obviously, smaller as well. But for PURPA projects it's
usually in that range.
Mr. Barton. Well, I appreciate that. But if it is not
PURPA, what does the economics of solar today indicate the
optimum size is? I would think it would be larger than that.
But maybe not.
Mr. Glass. Yes. I think for a utility scale solar, I would
say the average is now north of 50 megawatts. I think for
commercial and industrial when you are on a flat rooftop
there's a different optimization for, obviously, residential.
You're talking, like----
Mr. Barton. Right.
Mr. Glass [continuing]. Five or six kW.
Mr. Barton. Ms. Raper, you may be the best person on this,
since you are a public utilities commissioner. Texas has an
open access market system in ERCOT. We deregulated our power
generation.
Do you believe, and you may not know this, but nationally
is there a problem for these so-called facilities getting
access to the grid? There was a concern in the '70s that since
everything was regulated and integrated that there might be.
But in today's market is that still a problem?
Ms. Raper. Thank you, Congressman, for the question. I
think that there is not a problem for large QFs to have access.
I do believe that there are still co-generation facilities
and other small--we have run-of-river hydro that come in under
as a QF resource and I believe that those are entitled to those
published standard rates that PURPA talks about.
But no, I think that you get to 10 megawatt, 20 megawatt
and I think it is insincere for Mr. Glass to represent that the
average size is 10 megawatts for a QF.
The average size is 10 megawatts for a QF because the 100
megawatt disaggregated in order to become 10 of those. So yes,
I think it's proven through the Energy Policy Act of 2005 and
the modifications that Congress made that there is access in a
competitive market for those larger QF facilities.
Mr. Barton. I haven't talked to the chairman or the ranking
member so I don't know where the will of this subcommittee is
on this issue.
But if you assume that we're not going to repeal PURPA
which, again I would be open to, but you wanted to reform it,
is the 80 megawatts standard for a QF and then the 20-watt
megawatts standard under FERC's 688, are those still valid or
should those be changed? And I will let anybody take a pop at
that.
Mr. Kouba. We are advocating to lower that 20-megawatt
limit down to 2 megawatts.
Mr. Barton. Two. OK.
Mr. Baas. And I would disagree. I believe that facilities
like ours have a very difficult time moving electricity to the
grid competitively. Twenty megawatts at a minimum and for waste
energy facilities 20 to 80 would be very helpful.
Mr. Prager. And, Congressman, we would support reducing the
80-megawatt limit down and make it consistent with the limit
that is associated with competitive markets across the country,
especially for states that have competitive least-cost resource
planning.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize another proud Texas member, Mr. Flores.
Mr. Flores. OK. I want to thank the chairman for hosting
this informative hearing and also thank you, panel, for your
excellent testimony.
Three quick questions, if we can. It seems to me like state
policies are driving the growth and renewable generation.
They've got renewable portfolio standards--tax credits,
competitive procurement requirements, net metering are just a
few of those policies.
So two questions out of that statement. The first one is
can we even determine if PURPA's mandatory purchase
requirements under Section 210 are still a factor in driving
renewable generation as opposed to the state renewable policy?
So Mr. Baas, I will start with you.
Mr. Baas. The state policies certainly help, but the
federal PURPA requirements I think really enhance and provide
that umbrella framework for the states to operate.
Mr. Flores. Which do you think is having a greater impact
today?
Mr. Baas. PURPA.
Mr. Flores. OK. Mr. Kouba.
Mr. Kouba. In Iowa, there is no doubt that PURPA facilities
aren't driving renewable growth. It is the utilities driving
renewable growth and many other independent power producers
driving renewable growth, and we can take advantage of those
independent power producers through very competitive RFPs and
PPAs and certainly with our own facilities.
We go through RFP processes that make very competitive
prices for those projects. So definitely being driven by
utilities right now and independent power producers.
Mr. Flores. Mr. Thomas.
Mr. Thomas. Thank you. We believe PURPA has had a great
impact on us. We would not be nearly as competitive in
manufacturing without their ability. I can't think of an
example where PURPA was used with a hammer for us to be able to
do this.
Most of the time, we work through with the state or with
the utilities and come up with a negotiated contract. But
PURPA's presence is important and it enables that.
Mr. Flores. OK. Ms. Raper.
Ms. Raper. Thank you, Congressman.
I think initially PURPA drove some of the renewables that
came onto the market. It assisted in people wanting to invest
in things like wind and solar and geothermal. But I don't think
that it's the driving force anymore for getting renewables on
the system.
Mr. Flores. Mr. Glass.
Mr. Glass. I detailed in my testimony roughly 20 percent of
all the solar installation that was installed in the U.S. last
year was based upon PURPA-developed contracts.
So it was significant. And I would say for the other 80
percent, PURPA is a very important backstop in case the other
end of the offtake contract goes away. Financiers depend upon
PURPA as that backstop as Plan B.
Mr. Flores. Mr. Prager.
Mr. Prager. The vast majority, over 95 percent, of the
renewable energy on our system, which is, again, the largest
renewable wind energy provider in the country, comes as a
result of state policies, low costs, and market forces. It's
not because of PURPA.
Mr. Flores. OK. Thank you.
Did I really get 5 minutes at the beginning?
Mr. Walberg. You sure did.
Mr. Flores. Somebody cheated me on the clock.
Anyway, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Walberg. We took care of the cheat and gave you, in
fact, a little bit more in the end. So----
Mr. Flores. So can I keep going?
Mr. Walberg. No, no, no. You're----
[Laughter.]
It's always worth a try, though. I appreciate very much the
hearing today and I appreciated the fact that four out of six
of the panellists also indicated that they were open to
tweaking, reforming, altering, or amending the process and over
the last few months I've been drafting the PURPA Modernization
Act of 2017.
I believe that PURPA is ripe for reform and, if done
correctly, it will increase competition, lower utility bills
for our constituents, and ultimately promote grid reliability.
I am excited to work with this committee to bring about nearly
40 years of law into a change for the 21st century, if we can
do that.
I want to thank the witnesses for being here and great to
have a Michigander here as well, Mr. Baas.
Mr. Prager, in your testimony, you mentioned that PURPA's
mandatory purchase obligation is hindering Xcel's ability to
properly undertake critical resource planning.
Can you please elaborate on this and how it's negatively
impacting your customers, and additionally, do you think that
it would be beneficial if states were given mandatory purchase
obligation waiver authority?
Mr. Prager. I do think it would be beneficial. States are
doing an excellent job right now in making sure that they
manage their resource plans, do it cost effectively and achieve
these energy policy goals, including some unbelievably
aggressive goals for renewable energy development.
My testimony does talk in some detail about some of our
experiences, especially the experience that I indicated in
Colorado where we are actually being asked to add in a gigawatt
and a half of renewable energy that we haven't planned for,
that we haven't sited, that we haven't put through the process.
That gigawatt and a half of QF facilities, if they come in,
will completely disrupt our resource planning and will raise
customer costs and it threatens the reliability of our system.
Mr. Walberg. OK. Ms. Raper, would you care to add anything?
Ms. Raper. Amen. I----
Mr. Walberg. That's fine.
Ms. Raper. Thank you, Congressman. I agree. Without being
able to plan for the resources for QFs when they come on, then
it adversely impacts the utility's ability to plan, going
forward. And we have seen that in our state with the way the
integrated resource plans are submitted every 2 years. There
are swings now instead of tweaks to those integrated resource
plans and that is a problem. It impacts investment.
Mr. Walberg. It's a challenge. Yes.
Mr. Prager, you noted that Xcel is the number-one utility
provider for wind. You've also touched on the fact that QFs do
not face the market competition other IPPs are subject to.
Do you believe that PURPA is counterproductive to renewable
electricity competition and is keeping your customers from
enjoying the technological advancements made in renewable
generation such as wind?
Mr. Prager. We think it's very important when you bring any
resource onto the system including renewable energy, you do it
cost effectively. You do it in a way that results in low-cost
reliable power for your customers. We have been able to do that
outside of the PURPA process. PURPA is not consistent with the
way that states are currently doing the resource planning that
allows us to bring in that power on a cost-effective and
reliable basis. So yes, I would agree with that statement.
Mr. Walberg. OK. Mr. Kouba, in your testimony there was
some mention of reliability impacts to the system due to the
integration of these larger QFs on the distribution system.
How does a utility plan for or mitigate these issues and,
secondarily, who is ultimately responsible for grid reliability
issues--the utility or the QF?
Mr. Kouba. As a matter of fact, we can't plan for them
because these QF facilities now that are being disaggregated
and located on our distribution system come in at any given
time and we have absolutely no warning. So there is no planning
for the future in those cases. It's basically reacting and
doing the best we possibly can to ensure that the rest of our
customers on that distribution system aren't adversely
impacted, and in many cases so far they have been adversely
impacted.
It's just if you don't take these into the resource
planning process, you end up having potentially transmission
system impacts. We are seeing that now in the distribution
system because there's no adequate planning to add those
facilities. They come in at a location. They may not actually
be needed there, and they do end up causing problems for our
customers--those distribution systems.
Mr. Walberg. OK. Mr. Kouba, you mentioned that there are
opportunities for these QFs to integrate into the transmission
system. How do they integrate and are some QF developers
bypassing these established processes in MISO?
Mr. Kouba. How they would integrate in the transmission
system is very similar to how we integrate a new resource,
whether it is wind or combined cycle natural gas in the
transmission system. There is a process in place in MISO to do
that. They could walk through that process just like we do and
that process helps ensure that as we or QFs or independent
power producers are placing generation on the system, we are
actually improving the reliability system, not having a
detrimental impact on the transmission system.
So they could follow that process just as we do. I think
what they are finding is it is a bit of a cumbersome process.
It takes some time.
There may be transmission system additions that are needed
that are more expensive so they disaggregate--in our case, in
Iowa--and put them down in the distribution system where they
don't have to deal with that and don't have to deal with the
cost of transmission system upgrades.
Mr. Walberg. Well, thank you. My time is expired.
I guess I am not the last one. And now I recognize my
friend from New York that somehow got behind me. Mr. Tonko.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, and if you want to represent me too
you can do that.
Mr. Walberg. I'd be delighted to. Couldn't work well,
though.
Mr. Tonko. All right. Thank you. Thank you.
Let me thank the witnesses for joining us this morning
because it's such an important bit of discussion.
Mr. Thomas, I am a big supporter of CHP. With the recent
devastation of Hurricane Harvey and other massive storms that
are predicted to happen more and more if we don't address
climate change, I am concerned about how we come back from
these storms.
I think back to my home State of New York and the damage
caused by Superstorm Sandy. During Sandy, we saw, in that whole
experience the resiliency of the CHP facilities. In some
places, electricity was down for days but CHP kept working.
So has PURPA been successful in bringing more CHP
facilities online?
Mr. Thomas. Yes. I think the easy answer is absolutely. The
difference with the CHP facility and just the straight
manufacturing is you make additional and large capital
investment in the generation.
So knowing that you can recoup that over the length of the
period--20 years or so--gives us the confidence to install that
generation and make that a CHP facility versus just a straight
load manufacturing facility.
Mr. Tonko. And can you discuss whether there might be a
need to address some definitional or threshold issues with the
law? For example, your testimony mentions that many CHP
facilities export very little electricity to the grid.
Does it make sense to reclassify the size of a CHP
installation based on the amount that is generally exported to
the grid rather than what its overall capacity might be ranked?
Mr. Thomas. Yes, and thank you for your question. A lot of
times we talk about megawatts when we talk about the PURPA
numbers--20 or 80--and for us it's more about the amount of
energy, not the megawatts because our facilities may look like
they can net export 20 megawatts, let us say, but we seldom do
that because we match the steam load with what we need from
manufacturing.
So, we think an energy number is a better way to do that.
But leave it in place. Just change it from measuring absolute
capacity to measuring the amount of power that is put on the
grid.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Mr. Glass, can you explain the relationship between smaller
solar projects, those residential or community projects, and
those of utilities and the need for standard and expedient
interconnection processes?
Mr. Glass. Great question. All three levels--utility scale,
commercial and industrial, as well as residential all need very
clear straightforward paths to interconnection and where that
interconnection creates costs on the interconnecting utility,
those costs ought to be worked out and be dealt with so that
the cost cause are at pace for those types of things.
SEIA is completely supportive of that type of thing.
However, the one thing I would say is that we need to make sure
that these smaller types of facilities can efficiently plug in.
It would seem that the panel is most enamoured of the
centrally-planned utility model that we had back in the '60s
where there would be no small scruffy co-generator or small
energy producer of solar or anything like that that would come
interconnected and mess with their plans.
Unfortunately, that very competition I think has been very
successful in helping to bring down costs over time and I would
encourage--whether it be interconnection I would request that
the utility still be required to have that competitive
disruptiveness of smaller generation facilities such as solar.
Mr. Tonko. Now, does PURPA play a role in ensuring that
there are nondiscriminatory interconnection processes?
Mr. Glass. Absolutely. It's the bedrock. If there was no
PURPA there wouldn't have been an EP Act 1992 and an Order 888
and all of the things leading to the New York rev process that
is going on right now. We've been increasing competition since
1978 and we ought to continue to do so.
Mr. Tonko. And I would ask that, and so is it important to
the future of the solar industry that we move forward with
these sort of opportunities with interconnection?
Mr. Glass. Absolutely.
Mr. Tonko. And I understand a number of witnesses represent
utilities or facilities in deregulated electric markets.
But you have member companies selling and installing solar
projects all across the country. Is PURPA still important to
bring competition and generation diversity to areas that have
retained the vertically stacked integrated utilities?
Mr. Glass. Yes. It's vital in both markets. I would say
that a third of the load of the country is still in what we
call vertically integrated monopoly utility systems and then
the other two-thirds are in the New England--it is ERCOT and
California to a lesser extent.
There are different systems that apply and there is solar
going in in both. I would say that PURPA is important across
all of them for the market access, the transmission, the
interconnection that you were just mentioning but also as the
financial backstop so that people can get the financial
certainty of the stream of revenues over time to be able to
finance these projects. So it is vital.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, and thank you again to all of our
witnesses.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Tonko, and again, apologies for
looking right past you. Sorry about that.
Making sure I am looking around, I see no other further
members wishing to ask questions. I would like to thank all of
the witnesses again for being here today.
We appreciate this and I certainly hope that we will
continue these discussions. It is an important topic and it is
important for energy.
Before we conclude, I'd like to ask for unanimous consent
to submit two documents--two letters dated September 5th, the
first from Cypress Creek Renewables, the second from Northwest
and Intermountain Power Producers coalition--for the record.
Hearing no objection, they will be submitted for the
record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Walberg. Pursuant to committee rules, I remind members
that they have 10 business days to submit additional questions
for the record and I ask that the witnesses submit their
response within 10 business days upon receipt of the questions.
So without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:02 p.m., the meeting was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
