- DISRUPTER SERIES: SMART COMMUNITIES

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DISRUPTER SERIES: SMART COMMUNITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DIGITAL COMMERCE AND CONSUMER PROTECTION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 16, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-14

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
25-371 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            GENE GREEN, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                   Massachusetts
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             TONY CARDENAS, California
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           RAUL RUIZ, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia

7_____

Subcommittee on Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection

ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
Chairman
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            TONY CARDENAS, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virgina      DORIS O. MATSUI, California
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana                   Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           GENE GREEN, Texas
MIMI WALTERS, California             FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania           officio)
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Robert E. Latta, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Ohio, opening statement.....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Gregg Harper, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Mississippi, opening statement.................................     3
Hon. Ben Ray Lujan, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New Mexico, opening statement...............................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Peter Welch, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Vermont, opening statement.....................................     7

Witnesses

Jennifer Gallagher, Director of Public Service, City of Columbus,
Ohio...........................................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Kyle Chisek, Director of Bureau Relations, Office of Mayor Ted
Wheeler, City of Portland, Oregon..............................    17
Prepared statement...........................................    18
Brenna Berman, Commissioner and Chief Information Officer,
Chicago Department of Innovation and Technology \1\............    26
Kurt Gruendling, Vice President of Marketing and Business
Development, Waitsfield and Champlain Valley Telecom...........    28
Prepared statement...........................................    30
Jennifer Clark, Director, Center for Urban Innovation, and
Associate Professor of Public Policy, Georgia Institute of
Technology.....................................................    40
Prepared statement...........................................    42
Alexander Pazuchanics, Policy Coordinator, Office of the Mayor,
City of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania...............................    56
Prepared statement...........................................    58

Submitted Material

Statement of CA Technologies by David J. Bressler, Vice
President, API Management Solutions, March 16, 2017, submitted
by Mr. Harper..................................................    81
Letter of March 16, 2017, from Honda North America, Inc., to Mr.
Latta and Ms. Schakowsky, submitted by Mr. Harper..............    85
Statement of Panasonic, ``A Portfolio Microgrid in Denver,
Colorado,'' submitted by Mr. Harper............................    87
Statement of ITS America, March 16, 2017, submitted by Mr. Harper    89
Letter of March 15, 2017, from Elizabeth Hyman, Executive Vice
President, CompTIA, and Skip Newberry, Chairman, Technology
Councils of North America, and CEO, Technology Association of
Oregon, to Mr. Latta and Ms. Schakowsky, submitted by Mr.
Harper.........................................................    92
Statement of March 16, 2017, by ITI, CompTIA, Smart Cities
Council, and TIA, submitted by Mr. Harper......................    95

----------
\1\ Ms. Berman did not submit a written statement for the record.
Report by Deloitte, ``Wireless Connectivity Fuels Industry Growth
and Innovation in Energy, Health, Public Safety, and
Transportation,'' January 2017, submitted by Mr. Harper........    99
Letter of March 16, 2017, from Marc Rotenberg, President,
Electronic Privacy Information Center, et al., to Mr. Latta and
Ms. Schakowsky, submitted by Mr. Harper........................   118

DISRUPTER SERIES: SMART COMMUNITIES

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 16, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Digital Commerce and Consumer
Protection,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:17 a.m., in
room 2123 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Robert E. Latta
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Latta, Harper, Upton,
Lance, Bilirakis, Bucshon, Mullin, Walters, Costello, Walden
(ex officio), Lujan, Clarke, Dingell, Matsui, Welch, Kennedy,
Green, and Doyle.
Staff present: Elena Brennan, Legislative Clerk, Oversight
and Investigations; Jordan Davis, Director of Policy and
External Affairs; Blair Ellis, Press Secretary/Digital
Coordinator; Melissa Froelich, Counsel, Digital Commerce and
Consumer Protection; Giulia Giannangeli, Legislative Clerk,
Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection; Bijan Koohmaraie,
Counsel, Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection; Katie
McKeough, Press Assistant; Alex Miller, Video Production Aide
and Press Assistant; Paul Nagle, Chief Counsel, Digital
Commerce and Consumer Protection; Olivia Trusty, Professional
Staff Member, Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection;
Michelle Ash, Minority Chief Counsel, Digital Commerce and
Consumer Protection; Elisa Goldman, Minority Counsel; and
Caroline Paris-Behr, Minority Policy Analyst.
Mr. Latta. Well, good morning. I would like to call the
Subcommittee on Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection to
order, and the Chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes for
an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT E. LATTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

Good morning, and welcome to our second Disrupter Series
hearing this week, and I want to thank our panels for being
here to testify today. And we certainly appreciate your
flexibility as things moved around due to our full committee
markup last week, so we really appreciate that. The topic for
today's hearing is smart communities. One of the hallmarks of
the Disrupter Series is looking at emerging technologies and
platforms to understand how technology is bringing new benefits
to the consumer while disrupting traditional markets and
regulatory models.
Today we have the opportunity to look at these issues from
a slightly different perspective and hear from the experts on
the ground evaluating new technologies in their communities. In
some ways, no marketplace is more important than the local
government where every service is paid for with hard-earned tax
dollars using new technologies at the local level in our
hometowns so they may efficiently deliver better services to
their constituents.
Many of us sitting on the dais have experience in local
government. While many of the challenges and peculiarities are
similar if not the same among who we serve, the speed of
technology can also be measured by how many of these
technologies were available to us years back. Leveraging new
technology to provide, measure, and improve service to
constituents in our communities is the ultimate goal. There are
opportunities to improve education, traffic, and health. We can
drastically increase mobility and access to jobs. From safety
to sanitation to the environment, communities that wisely
invest in technologies can make a real difference in Americans'
lives.
While funding is an issue we all face, the first step is
identifying the local issues that can truly be transformed by
connected and other technologies. I am looking forward to
hearing from our witnesses on the panel about their ideas and
experiences, solving the most pressing local issues with the
new technology.
I would also like to extend a warm welcome to Jennifer
Gallagher from Columbus, Ohio, on the panel this morning. As
the winner of the Department of Transportation's Smart City
Challenge, Columbus has quite a bit of work ahead of them to
implement on their goal of reducing infant mortality. If there
is one thing I am sure about is the ingenuity and grit of my
fellow Ohioans to deliver to our constituents.
I would like to thank you all again for adjusting your
plans to be here with us this morning, and I look forward to
your testimony.
[The statement of Mr. Latta follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Robert E. Latta

Good morning and welcome to our second Disrupter Series
hearing in two days. Thank you to our panelists for being here
to testify. We sincerely appreciate your flexibility as things
moved around due to our full committee markup last week. The
topic for today's hearing is Smart Communities. One of the
hallmarks of the Disrupter Series is looking at emerging
technologies and platforms to understand how technology is
bringing new benefits to the consumer while disrupting
traditional markets and regulatory models.
Today we have the opportunity to look at these issues from
a slightly different perspective and hear from the folks on the
ground evaluating new technologies in their communities. In
some ways no marketplace is more important than the local
government, where every service is paid for with hard earned
tax dollars. Using new technologies at the local level, in our
hometowns, may be able to deliver better services more
efficiently.
Many of us sitting on the dais have experience in local
government. While many of the challenges and political
realities are similar, if not the same, to when we served, the
speed of technology can also be measured by how many of these
technologies were available to use years ago.
Leveraging new technology to provide, measure, and improve
service to constituents in our communities is the ultimate
goal. There are opportunities to improve education, traffic and
health. We can drastically increase mobility and access to
jobs. From safety to sanitation to the environment, communities
that wisely invest in technologies can make a real difference
in American's lives.
While funding is an issue we all face, the first step is
identifying the local issues that could truly be transformed by
connected and other technologies. I am looking forward to
hearing from the witnesses on the panel about their ideas and
experiences solving the most pressing local issues with new
technology.
I would like to extend a warm welcome to Jennifer Gallagher
from Columbus, Ohio on the panel this morning. As the winner of
the Department of Transportation's Smart City Challenge, the
city has quite a bit of work ahead of them to implement and
deliver on their goal of reducing infant mortality. If there is
one thing I am sure about, it is the ingenuity and grit of my
fellow Ohioans to deliver for our constituents.
I would like to thank you all again, for adjusting your
plans to be here with us this morning and I look forward to
your testimony.

Mr. Latta. And I have some time left on the clock, are
there any other members? The Chair recognizes the gentleman,
the vice chair from Mississippi.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREGG HARPER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI

Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
calling this hearing today on Smart Communities, the second
hearing this week in our Disrupter Series which provides us the
opportunity to examine and better understand how these
advancements will affect our daily lives in a rapidly evolving
world of interconnectivity.
It is no secret that infrastructure management is a growing
problem in the United States. Improving infrastructure
management and maximizing investment in roads and bridges and
other infrastructures not only improve our quality of life, it
also safeguards the flow of commerce, strengthens our economy,
and ensures we are competitive both locally and globally.
I am proud to say that a Mississippi company, Camgian
Microsystems, headquartered in my district in Starkville,
Mississippi, at the home of Mississippi State University, is
driving innovations and pioneering efforts to address the
problem and help to find cutting edge solutions. Camgian's
award-winning product, Egburt, released in October 2014, is a
complete internet of things cloud service comprising software,
hardware, and communications.
Egburt utilizes proprietary sensing and information
processing technology to deliver real time, actionable
intelligence designed to be used by commercial and government
customers for a broad range of remote monitoring applications
ranging from retail operations to infrastructure for both
bridges, dams, and other items. By leveraging the experience
and success of Egburt's software platform, Camgian engineers,
in conjunction with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, developed the
intelligent decision support, or IDS, system to improve the
performance and reliability of critical infrastructure.
In May of last year, Camgian engineers completed the
installation of the IDS system on the Markland dam bridge and
locks system which is 1,395 feet long and a key part of the
Ohio River navigation system. It has been successfully
operating since that time. As a result of this contract, we
could see groundbreaking development in infrastructure, health,
and management that could serve as the cornerstone for the
design and build of next generation infrastructure management
systems.
I am looking forward to hearing from each one of you today,
and I appreciate the chairman calling this hearing, and I yield
back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the acting ranking member of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from New Mexico, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BEN RAY LUJAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW MEXICO

Mr. Lujan. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. It is a
pleasure to sit next to you today for the hearing in the
Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection Subcommittee on Smart
Communities. I want to thank the ranking members for working
together to convene this hearing today, the chairman and the
majority, and I thank all the witnesses for their attendance
today as well.
Let me begin by noting my appreciation for the title of
today's hearing, Smart Communities, because in a State like my
home of New Mexico it really is about building smart
communities. And as I think today's hearing will show, there
are exciting innovations happening everywhere from the
assembled cities here in Columbus, Chicago, Pittsburgh, and
Portland, including New Mexico where we have two national labs
and Intel.
Take what is happening in Santa Fe. In New Mexico, water is
a precious resource which is why Santa Fe is deploying cellular
smart meters to track consumption and to identify leaks and
other problems. These types of advancements improve quality of
life, save money, and help policymakers make better decisions.
However, there is no reason that these advancements should be
reserved for just cities and Silicon Valley. We must act to
prevent the development of a new digital divide by helping
communities of all sizes adopt smart infrastructure and
solutions.
To guarantee that smaller and rural communities aren't left
behind, I am working with Senators Maria Cantwell and
Congresswoman Suzan DelBene to develop legislation to promote
the use of smart technologies while protecting privacy and
guarding against cyber attacks.
Our draft legislation seeks to enhance Federal coordination
of smart community efforts and provide communities with a
resource guide and technical assistance, leverage the expertise
of our national laboratories including Los Alamos and Sandia to
help communities adopt smarter infrastructure and real
solutions, launch regional demonstration efforts to test and
advance smart community technologies and systems, and promote
the development of a technology-skilled workforce to support
the deployment and development of smart communities. We believe
this effort will make communities across the country more
liveable and sustainable, and there is no reason this effort
shouldn't be a bipartisan effort.
I believe that this committee and the Congress has the
responsibility to work together to ensure that every corner of
America benefits from the infrastructure of tomorrow, which is
why critically it isn't enough that we work together to advance
the ideas under discussion today, we have to work together to
deploy broadband infrastructure that reaches all Americans. I
often joked with the previous chairman of the FCC that if we
are having a conversation of having broadband at 30,000 feet
from Los Angeles to New York, surely we can be talking about
having broadband in all parts of America on the ground.
In the weeks ahead I look forward to working with my
colleagues. I want to thank Mr. Latta again for holding this
important hearing, and with that I yield to Mr. Doyle of
Pennsylvania.
[The statement of Mr. Lujan follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ben Ray Lujan

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is a pleasure to sit next to
you for today's Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection
subcommittee hearing on Smart Communities.
I thank you and the Ranking Members for working together to
convene this hearing today and I thank all the witnesses for
their attendance.
Let me begin by noting my appreciation for the title of
today's hearing: ``Smart Communities.'' Because in a State like
my home of New Mexico, it really is about building smart
communities and as I think today's hearing will show--there are
exciting innovations happening everywhere--from the assembled
cities here: Columbus, Chicago, Pittsburgh, and Portland--to
New Mexico, where we have with two national labs and Intel.
Take what's happening in Santa Fe. In New Mexico, water is
a precious resource, which is why Santa Fe is deploying
cellular smart meters to track consumption and to identify
leaks and other problems.
These types of advancements improve quality of life, save
money, and help policymakers make better decisions. However,
there is no reason that these advancements should be reserved
just for cities and Silicon Valley. We must act to prevent the
development of a new digital divide by helping communities of
all sizes adopt smart infrastructure solutions
To guarantee that smaller and rural communities aren't left
behind, I am working with Senator Maria Cantwell and
Congresswoman Suzan DelBene to develop legislation to promote
the use of smart technologies while protecting privacy and
guarding against cyber-attacks.
Our draft legislation seeks to:

Enhance Federal coordination of smart community
efforts and provide communities with a resource guide and
technical assistance.

Leverage the expertise of our National
Laboratories, including Los Alamos National Laboratory and
Sandia in New Mexico, to help communities adopt smart
infrastructure solutions.

Launch regional demonstration efforts to test and
advance smart community technologies and systems.

Promote the development of a technology skilled
workforce to support the development of smart communities.
We believe that this effort will make communities across
the country more livable and sustainable. And there is no
reason this effort shouldn't be a bipartisan effort.
I believe that this committee and this Congress has a
responsibility to work together to ensure that every corner of
America benefits from the infrastructure of tomorrow.
Which is why, critically, it isn't enough that we work
together to advance the ideas under discussion today. We have
to work together to deploy broadband infrastructure so that it
reaches all Americans.

Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you for
hosting this important hearing today on Smart Communities and
for featuring my hometown and district, Pittsburgh, and I want
to welcome Alex Pazuchanics--we call him Paz, for short--for
being here today.
You know, Pittsburgh has changed a lot. You don't have to
wipe soot off your car in the morning anymore and the sky isn't
full of dust and ash anymore. We have become one of the most
liveable and innovative cities in the country. Pittsburgh has
deployed a range of technologies and on its smart cities
platform and as Alex will point out in his testimony this isn't
just sensors and connected infrastructure, it is cloud
computing and data analytics on the back end too, taking that
data and using it to improve traffic patterns, reduce vehicle
idle time, improve air quality, and make our city more
liveable.
Now at the risk of sounding biased, I think Pittsburgh is
in many ways a perfect test bed for the city of the future. And
as these technologies develop what the city is doing is
creating a modular infrastructure that will allow for the rapid
deployment of new technologies and capabilities. I know last
year was the first round of the Smart City Challenge at the
Federal level, but we have been doing this stuff in Pittsburgh
for a long time and we are going to continue to do it in
Pittsburgh, but we need to continue Federal support. And I want
to thank all my colleagues here today for demonstrating the
importance of this work at the Federal level and I want to
thank all the panelists for your testimony today. And Mr.
Lujan, thank you for yielding me this time and I will yield
back.
Mr. Lujan. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields back
and the Chair now recognizes the chairman of the full
committee, the gentleman from Oregon, 5 minutes. Thank you.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to welcome
our witnesses. We appreciate your testimony and how our local
communities are leading in innovation and great ideas in every
sector, because I believe they are laboratories for American
innovation and new ideas.
As we will hear today, many communities across our country
have adopted technology to improve their citizens' quality of
life, but counties, cities, towns, and parishes all face the
same question when they evaluate new technology and projects.
Many communities are still working to understand how to adopt
and when to adopt technology that will improve efficiency,
increase accountability, accessibility, and streamline everyday
tasks for their citizens.
Several organizations, including the Department of
Transportation, have worked to discover what projects local
governments were interested in pursuing and hear from residents
about the projects they think would be most advantageous in
pursuing. In total, 78 cities have submitted applications for
DOT's Smart City Challenge, and today I look forward to hearing
from some of the finalists about your proposals and I
appreciate your testimony, particularly how you have engaged
with people in your communities to gather ideas or encourage
adoption of them.
The innovation agenda for this subcommittee includes
promoting many technologies that have natural applications for
local governments, but we must acknowledge the challenges.
These ideas may face difficulties with both funding and
adoption. There are also important data sharing, cybersecurity,
and privacy issues that need to be addressed when government
entities are engaging with private companies to provide
transportation, energy, or other community services, so my hope
is we can explore many of these issues during today's hearing
and into the future.
Today we have a chance to hear from several cities and
other experts who are on the front lines of finding the value
proposition for deploying smart community technology, and
despite my colleague's comments about Pittsburgh which is a
wonderful city, it ain't got nothing on Portland.
I would especially like to thank Mr. Chisek from my home
State of Oregon and the from the City of Portland. He is here
to talk about projects that Portland is working on, as the City
of Portland has been a national leader on these issues for a
long time. So I want to thank you for making the trek back
here, and we appreciate all your innovation.
It is really a fun part of this job, I think, for all of us
is to hear what is going on on the ground and how we can help
facilitate it and learn from it and take the innovation from
our local laboratories, maybe even apply it to the Federal
Government. So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the
balance of my time and I thank you for your leadership on these
issues.
[The statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Local communities are the laboratories of American ideas
and innovation. As we will hear today, many communities across
our country have adopted technology to improve their citizens'
quality of life. But counties, cities, towns, and parishes all
face the same questions when they evaluate new technology and
projects. Many communities are still working to understand how
to adopt, and when to adopt, technology that will improve
efficiency, increase accessibility, and streamline everyday
tasks for their citizens.
Several organizations, including the Department of
Transportation, have worked to discover what projects local
governments were interested in pursuing and hear from residents
about the projects that they think would be most advantageous
in pursuing. In total, seventy-eight cities submitted
applications for DOT's Smart City Challenge, and today I look
forward to hearing from some of the finalists about their
proposals. Particularly how they have engaged with folks in
their communities to gather ideas or encourage adoption.
The innovation agenda for this subcommittee includes
promoting many technologies that have natural applications for
local governments, but we must acknowledge the challenges.
These ideas may face difficulties with both funding and
adoption. There are also important data sharing, cybersecurity,
and privacy issues that need to be addressed when government
entities are engaging with private companies to provide
transportation, energy, or other community services. My hope is
that we can explore many of these issues during today's hearing
and into the future.
Today, we have the chance to hear from several cities and
other experts who are on the front lines of finding the value
proposition for deploying smart community technology. I would
especially like to thank Mr. Chisek from my home State of
Oregon for being here to talk about the projects that Portland
is working on, as the City of Portland has been a national
leader on these issues. Thank you all for being here.

Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back. And at this time, the Chair would recognize the gentleman
from Vermont, who is claiming the ranking member's time.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PETER WELCH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF VERMONT

Mr. Welch. I thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, as you
know, the challenges facing rural America are acute. There is a
significant population shift into urban areas. Rural America
has enormous challenges. You and I have started a rural caucus
and it is because we believe that there has to be a solid
future in rural America. That can't happen unless we have solid
internet. We have to have the same speed, we have to have the
same access and the same quality in rural America as in urban
America and we can't turn our back.
And folks who are here today, including Kurt Gruendling--
thank you for coming--from Waitsfield Telecom, are doing the
hard practical work to make certain that rural America has the
resources they need, the infrastructure they need in order to
be viable. So I am delighted that we are having this hearing
and that Mr. Gruendling from Waitsfield Telecom is here.
You know, he in addition to being vice president of
business developing and marketing, he does all kinds of things
in the community. You understand that if you are in rural
America you have a job and you have another job and then you
have the community service and you have more community service,
and that is what you do in addition to raising his twins who
are 15 years old. But Waitsfield Telecom is three generations
of ownership in the same family; it has been around for 113
years. They serve Mad River in the Champlain Valley areas and
it is really crucial to our schools, to our businesses there;
it is like 28,000 people.
But how do you deploy and provide service in small rural
areas that have mountainous regions and technical challenges?
The big carriers don't want to do it because they can't make as
much money as they want, but I also think they don't do it
because they aren't as smart as the small carriers like
Waitsfield Telecom that figure out practical solutions to real
problems where they have an ongoing commitment to the people in
that community.
So this hearing is very important. Our work on the rural
caucus and in this committee is incredibly important. Our
chairman of the full committee has a pretty broad rural
district, so my hope is that this committee more than any other
committee in this Congress is going to stand up for rural
America. Thank you.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields back,
and that concludes our member opening statements. The Chair
would like to remind members that pursuant to committee rules,
all members' opening statements will be made part of the
record.
We want to thank all the witnesses again for being with us
today and taking the time to testify before the subcommittee.
Today's witnesses will have the opportunity to give opening
statements followed by a round of questions from the members.
Our witness panel for today's hearing will include Jennifer
Gallagher, director of Public Service for the City of Columbus,
Ohio; Kyle Chisek, director of Bureau Relations in the office
of Mayor Ted Wheeler of the City of Portland, Oregon; Ms.
Brenna Berman, commissioner and chief information officer at
the Chicago Department of Innovation and Technology; Mr. Kurt
Gruendling, vice president of Marketing and Business
Development at Waitsfield and Champlain Valley Telecom; Dr.
Jennifer Clark, director of Center for Urban Innovation and
associate professor of public policy at Georgia Institute of
Technology; and maybe I should just go with Paz too--and Mr.
Alexander Pazuchanics, the policy advisor at the office of the
mayor for the City of Pittsburgh.
We appreciate you all being here today and we look forward
to the panel and the discussion today, and with Ms. Gallagher
you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement. Thanks very much.

STATEMENTS OF JENNIFER GALLAGHER, DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICE,
CITY OF COLUMBUS, OHIO; KYLE CHISEK, DIRECTOR OF BUREAU
RELATIONS, OFFICE OF MAYOR TED WHEELER, CITY OF PORTLAND,
OREGON; BRENNA BERMAN, COMMISSIONER AND CHIEF INFORMATION
OFFICER, CHICAGO DEPARTMENT OF INNOVATION AND TECHNOLOGY; KURT
GRUENDLING, VICE PRESIDENT OF MARKETING AND BUSINESS
DEVELOPMENT, WAITSFIELD AND CHAMPLAIN VALLEY TELECOM; JENNIFER
CLARK, DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR URBAN INNOVATION, AND ASSOCIATE
PROFESSOR OF PUBLIC POLICY, GEORGIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY;
AND ALEXANDER PAZUCHANICS, POLICY COORDINATOR, OFFICE OF THE
MAYOR, CITY OF PITTSBURGH, PENNSYLVANIA

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER GALLAGHER

Ms. Gallagher. Well, good morning. Again my name is
Jennifer Gallagher and I am the director of the Department of
Public Service for the City of Columbus, Ohio.
I would like to start my testimony today by thanking
Chairman Latta, Vice Chairman Harper, Ranking Member Schakowsky
who is unable to be with us, Chairman Walden, and Congressman
Lujan, and all members of the subcommittee for providing me the
opportunity to represent my city and the work we are doing on
behalf of Smart Columbus, which is the term coined by our
community upon winning the Smart City Challenge. For full
details of our Smart Columbus Demonstration Project, please
refer to the written testimony that was submitted to your
committee.
I appreciate the subcommittee's looking ahead of the curve
of disruptive technologies, and I am delighted to have the
opportunity to talk about what my community is doing with the
collaborative support of our local governments, our research
institutions, and our private sector. This hearing is hopefully
part of many activities that will help disseminate what works
and what doesn't work as communities address these same
challenges.
Keep the spotlight on Columbus. We want to make sure that
lessons learned in Columbus can empower cost effective,
technology enabled solutions across the country, and hopefully
inform public policy decisions going into the next decade.
Mayor Ginther's vision for Columbus is shared prosperity for
all residents. He is working to make the City of Columbus
America's Opportunity City. In the mayor's vision, Columbus
will be the place where you are more likely to move to the
middle class and beyond than anywhere else in the Nation.
We believe access to transportation is a key component of
turning this vision into reality. Our application for the U.S.
Department of Transportation's Smart City Challenge focused not
on how to move people from point A to point B, but how to move
people to ladders of opportunity. We believe our focus on
opportunity was our key to success in light of rigorous
competition from 77 other great American cities.
This Federal grant has changed our city. Cities in the
competition, including some represented on the panel,
challenged themselves to push for innovation and sustainable
solutions in transportation and energy sectors. Throughout the
process, the competing cities learned from one another and we
continue to do that today.
I am encouraged that the Congress and the President have
been talking about infrastructure. For urban areas, the key to
continued growth in the future isn't just about building new
highways or adding more lanes to the highways we have, we want
to make sure that the discussion provides flexibility and
options for disruptive technologies in the cities that want to
move in that direction.
Today, Columbus has about 850,000 people. Some estimates
have our region growing to three million people by 2050. With
this growth we have to be smart in order to be sustainable,
which is why what we are doing in Columbus is so important to
the future of mobility. What we learn and put into action over
the next few years won't just change transportation in
Columbus, it will be adaptable and scalable to cities around
the country and around the world.
We have learned that technology, indeed disruptive
technology, is an enabler, but not an end-all for us to
accomplish our goals. As this demonstration project comes to
fruition, we look forward to reporting to you and your
colleagues on lessons learned and our suggestions for best
practices and not best practices moving forward. As your
committee considers the development of new standards as these
technologies emerge, the City of Columbus looks forward to
providing you information on our experience and best practices
to better inform you on your decision making process.
Mr. Chairman and other members of the subcommittee, thank
you for your time this morning. I am happy to answer any
questions now and in the future.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gallagher follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Gallagher. And we do have a video that we showed during
our presentation for the Smart City Challenge, if I may show
that now.
[Video shown.]
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much. And the Chair now
recognizes for 5 minutes Mr. Chisek for your opening statement.
Thank you very much.

STATEMENT OF KYLE CHISEK

Mr. Chisek. Thank you. Good morning. My name is Kyle
Chisek, and I serve as the director of Bureau Relations in the
office of Mayor Ted Wheeler. Previous to my role with Mayor
Wheeler, I was the project manager for the City of Portland on
the Smart City Challenge grant application to the U.S. DOT. The
City of Portland appreciates the opportunity to provide
feedback to the House Committee on Energy and Commerce as a
part of the Smart Communities Disrupter Series.
Portland has been a national leader in Smart City policies
specifically as they relate to utilizing innovative technology,
improving public health, and supporting energy efficiency. We
support Congress' efforts to fund Smart City infrastructure
investment and to better understand the challenges and
opportunity facing our communities today.
Infrastructure is more than just roads and bridges, and it
includes technology to help make the transportation system
function better. New technology, big data, innovative
partnerships, they all have the ability to change our
communities for the better, and in Portland these changes are
already happening. Our government and agency partners, our
Metro regional government, Multnomah County, the Oregon
Department of Transportation, our Port of Portland, and TriMet
are all crucial to delivering an innovative transportation
system that allows citizens to access information and services
quickly and easily.
Whether it is the launch of America's first modern
streetcar system or our first statewide road user charge,
OreGo, or even our cutting edge academic research on Smart City
policy, Oregon is trying to lead the way. Portland State
University hosts the National Institute for Transportation and
Communities. It is one of five U.S. DOT national university
transportation centers and it links the study of transit and
transportation, urban planning, housing, and computer science
together.
PSU's Business Accelerator has spawned the Smart City
startups like Globe Sherpa which is now called Moovel. PSU is
also working to design and implement an open data cloud,
building on a history of open data and development of open data
standards in the Portland region. Portland was one of the first
cities to adopt an open data resolution that created an open
data portal, CivicApps, back in 2009.
Portland's regional public transit agency, TriMet, has
partnered with Google in 2005 to develop a standard for how
real time transit schedule information is structured. This
standard, the General Transit Feed Specifications, is now used
by transit agencies around the world allowing software
developers to build transit apps that work consistently across
jurisdictional boundaries.
In 2016, TriMet was also awarded the Mobility on Demand
Sandbox grant from the Federal Transit Administration. This
grant will allow Portland to build on the success of its Hop
Fastpass ticketing system to incorporate multimodal and shared
use mobility options into its trip planning. So basically this
is the goal of allowing Americans to plan, book, and pay for
car sharing, bike sharing, public transit, and all from one
single application. In fact, it was a common theme through all
of the final cities on the Smart City Challenge to be able to
do this, so we are very happy to be moving forward on that.
Smart cities must also be safe cities, so Portland is
committed to safety through its Vision Zero policy. This policy
has been adopted by other American cities and States that no
loss of life is acceptable on public streets and that
government has an affirmative obligation to eliminate traffic
related fatalities and serious injuries. So we are very
committed to using Smart City technology to achieve this goal,
whether it is deploying speed cameras, gaining data at
intersections so the city can address safety issues before
crashes occur, or ensuring autonomous or automated vehicles
increase safety rather than pose a hazard to our citizens.
There is huge benefits for safety with autonomous vehicles.
Ensuring access to opportunity and allowing our transportation
network to enhance social mobility is also a key.
Transportation is a key to employment and that was one of the
focuses in our Smart City Challenge grant application.
Lastly, public-private partnerships provide cities with the
alternative and innovative project delivery options. So it is
not a replacement for Federal funds, but it is something that
can help cities be able to deliver projects better, faster, and
quicker. These partners can help fund new infrastructure, and
my current boss, Mayor Wheeler, when he was State treasurer,
helped create the West Coast Infrastructure Exchange to
facilitate these partnerships. He tried to pioneer them and we
have a history of doing so.
In conclusion, with increased Federal investment related to
Smart City initiatives, the Federal Government will realize
significant returns on its investments in the form of energy
efficiency gain and leveraging land use patterns to create
vibrant cities and strong economic growth. In addition, by
testing these in cities, rural communities can benefit from our
lessons learned and our mistakes made. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Chisek follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Thank you for your testimony today. And Ms.
Berman, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your opening
statement. Thank you very much for being here.

STATEMENT OF BRENNA BERMAN

Ms. Berman. Thank you, Chairman Latta, Ranking Member
Schakowsky who could not be with us here today, and members of
the committee, for inviting me to speak today about smart
cities. My name is Brenna Berman and I serve as the
commissioner for Chicago's Department of Innovation and
Technology and CIO for the City.
Chicago, as you know, is the third largest city in the
country, a global city with world class architecture,
universities, and cultural institutions. As one of the most
dynamic cities in the world, we seek to equip our communities
with leading edge technology that engages, informs, and
empowers. Mayor Emanuel's vision for achieving this is built on
a commitment to modern infrastructure, smart communities, and
technological innovation.
In Chicago we have applied Smart City tools like open data,
predictive analytics, and sensor technology to public health,
public safety, and improving our environment, among other
public challenges. These tools have helped us to become more
responsive to our community, faster and more efficient in our
service delivery, and smarter about our investments and
policies. Step one for us in becoming a Smart City was
examining and changing the way that we collect, share, and use
data.
In 2011, Mayor Emanuel launched the city's first-ever open
data portal, providing hundreds of city datasets to the public
for the first time ranging from business licenses to conditions
of our beaches to the largest crime dataset available in the
world. One million people visit the data portal annually. These
students, journalists, professors, and programmers use the more
than 600 datasets available to increase their understanding of
the city and produce apps that are useful for others.
We also took a closer look at how we in the city could
better use the data we collect to drive decisions or predict
issues. We began applying predictive analytics to help the city
run more efficiently and effectively. For example, we have been
able to devise algorithms to help our Public Health Department
forecast food inspection violations 7 days sooner than without
the use of data which helps them address threats to public
health more quickly.
We have applied predictive analytics to things like rodent
baiting, E. coli levels in Lake Michigan, and West Nile virus
across the city, just to name a few. But now, data is moving
outside of the IT department to become embedded into the
physical infrastructure of the city, helping to function in
unprecedented new levels of efficiency and effectiveness. This
is what everyone means when they talk about the internet of
things, new data being collected automatically through sensors
telling us what might come next, truly becoming a Smart City,
and that for us requires partners.
Chicago is home to some of the leading universities and
research institutions in the country, as well as Fortune 500
companies and innovative startups. In 2015, UI Labs, a
consortium of Chicago research institutions and corporations,
launched a Smart City accelerator called City Digital to
harness the collective energies of more than 300 organizations
to apply cutting edge technology and integrated data solutions
to urban infrastructure challenges in Chicago.
With our City Digital partners we can tackle bigger
problems like storm management and flooding. While data can
tell us what areas in the city are likely to flood, with our
partners and new technology we can actually do something about
it. For example, recently we combined green infrastructure
solutions such as water-retaining plants with sensors and a
secure network to actually collect data about their
effectiveness and apply a dashboard for the Water Department to
manage these solutions. That allows the city to easily see the
impact of the solution and make better investment decisions in
the future.
Chicago is also committed to efforts that merge our built
environment with our digital environment. Right now we are
doing this through two projects: the largest Smart Lighting
Project so far in the country, and the Array of Things. The
Smart Lighting Project will install new LED lights across the
city. Not only are these lights more energy efficient, but they
will communicate with each other and city systems.
When a streetlight goes out we won't have to rely on a
neighbor reporting it, the streetlight itself will alert
relevant city departments. We know that simple streetlight
outages are associated with small spikes in crime. Being able
to respond quickly addresses the need to be able to fix the
light and improves public safety.
With funding from the National Science Foundation we are
working with the University of Chicago and Argonne National
Laboratory on the Array of Things, a first of a kind urban
sensing project that consists of a network of interactive,
modular sensor boxes installed around the city essentially
serving as a fitness tracker to collect real time data on
Chicago's environment, infrastructure, and activity for
research and public use.
The data generated by the Array of Things will help
anticipate floods, traffic safety incidents, and improve air
quality. With its data being made open to the public, the
initiative supports researchers, policy makers, developers, and
residents alike to work together and take specific actions that
will make Chicago healthier and more liveable. These
initiatives from those at City Digital to the Array of Things,
all fall under Chicago's bold and comprehensive vision for
being a Smart City. That vision is guided by informed, data-
driven decision making, and a collaborative, inclusive process
for fostering and promoting innovation.
Indeed, while technology is evolving far more quickly than
ever before, the principles of efficiency, sustainability, and
a better quality of life for all of our residents still ring
true. The city is committed to collaborative urban innovation
and to share its insights with the world so that we may all
grow together in this process. Thank you very much.
Mr. Latta. And again, thank you very much for your
testimony today. And the committee now recognizes Mr.
Gruendling for 5 minutes. Good morning.

STATEMENT OF KURT GRUENDLING

Mr. Gruendling. Good morning, Chairman Latta, Ranking
Member Schakowsky, Congressman Welch, and members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on
Smart Communities. I am here on behalf of Waitsfield and
Champlain Valley Telecom and NTCA, the rural broadband
association which represents about 850 small, rural telecom
providers in the U.S.
As many of the subcommittee members are aware because small
telcos serve your districts, we provide broadband and other
advanced services to the most rural areas of our country.
Broadband helps solve the problem of distance by opening up new
education and job opportunities for rural Americans, allowing
them to telecommute remotely to companies in urban areas while
helping rural businesses tap into global markets, enabling
countless possibilities for commerce.
Broadband connects rural veterans and others with
healthcare specialists and helps farmers and ranchers use the
internet to analyze livestock and crop data. It also provides a
convenient means of maintaining strong social connections with
friends and relatives, no matter how far away they may be. And
when people want to escape the city for a change of scenery and
some R&R, broadband is the driver of the tourism economy
helping to connect to the ski resorts of rural Vermont and
countless other tourist destinations in your home areas.
While Vermont might be best known for its picturesque
landscape, world class skiing, and quaint inns, look deeper and
you will find a vibrant high-tech business community served by
a state-of-the-art telecommunications network that continue to
evolve. In our service territory, all schools, many of the
larger businesses, and some residential customers are now
served by fiber-to-the-home technology offering speeds up to 1
gigabit.
Vitality of any community is dependent on its access to
robust economic opportunities, first-rate health care,
education, and public safety services. Rural communities in
particular face unique challenges to accessing these types of
benefits. Smart Rural Community is an initiative of NTCA and
for most of the development and deployment of broadband-enabled
applications that the community can leverage to improve these
vital services.
Smart Rural Community recognizes that broadband access is
foundational to community success, but it is just one part of
the equation. These communities understand the importance of
embracing and relying upon dedicated local leaders and from
many fields and industries who work collaboratively to develop
broadband-enabled solutions to create and improve opportunities
in rural America.
Since 2013, 44 NTCA members have been recognized with the
Smart Rural Community Showcase Award for demonstrating
excellence in collaborating with other local leaders to improve
broadband-enabled services. My company earned this award in
2014 for working with government and business leaders in the
Mad River Valley.
After Hurricane Irene hit Vermont hard in September of
2012, the State sought to relocate more than a hundred
employees that worked in the flooded State office complex in
Waterbury, Vermont, to a vacant space in the Mad River Valley
Business Park. Our company worked closely with State and local
economic development officials to quickly wire the building
with fiber optics and deploy a state-of-the-art phone system to
meet their needs so they could quickly relocate to their new
office.
In 2015, our company also secured a Smart Rural Community
Collaboration Challenge Grant which matched community funding
to provide free Wi-Fi coverage to over a hundred local
businesses in tourist areas.
There are many great success stories from the Smart Rural
Community initiative. NTCA companies have deployed connected
health cards in public schools whose students are challenged by
persistent poverty. They have worked with the U.S. border
control officials to support critical security functions along
our Nation's southern border, and they have enabled local
firefighters to view reported fires and locate nearby hydrants
before firefighting teams arrive.
To not have access to high-speed internet today should be
unimaginable, yet millions of rural Americans have limited or
even no access to robust broadband. Smart Rural Community
depends upon a mix of private entrepreneurship, public and
private capital, and universal service programs. These
resources enable not only network deployment, but also the
ability to ensure that the services provided over those
networks remain robust and affordable and can be upgraded over
time.
We have made great progress in deploying broadband, but we
still have many locations to reach and upgrade and sustaining
such progress is a separate challenge. Recent reforms to the
Universal Service High Cost Fund have unfortunately resulted in
a budget shortfall that will result in fewer locations being
reached, comparatively slower speeds being delivered to
locations that are being reached, and higher rural consumer
broadband rates.
This budget shortfall hurts small businesses like ours that
still need to upgrade portions of our network, and it
undermines the ability of those companies to deliver and keep
delivering on the promise of broadband that create smart rural
communities.
In conclusion, rural telcos have made great progress and
are eager to continue deploying infrastructure and delivering
services that rural America and, frankly, all of America needs
to participate in the global economy. The Smart Rural Community
initiative highlights what is possible when consumers,
businesses, and other organizations work together to make that
a reality. Thank you for the opportunity to testify and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gruendling follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. And thank you very much for your testimony this
morning. And the Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes for your
statement, Dr. Clark. Thanks for being here.

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER CLARK

Dr. Clark. Good morning and thank you. My name is Jennifer
Clark. I am an associate professor of Public Policy at the
Georgia Institute of Technology and the director of Georgia
Tech's Center for Urban Innovation. I would like to begin by
thanking Chairman Latta, and also thanking the members of the
subcommittee for making this opportunity available to us to
testify to you today.
Smart communities are critical to the future economic
competitiveness of the U.S. Over 90 percent of the country's
GDP is generated in metropolitan economies that is cities and
their suburbs. Smart communities are not just an opportunity to
increase economic growth and opportunity, but they present a
challenge as well: Does the U.S. invest in intelligent
infrastructure to build the 21st century economy and plan for
what is beyond? Or does the U.S. miss the moment when targeted
investments and integrating information and communications
technologies into infrastructure systems could form the
foundation of an industry 4.0 level cyber-physical system?
The economic opportunity presented by smart communities is
threefold. First, the data produced by intelligent
infrastructure promises to increase the reliability of local
government services and performance of infrastructure systems.
The data paves the way for building interoperable and cross-
platform systems that build efficiencies and ultimately allow
localities to provide higher quality services at a lower cost.
The result is the opportunity to expand services and maintain
more reliable and efficient systems ranging from waste
management to transportation.
The second opportunity is that smart communities' data
systems can enhance and inform the strategic planning
capacities of local communities, large and small, with real
world data on how infrastructure systems are used by citizens
and businesses and how that infrastructure is performing in
real time. Further, the sharing of data amongst smart
communities partners and participants helps to build networks
for diffusing policy strategies and technology models.
These strategic partnerships form the foundation for the
third economic opportunity that flows from smart communities:
entrepreneurship and market leadership. The data generated by
and for smart communities systems and the systems that produce
that data form the foundation of new enterprises and new
products and services and as a consequence function as
platforms for further economic development.
The making of smart communities follows a model of
technology diffusion familiar in the private sector context.
This, however, is technology diffusion in the public sector
context where there is a necessary focus on the broad
provisioning of reliable and efficient services and a
consideration for building access to data for enterprise
development.
In the U.S., the national innovation system largely relies
on publicly funded basic research and development conducted
within the network of world class research universities and
national labs throughout the country. For decades, these
universities and national labs have served as the research and
development backbone of U.S. industry as well as of national
defense.
Research universities have extensive experience partnering
with industry and government on technology diffusion projects.
Research universities are built to test new technologies,
evaluate alternatives, assess investments, evaluate economic
impacts, measure distributional consequences, and certify
processes, materials, products, and standards. As with any new
enabling technology, research universities can play a role as a
neutral third party with specialized technical expertise.
Universities also are embedded in local communities and
often have long term working relationships with local and State
governments. Research universities also have vested interests
in upgrading and maintenance of intelligent infrastructure in
the cities and communities in which they are located. World
class industry partners, star scientists, and the next
generation of entrepreneurs all look for intelligent
infrastructure to support their research and commercial
enterprises. The absence of this infrastructure makes
universities less globally competitive for talent and for
capital, and as stated before such absences make local
communities less globally competitive as well.
There is a significant amount of research required to move
smart communities' technologies from design to development to
deployment. There is a growing need for education and training.
In research universities like Georgia Tech, we are developing
new curriculum to integrate teaching and learning about
innovation and communities, technology and cities and regions.
We are also investing in research centers like the Center
for Urban Innovation and the Institute for People and
Technology that take an interdisciplinary approach to moving
innovations in engineering, sciences, and computing into a
complex real world context of communities, entrepreneurs, and
industries. How to design and deploy intelligent infrastructure
to efficiently and effectively support smart communities is one
of the central questions going forward for the country as a
whole and for local communities in specific.
Building the replicable models and dissemination networks
for the broad and sustained implementation of information and
communication technologies into the next generation of national
infrastructure is the opportunity and the challenge before us.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Clark follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Dr. Clark, thank you very much for your
testimony this morning, and Mr. Pazuchanics, you are recognized
for 5 minutes. Thanks for being here.

STATEMENT OF ALEXANDER PAZUCHANICS

Mr. Pazuchanics. Thank you, Chairman Latta, acting Ranking
Member Lujan, all members of the House Energy and Commerce
Subcommittee on Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection. On
behalf of Mayor William Peduto and the City of Pittsburgh, I
want to start by thanking you for the opportunity to speak with
you today about Pittsburgh's emergence as a smart community. It
is a pleasure to be here.
The City of Pittsburgh is a resilient city. Investments
that were made by philanthropists and industrialists decades
ago have helped to position the city to be on the leading edge
of revolutions in health care, technology, and advanced
manufacturing. A high quality of life and low cost of living
attracts new residents from across the country and around the
world. For the first time in a long time, we are managing
growth instead of managing decline. Given this new opportunity,
the City of Pittsburgh is attempting to reshape the way that
residents interact with our local government.
An initial challenge of our Smart City work has been
defining what it means to Pittsburgh. During the U.S. DOT Smart
City Challenge, the definition was provided to us through the
twelve Beyond Traffic vision elements including urban
automation, connected vehicles, and sensor-based
infrastructure. While these applications are vital to the city
of the future, they are not goals in and of themselves.
The city has been building a three-part framework for smart
cities, collaboratively using technology to measurable improve
the quality of life of our residents and visitors, building a
data utility for government, industry, and citizens to use, and
preparing our systems and our residents for future disruption.
Our Smart City initiatives start with a simple question:
what is the challenge we are trying to solve? Instead of
letting the latest and greatest technology drive our decisions,
we are oriented around real world problem solving. For example,
the city has partnered on a number of projects with the
Traffic21, Metro21, and newly created Mobility21 institutes at
Carnegie Mellon University to use academic research to solve
real issues in traffic management, infrastructure preservation,
and transportation safety.
An example of a successful implementation of this method
can be seen in the city's SURTRAC development. SURTRAC was
designed by robotics researchers at Carnegie Mellon to solve
system inefficiencies that occur as a result of fixed traffic
signal timing. By detecting the volume of traffic at an
intersection and providing that information to other signals in
the network, the adaptive signals are able to provide more
efficient light timings, reduce travel times and stops for
vehicles. Future applications include additional capabilities
to minimize not just vehicular delay, but also pedestrian wait
times and using vehicle-to-infrastructure communications to
optimize the flow of heavily occupied mass transit vehicles.
The second pillar of the Smart City strategy is a data
infrastructure that allows for the city to operate more
efficiently and to allow the public and private sectors to
build on top of our resources. In much the same way that our
electric grid, water systems, and roadways and bridges allowed
for Pittsburgh's success in the 20th century, our Data Utility
will advance Pittsburgh into the 21st.
We have been laying the technical groundwork on this work
for several years. The city, county and University of
Pittsburgh are partners in the Western Pennsylvania Regional
Data Center, a regional effort to make public non-sensitive
municipal data. For Pittsburgh, this collaborative structure
has been a tremendous success and has brought a number of
outside partners to the table to publish their own datasets.
Over 150 datasets provided by local government, public
agencies, university partners, and nonprofit organizations help
citizens engage with the communities they call home. Trainings,
hackathons, and partnerships with local libraries are producing
a vibrant ecosystem of civic tech that engages with us,
creating a feedback loop.
The final pillar of Pittsburgh's Smart City strategy is the
need to build a policy and planning framework around the
considerable disruption technology is going to continue to play
in the way that we deliver services to residents. Many of the
innovations in the Smart City space are in the private sector.
Some of them, such as autonomous vehicles and transportation
network companies, rely on access to public right of way for
their business models to work, and an appropriate and even-
handed framework that balances safety with innovation is
required for the good of our residents.
Pittsburgh's strong working relationship with the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and our recent
designation as an Autonomous Vehicle Proving Ground will allow
us to continue to represent these concerns of our residents on
the subject.
The potential for autonomous, connected, electric, and
shared vehicles pose significant uncertainty for cities. For
example, the City of Pittsburgh receives nearly 15 percent of
its general fund revenue from parking tax, a source that could
be reduced as a result of autonomous vehicles. Likewise,
changes in parking demand have significant effects on the
financing of public garages and parking minimums for
development. And perhaps most importantly, technological
development will create disruptions in employment for the
transportation and logistics industry, requiring thought on the
future of work and the pathways to advance manufacturing,
cybersecurity, and data science jobs of the future.
The City of Pittsburgh is approaching our Smart City
deployments by keeping these three concepts in mind. We are
trying to harness the promise of new technology to benefit our
residents first. We believe these initiatives and others that
will come can improve the quality of life of residents by
improving safety, reliability, efficiency, and resiliency of
our networks. Slowly but surely, we are making the investments
and finding the partnerships to advance those goals. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pazuchanics follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Thank you very much for your testimony, and
thank you again, all of our witnesses, for the testimony today.
And that will conclude the testimony from our witnesses, and we
will go into questions from the committee. And I will start off
with my questions this morning and this is actually for all of
the panel and if you could all maybe give a brief answer.
Safety is regularly mentioned as a benefit of improving
local transportation, infrastructure, energy delivery, and
health care including emergency services. What improvements in
safety have your communities experienced or are trying to
achieve with your smart communities initiatives?
And Ms. Gallagher, if we could start with Columbus.
Ms. Gallagher. Chairman Latta, thank you for the question.
I think on the side of safety for us, we all, most of us here
know that 37,000 deaths occur on our Nation's freeways every
year, so if you do the quick math that is over a hundred a day.
That is unacceptable, and anything we can do to fix that is
obviously a positive.
So one of those things are just making cars safer in taking
the human element out of it. The second is giving people other
options and opportunities to perhaps not have to drive that car
themselves. So with our Smart Columbus program, a few of the
things that we are doing on the quick end is putting Mobileye
on all of the buses in Columbus, where the Mobileye will scan
as buses are going up and down the streets and check for
pedestrians, bicyclists, other things that maybe you can't see
in a COTA bus, all the way to towards the end our demonstration
period, the autonomous vehicles, and taking that human error
out of the driving experience and all things in between.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Mr. Chisek?
Mr. Chisek. Well, in Portland, one of the things we are
looking at, and I alluded to it in my opening statement, was
focusing on intersections where we know we have problems and
finding out about problems before they result in crashes and
fatalities.
So in east Portland you are about three times as more
likely to die in a fatal crash than anywhere else in the city,
but by focusing on these high crash locations or corridors
where we know we have a lot of crashes, with video
infrastructure, with other sensors to gather data, we can track
near misses and that can tell us ahead of time that oh, there
are a lot of near misses with pedestrians and vehicles or
bicyclists and vehicles at particular locations, and we can
then use our civil engineering groups to create a fix for that
before anybody gets seriously injured or killed since we would
have the data on that. So that is one of the things we are
looking at.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Ms. Berman?
Ms. Berman. So we are actually doing something similar to
Portland because we are part of the Vision Zero project as
well. One of the key roles of the Array of Things is to focus
on intersection safety. There is a lot of data about actual
accidents but there is very little data today about those near
misses. And the Array of Things is calibrated to calculate
those data, or to calculate data around near misses without
actual need of the civil engineers, so it actually creates
those calculations so that we can understand better those near
misses.
We also actually are using safety cameras across the city
to provide safety data and analytics to our police department
to help them better understand what is going on across the city
to create better safety situations as well.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Mr. Gruendling?
Mr. Gruendling. So I come at it from the service provider
side, so you know we have worked obviously with local and State
officials to connect cameras to view road conditions real time.
This is certainly very relevant with the snowstorm that we just
experienced. You know, when I left Burlington I saw that it was
29.9 inches of snow and over 40 in the mountains.
So there is different locations throughout the State that
are set up, including one that we service with fiber optics up
on Route 17 that allows people to check real time to see what
the road conditions are, and you know that they can deploy
resources, snow plows, whatever, using that technology in
addition to having all the snow plows now GPS-enabled to see,
you know, on a map what has been plowed, where additional
resources are needed, et cetera.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Dr. Clark?
Dr. Clark. I can speak to this from the research that we
are doing in collaboration with the City of Atlanta. And one of
the research projects that we have just started has to do with
working with the Safe Routes to School program, which is an
existing program, and working with having young people use
sensors to help crowdsource, get crowdsource with the
information about what the safest route back and forth to
school really is for them and their families. And so we can
actually then take that information and make recommendations
about where improvements to intersections, improvements to
sidewalks can also be made.
We also are doing that with bicycle routes so that we are
crowdsourcing bicycle routes, so users who are actually telling
us, using an app, what the safest routes are, what the more
dangerous routes are, and then that information can be fed back
to the city in order to make specific infrastructure investment
to mitigate those problems.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Mr. Pazuchanics?
Mr. Pazuchanics. One of the new projects that we are quite
excited about is a Smart Belt Coalition of the Departments of
Transportation and Turnpike Commissions of Ohio, Michigan, and
Pennsylvania. And one of the projects associated with that is
to be able to allow for truck platooning among the major
interstate corridors of those three States which promotes not
just efficiency in the freight system, but also safety
delivery, having the vehicles communicate with one another to
maintain and safe and healthy distance while being able to move
at a speed faster than the humans would be able to provide in
and of themselves.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, and my time has
expired. And the Chair recognizes the gentleman from New Mexico
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Two questions for the
panel: what should the Federal Government do to assist in
development to smart communities? And what have been some of
the challenges--maybe three questions. What have been some of
the challenges that you have identified with the Federal
Government? For example, Mr. Chisek, in your testimony you
talked about the challenges of being able to access different
funds because of, you know, telecom energy versus something
else, and the ability to be able to combine those funds to be
able to deploy a project.
And then I would say the final question is what thoughts do
you have with access to existing infrastructure; has that been
a critical component to being able to deploy your assets or
resources from a Smart City perspective, and specifically pole
location on light poles or electrical power lines, existing
buildings or infrastructure that are owned by the city, as we
talked about even the deployment of 5G now which will present
more opportunities with smart cities as well?
Ms. Gallagher?
Ms. Gallagher. Thank you for the questions. As far as roles
for Federal or State Government, from our point of view it
would be helping define those regulations, those policies,
those standards as we move forward into this uncharted
territory, but yet allowing enough flexibility for locals to
use those to be able to solve the problems they are seeing in
their communities.
Second question was risk challenges with the Federal
Government. I think probably the same thing on just trying to
move as quickly as the changes and the technology in the
private side is moving and to try to get that legislation, that
funding in place to try to keep up with those. It is a
challenge at all levels of government.
And then thirdly, as far as infrastructure, and you know we
are having some of those dialogues right now in Ohio with some
of the utility providers, as far as who has what rights and
priorities on and poles and infrastructure and so forth. So
that is going to continue to be a challenge as we move forward
because there is such a need for that infrastructure and those
are conversations that we are going to continue to have, but I
think are very, very important.
Mr. Lujan. Anything to add, Mr. Chisek?
Mr. Chisek. Thank you. So I will address the middle
question first which was some of the challenges with the
Federal Government. I think different agencies have different
wants and needs and so the city definitely would, like I said
when things are more aligned between the different agencies so
we can address it directly rather than in different ways. We
also understand that on some of the procurement side of things
that the rules and regulations are different for different
agencies we are interacting with, so again moving that to that
common alignment and trying to problem solve and be more
innovative on how we move these things forward.
I think as far as challenges and co-location, we are
working with a consortium of private companies and our electric
utility on deploying smart sensor technology on our light
poles. You know, it does get complicated, but we have good
partnerships with these private industries so we are able to
work things out. Our private electric utility owns the poles.
We own the little arm that comes off of the poles, so we have
for a long time have had the ability to work through these
issues with them. We are doing the same thing with them on
electric vehicle charging stations located in our right of way
but owned and maintained by our private electric utility.
Mr. Lujan. And as we go to Ms. Berman, for the other
witnesses I may not be able to get to I will submit that in
writing as well and to get your thoughts in that particular
area. Ms. Berman?
Ms. Berman. I will try to be very brief. Two supportive
roles I think the Federal Government could play, one would be
around coordination between the cities. We are all working on
very similar problems. You saw one example just a minute ago
where we are doing something really similar. The other would be
there is a very strong focus on pilots, which is excellent. The
challenges do change when you go from a successful pilot to
scaling for an entire city and oftentimes the Federal support
whether it be a grant or a challenge falls off from pilot to
full scale, and so it would be very helpful to see the focus on
helping projects go from that pilot to scaling the solution.
Mr. Lujan. Do you think there would be, and that is based
from a scaling perspective, maybe collaborative efforts even
with our national labs?
Ms. Berman. Yes. And that is the goal of the Array of
Things, actually, is we are scaling a solution citywide there
and it is going to multiple cities. So yes, the role of
partnering with the national labs is very helpful, absolutely.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you. And with that Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the vice chairman of the subcommittee, the
gentleman from Mississippi, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks again to
each of you for being here. And you know the technologies and
the things that we are seeing already are just, you know, we
couldn't even have really pictured this 20 years ago or even 10
years ago, and who knows what we are going to see as this is
developed over the next number of years. So I really appreciate
your testimony and your insight into what is going as we want
to make sure that government is not in the way of innovation.
You know, it seems sometimes regulations get a little bit
behind that curve that we want to make sure we give folks the
ability to be innovative and to come up with these things that
are there.
You know, I certainly have an interest in the fact that I
have an adult son with special needs who cannot drive. He
works. He graduated from a special program called the ACCESS
Program at Mississippi State University, one of the first two
students to graduate from there almost 3 years ago. He has done
a lot of stuff. But as we look at self-driving cars and things
like that that could really help those in the disability
community, you see some potential that we haven't seen before
so we are excited about that.
And Dr. Clark, if I could ask you some questions. Of course
our hearing is called, you know, Smart Communities. Do you see
opportunities for smaller and rural communities to leverage
these technologies that other cities on the panel have
discussed, and also how are traditionally underserved
communities, including those that are disabled, able to benefit
from these technologies?
Dr. Clark. Thank you very much for the question because I
do feel like this is something we need to focus on is how to
make that work. Yes, I mean the short answer is yes, I see
those opportunities. I have some concerns about how those
opportunities are going to appear. I think we need to plan for
them.
One of the things that has been happening in the policy
diffusion or the technology diffusion for smart cities rather
than smart communities in recent years is that for larger
cities vendors have been coming to larger cities and they have
been saying we will give you this in kind so we can work out
this technology in your city. You don't have to pay us for it,
we are going to work it out here. Well, the smaller communities
are not going to get that opportunity. They are going to get a
price tag on the technology.
And I think this is one of the real challenges is that what
is going to end up happening is a very uneven distribution of
who has the high-tech technologies built into their
infrastructure system and who doesn't. And so I think it
absolutely is important for smaller and rural communities to be
seen as an important part of this story, not as an add-on
later, and also recognizing the fact that they don't have the
tax base to pay the same prices.
One of the most interesting, and I will try to make this
brief, but one of the most interesting conversations I had
recently was I was making a presentation with my colleague from
the City of Atlanta to the mayors of the region and you know we
have 23 different counties in the Atlanta region, it is a huge
region. And the mayors came up to us afterwards and they said,
so how do we become part of the smart communities partnership,
how do we get access to this technology?
And I thought, I am overwhelmed. I don't know. I don't have
a program to direct you to, I don't have a funding source to
direct you to, all I can tell you is that we know we need to do
this, but I can't give them an answer to when.
Mr. Harper. Talk to me then for a minute about those that
have disabilities, whether they are physical or, you know, we
deal a lot with those with intellectual disabilities, so how do
we incorporate that for them?
Dr. Clark. Well, and I think this has a lot to do with the
question of standards and thinking about digital inclusion
instead of digital divide, right. And so one of the ideas is
thinking about, and we have a number of researchers at my own
institution who are working on trying to develop the
technologies at the beginning so that they are actually someone
who had limited eyesight or limited hearing actually could use
the technology, because we don't build it for just people who
can see in the first instance, instead of again, as I said,
coming to that question later and saying oh, how do we retrofit
this to be?
We have the technologies to actually build these for quite
a broad set of capabilities and opportunities, but we need to
design that on the front end and that takes some consideration
and planning.
Mr. Harper. Sure. Well, thank you. And I would encourage
each of you in your roles to look at how we can do that and
make sure that there is not a catch-up; that it is a bring-
along as we go. And so with that I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back. The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from California
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I want
to thank the witnesses. It has been wonderful hearing about
what has been happening as far as smart cities and all the
innovations that you have utilized. Now very exciting work is
happening throughout all the communities across our country to
harness the power of technology. In my home district of
Sacramento we are also moving forward to embrace these
opportunities. We are positioning ourselves as a test bed for,
for instance, autonomous vehicles, and encouraging the
development of electric vehicle infrastructure.
The City of Sacramento hosts an open data platform which
promotes transparency and invites civic innovators to create
solutions at the local level. Sacramento was selected as one of
the 16 cities to join a partnership with Transportation for
America and Sidewalk Labs to pilot new programs and develop
best practices for Smart City policies and projects.
All this innovation will rely upon connectivity. This will
place new demands not only on our roads and highways, but also
on spectrum and infrastructure that powers wireless
communications. The most important thing we can do is encourage
smart communities is to accelerate the deployment of 5G
networks. Verizon recently announced a pilot project to offer
5G in Sacramento and ten other cities. I am glad that
Sacramento residents will soon see some of the benefits of
super high wireless networks and every American community
deserves access to these world class networks.
I am also looking at things like energy efficiency and air
quality and I think some of you have brought this up. Cities
already consume 75 percent of all energy used worldwide and
urbanization is on the rise. These cities of the future as well
as all smart communities will need to find innovative and
sustainable ways to reduce their energy consumption. Energy
efficient technology made possible by smart communities from
smart grids to connected light bulbs have the potential to
significantly benefit the environment and public health.
Well, all of you who represent cities, what features of
your smart systems have that enable your cities to use energy
more efficiently and sustainably? Ms. Gallagher, start with
you.
Ms. Gallagher. Thank you, Congresswoman. So as part of the
Smart City Challenge award that we received, $10 million of
that came from the Vulcan foundation, and their entire goal is
to reduce carbon emissions. So we are partnering with them on
basically five different fronts. One is a smart grid which we
are very fortunate in Columbus, Ohio, to have the American
Electric Power Company headquartered there, so they are doing
about a half-billion-dollar program for everything from smart
meters up to helping us electrify homes for electric vehicles.
We also, another component of that is fleet, changing our
fleet over to electric vehicles. It is consumer adoption of
electric vehicles. We are partnering with Columbus Power on
many, many ranges for smart grid and we are also looking at
just the charging infrastructure in general. So just very
quickly those are just some of the highlights that we are
hitting for the carbon emissions.
Ms. Matsui. OK, thank you. Mr. Chisek?
Mr. Chisek. Thank you. Through the Smart City Challenge,
Portland was actually fairly far ahead on the electric side of
things. We have been working for quite some time on smart
meters. What we want to do is take it to the next level now and
move more into, say, port operations and how can we gain
efficiency there both with energy usage but also
electrification of some of their infrastructure as well.
Ms. Matsui. OK, thank you. Ms. Berman?
Ms. Berman. So two things in Chicago, the first is our
smart lighting project which will do an LED retrofit for
420,000 streetlights which will be getting underway later this
year, and then we have an active smart buildings program which
for buildings that the city owns introduces building control
systems for all the city owned buildings, and on the policy
side encourages the adoption of similar systems for privately
owned buildings across the city to shrink the energy
consumption for our building stock.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you. And Mr. Pazuchanics? Paz?
Mr. Pazuchanics. Sure. Two projects, we, similar to the
City of Chicago and a number of other cities, are also
embarking on a streetlight conversion project for about 40,000
lights, so a bit smaller but that project we expect to realize
significant energy savings.
The second piece is through system efficiency. As a result
of the adaptive signal network that we are building we are
seeing reductions in air quality emissions because the vehicles
are spending less idle time in those corridors. Given our
topography and the fact that you know everything in Pittsburgh
sort of has to run through a valley in between mountains the
particulate matter tends to concentrate, and so to the degree
that we are able to move vehicles more efficiently and move
mass transit more efficiently, we are seeing significant
improvements in air quality in those corridors.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Thank you very much. It looks like I have
run out of time. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. And now the gentleman from
Indiana is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bucshon. Well, first of all, thank you for being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't know. I was in Shanghai a few
years ago and all of a sudden at about a certain time of night
all the lights went off in the entire city. Has anybody ever
experienced that? I am not promoting that but I guess that is
how they do energy efficiency. I mean, literally it looks like
Vegas and then it is dark. It was the weirdest thing I ever
seen in my life.
I want to focus on kind of some practical things and I do
want to talk about rural broadband, because my district is
primarily rural. And I really consider rural broadband like the
electricity or the telephone of our age and especially in rural
communities, so what things can we do to get broadband to rural
communities? I mean, other than money. I mean, obviously that
is important, but there is probably other things too.
Mr. Gruendling. Thank you for the question. Yes, I agree. I
think rural connectivity is, you know, certainly a critical
conversation we all need to have and certainly is a focus and
you know it ties right in with economic development. I mean,
some of the challenges we have as a local family-owned
telecommunications carrier is really just some of the
uncertainty in the recovery mechanisms you know going forward
in terms of, you know, we are building the fiber optic network
of the future but it takes time and it takes money, and in
Vermont we have a limited construction season, right. We have a
few months that we can actually put infrastructure in the
ground and that is a challenge as well.
But, you know, over the past couple of years at FCC, you
know, we have seen reductions in our Universal Service funding,
our access revenues, all at a time where we need to be stepping
up our infrastructure investment in the fiber optic network of
the future.
Mr. Bucshon. Are there specific regulations that make it
difficult and more costly to do these things?
Mr. Gruendling. Permitting.
Mr. Bucshon. OK, so permitting is, I am assuming it is
slow?
Mr. Gruendling. Absolutely.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes. And who is that primarily from, what
agencies?
Mr. Gruendling. It is a mix of local, State, and Federal
issues.
Mr. Bucshon. OK.
Mr. Gruendling. You know, including rights-of-way issues
and certainly easements you know which can be challenging when
dealing with local----
Mr. Bucshon. Oh yes, I know.
Mr. Gruendling [continuing]. Landowners. Especially, I
mean, with fiber optics too, you know, we are putting more and
more electronics out in the field with splitter cabinets and
what not which require easements and you know it takes time.
Mr. Bucshon. So it is a complicated problem, because I mean
I have schools, you know, I mean, if kids can't get fast
internet, you know, I mean, how can you have kids out in the
rural communities learning when they--I literally have some
people that almost essentially have dial-up. I mean they don't
have access to the internet, so that is a big problem in our
country.
So what I would like to do is if there is any barriers at
the Federal level, you know, we need to try to work on those to
improve that. And I do think at some point, you know, I have
talked to the big carriers also about this and at some point,
you know, or I am hopeful that the private sector can solve
most of these problems, but there may very well be, like I said
it is like the telephone or electricity in my view.
I want to focus on some other practical things. I was
interested in what you said about your streetlights because--I
went to med school in Chicago, by the way, University of
Illinois. My son lives in River North, so I love Chicago.
And one of the most frustrating things of any city, but
Chicago is one of those, is when you are driving, you know, it
is 10 o'clock at night and you see a ray of red lights and
there is nobody coming from the other direction, right. And you
are just sitting there idling and then you pass the one and it
turns red on you again. What is happening in all of your cities
where you can, you know, either pressure sensors or visual
sensors or other ways to interact?
The other one is late at night you are traveling through a
city, and I am just using Chicago because I lived in Chicago,
and you are driving along and you have a green light and all of
a sudden out of the corner of your eye you see someone fly
through the red light and you are like, whoa, because they just
assume there is nobody coming. So that type of interaction I am
interested in too, in technology, infrastructure, vehicle
communication.
And I will let you comment first and then take some
comments from others about what they might be doing.
Mr. Pazuchanics. Sure. So the adaptive signal network that
we have tested about 60 intersections right now in the city and
we have seen between 15 and 20 percent reductions in the wait
times, the number of stops that vehicles are going through
those corridors. You know obviously a lot of that benefit is
realized at points that are not a.m. or p.m. peak, sort of the
off-peak where the signal timing doesn't necessarily make
sense.
The city actually received an ATCMTD award from FHWA last
year to expand that pilot to another about 150 intersections
throughout the city. So I think we are really starting to see
the potential for vehicle to infrastructure communication with
those signals as well, not just----
Mr. Bucshon. Is that computer modeling, or how is that?
Mr. Pazuchanics. It is a combination of sort of computer
modeling and then visualization of the intersection itself, so
sort of blocking out vehicles as sort of blocks within the
system and then the intersections themselves are talking to the
next intersection down the line providing the information. And
as I mentioned, you know, we are hopeful that we can then
provide information about the load of a bus, how far behind
schedule the bus is, factor all of that into whether the bus
gets a green light or a red light.
Mr. Bucshon. I am out of time so the other cities can't
comment, but what I would like to say is there is a lot of
things. It is not just inconvenience, right, and somebody
pointed out idling time in cities and other areas that is
leading to more emissions and other things that goes into that
is a really important issue. So thank you, I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the gentlelady from New York for 5 minutes.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank our
panelists for their testimony here this morning. I want to
switch gears just a bit and really focus in on cybersecurity,
because of course we are in a time when you know just with some
general expertise you could shut down a grid, right. So I would
like to have a sense of have any of your smart community
systems already been subject to hacking or malicious attacks
either attempted or successful?
And I will start with particularly those of you who are
operating in cities, so Ms. Gallagher and Mr. Chisek?
Ms. Gallagher. Thank you. We have not yet, but of course I
think some of the other cities are a little further along than
we are, so I will probably pass to them.
Ms. Clarke. Mr. Chisek? Ms. Berman?
Mr. Chisek. Thank you. We have not as well, but we have
been thinking for quite some time about cybersecurity and those
issues are very important to us.
Ms. Berman. So I would like to give you a more general
answer because I am responsible for cybersecurity for all of
the city systems, not just the connected ones we have talked
about today but all of our systems. And cybersecurity is a
concern across the country, certainly, and there is not enough
funding for everything that cities should be doing in our
current budgets or the small amount of grant money that we may
be able to pull from the sources that we have today to do
everything that we should be doing.
The systems that we have talked about today in Chicago have
not been hacked as yet. You never want to say that out loud. To
say have they been attacked you actually can't answer that in
any definitive way. None of the systems that you have that are
monitoring that because to say have they been attacked that
means you don't know if they have been successful, right.
So to be very clear you actually don't know if they have
been attacked yet, right. You can say that they haven't been
hacked because that means they have been successful. You don't
know if they have been attacked because everything is under
attack all the time. So the City of Chicago and all of our
systems are under attack all the time millions of times a day
and that is a fact, and that is a fact in all cities across the
U.S. every day.
So it should be a focus of the Federal Government to help
cities be safer from a cybersecurity perspective. And so I
appreciate the question because it is a deep concern of mine
and of my peers that are focused on these issues and we take it
very seriously, but the support of the Federal Government would
be greatly appreciated in that area.
Ms. Clarke. Mr. Pazuchanics?
Mr. Pazuchanics. Sure. The City of Pittsburgh has not
experienced an attack at this point, but I will say that a big
part of our success thus far has been partnership with the
University of Pittsburgh, Chancellor Gallagher, himself an
expert in cybersecurity, and a very strong program in
cybersecurity that helps provide sort of a feedback loop for us
and enables us to, you know, test out our systems, make sure
that there is resiliency in those systems, so that city-
university partnership is very critical.
Ms. Clarke. And I am glad that you mentioned that because
part of what I would want to suggest because of the rollout of
what you are all doing is that where you can get some
partnerships going, particularly with the utilities you know
that should be a bond that you build. Because you are
absolutely correct, Ms. Berman, you are currently under attack
right now as we sit here. All you need is for one to penetrate
though for there to be catastrophic consequences.
So I want to encourage to that extent some sort of
partnering and I will certainly be your advocate here at the
Federal level to see what we can do, because as we move into
5G, as we become more expansive in our interconnectedness, you
know, the more vulnerable we are going to become.
Just quickly, as the administrators of your community smart
systems, have you taken the cyber threats into account when
planning for the future and, if so, how have you begun to
prepare for them?
Ms. Gallagher. We absolutely have. We actually as part of
the Smart City Challenge we have put together a working group
that is solely focused on this. We have a chief information
officer that is leading that. We are very fortunate that we
have the Ohio State University on our team.
Another key leader for us is Nationwide Insurance because
of course it is very important to them so they have lent us
quite a few of their employees to help us in this effort. So
you are absolutely right, it is all about partnerships and
leaning on that private side and the university side who has
already been down this road. So we take it absolutely
seriously.
Mr. Chisek. Thank you. The City of Portland also has been
moving forward on this issue. We are creating a chief data
officer position just simply because we are going to have
sensor equipment spread throughout the city that is vulnerable
that is bringing a whole host of data back to our open data
platform.
So thinking through that ahead of time has been critical. I
think our partnerships with private industry have also helped
us quite a bit, because just like we are under attack they are
under attack and the more we can do things together, I think
the more and better results we get.
Ms. Clarke. Ms. Berman, did you want to add anything?
Ms. Berman. Just quickly that like the other cities we plan
for both security and privacy at the beginning of every project
and there is someone assigned, a chief information security
officer, who has that responsibility on every project.
Ms. Clarke. Mr. Pazuchanics?
Mr. Pazuchanics. Yes, agreed that it is significantly
factored into the legal agreements and the structure of our
regional data center with that intent and expected purpose in
mind. Thank you.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you. I appreciate your indulgence, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields back,
and the Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes the gentleman from
Pennsylvania.
Mr. Costello. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Pazuchanics, I
had the opportunity to visit CMU within the past year and learn
about the autonomous vehicle testing and learned a great deal
about how the technology and other types of technology have
really contributed to what it means to have a smart community
and how it really can create a lot more in the way of
efficiency and improvement within not just a public works
department but code enforcement and law enforcement, right on
down the line.
And I applaud you and everyone in Pittsburgh. It is
Congressman Doyle and the other members of Congress from the
Pittsburgh area, but in particular those in the city
administration who really deserve to be commended. And I would
like to ask a couple of questions related to that.
The data utility system that you have, Deloitte report
speaking about the impact of wireless connectivity to our
communities estimates that adopting a smart grid would create
$1.8 trillion in added revenue to the economy, saving the
average consumer hundreds of dollars of year in energy costs.
What are the biggest barriers that currently exist to deploying
a smart energy grid and related to that how does the data
utility help advance energy services to provide better
resources for the City of Pittsburgh?
Mr. Pazuchanics. Sure. I think one of the biggest
challenges to a coordinated smart grid and a smart utility
management system is the lack of coordination or cooperation
among various entities sort of providing very similar
services--natural gas companies, the electric company, the
water systems--to the degree that we are able to share
resources and solve multiple problems at the same time using
similar infrastructure we are going to all be better off and
see an economy of scale. So I think that coordination is key
across those agencies.
I think, you know, in Pittsburgh we are very fortunate to
have Duquesne Light which is a very sophisticated and
innovative electric utility that takes that seriously and is
moving toward IPv6 infrastructure. But I do think that there is
still, you know, a challenge with playing catch-up with some of
the other utilities and we could see savings if they were all
working together.
Mr. Costello. And is that going to require affirmative
steps on the procurement end moving forward?
Mr. Pazuchanics. Yes. I think that a major hangup with a
number of Smart City initiatives tends to be, or the way that
our procurement system is structured now it tends to be sort of
more purchase or product oriented rather than solution
oriented. And to the degree that we are able to restructure to
allow for some of these innovations in procurement to occur we
are going to be better off.
Mr. Costello. I would like to ask you about, and I will
open this up to the rest of the panelists. Let's talk about
health care and a smart community. Smart communities
demonstrate real potential for a much needed transformation of
health care from reactive and hospital centered to preventive,
proactive, evidence based person centered focused on well-
being.
How does a smart community, particularly in the municipal
administration realm, go about improving a community's health
care through its various applications?
Mr. Pazuchanics. I think one of the key components of that
is providing provision of first and last mile service to
critical healthcare assets. You know, one of the major
challenges in Pittsburgh given our topography is the fact that
first mile or last mile can mean very different things
depending on age, ability. The potential of Smart City
deployments, particularly shared vehicles, autonomous vehicles,
to enhance connection to the major hospitals and university
systems that provide that health care, I think, is going to be
very important and it is the way that health care and
transportation are tied together.
Dr. Clark. I think the smart and connected health
initiatives, research initiatives, actually are a big effort in
figuring these questions out. And I also would just point to
things like when we are talking about air quality monitoring
one of the things we can monitor is for asthma. And so what
that allows--and real time. So what that allows families to do
is to determine whether or not today is a good day to walk to
school or whether today is a good day to drive. So it gives
people agency about making decisions about how they navigate
the built environment through these sensor systems that can
improve their health.
Mr. Gruendling. I think telehealth is a great topic when we
are talking about smart communities, and I think that access to
specialists who might not reside in a rural area for instance,
you know, without the need to travel to a big city hospital you
know for certain checkups or check-ins. You know, I think with
a lot of smart connected medical devices now you know they
report back automatically to a physician or a physicians' group
and allow them to monitor a patient in a home type environment.
And you know it is the connectivity that is allowing that to
happen.
Ms. Berman. I would like to build on what Dr. Clark said
about the asthma example, because smart cities technologies can
allow a city to go beyond just monitoring and changing behavior
based on air quality and asthma but actually doing something
about it. So taking that information and putting policies and
services in place to improve air quality, which also speaks to
the equality of health in the city because oftentimes the worse
air quality also is where your underserved communities are, so
evening that playing field and helping families be healthier as
well.
Mr. Chisek. I agree with everyone. But it could also help
better deployment of resources and resources are scarce. So
better deployment of these resources, be they health care, be
they first responder, is one of the advantages of smart cities.
Ms. Gallagher. We have been out talking to especially I
would say our lower income neighborhoods as we have been going
through this process and just asking them what do they see as
their biggest challenge with health care, and what we have
heard is transportation is a major barrier. When it will take
you an hour and a half to get to your doctor's office by the
time you change two or three buses, go to a hub, go to the next
place, it is easier just not to go.
So we have got to get them additional solutions. Not only
the first and last mile, I a hundred percent agree, but just
make it easier so it becomes just another thing to do versus a
hindrance and an obstacle you have to overcome.
Mr. Costello. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Harper [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bilirakis,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it and
I thank the panel for their testimony. For the entire panel a
recent report by Deloitte on the impact of wireless
connectivity to our communities notes that a 1-minute
improvement in response time for emergency medical services
could reduce fatalities by 8 percent, which means efforts to
better coordinate responses or automatic deployment could save
lives.
Are you discussing with your emergency responders how they
are utilizing this lifesaving technology? How are you planning
to use connected cars to better serve the elderly and disabled
populations? Whoever would like to go first, thank you.
Ms. Gallagher. We actually do have a lot of conversations
with our emergency management. And just a quick example of one
thing we are doing is working again, and I think it has been
brought up, with the traffic signals and having the traffic
signals talk to the vehicles and talk to each other. So whether
it is you know an emergency vehicle is coming, you keep the
lights green, you stop the other vehicles so they can have
quick passage you know that is one example.
Another one perhaps is them specifically talking to each
other and you know figuring out who is the closest and that
sort of thing per the cars, they are not having to go through
dispatch, and just a variety of things. But we are having those
conversations.
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes, please.
Mr. Chisek. It does go back to that deployment of resources
issue. So typically we have been sending fire trucks and
ambulances to medical calls; by using this technology to triage
that and pull the medical calls out we can better deploy our
fire resources. We are also deploying some smart cities kiosks
that can also be used as gathering points for information for
the public in the event of a disaster. We have all heard about
the Cascadia Subduction's own earthquake that is supposedly
going to hit the West Coast, so that is also one of our
strategies around resiliency.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. Ms. Berman?
Ms. Berman. We took a slightly alternative approach to
getting emergency resources to where they needed to be. We did
an analytics analysis of all of our 911 calls and there are
pockets of recurring 911 calls around train stations, et
cetera, during commutes, so now we pre-deploy ambulances and
have them waiting, so that cuts your response time down quite a
bit when the ambulance is already there. So we are doing things
like that.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. Sir?
Mr. Gruendling. Thank you. We are definitely having these
conversations at both the State and local levels with our first
responders. Obviously we are a critical part of that enhanced
911 system in the State of Vermont, so you know those
conversations and the technology pieces and components that
make that up are certainly ongoing. And you know one of the big
initiatives that our State and working with our schools we have
been trying to really enhance the location-specific 911 in
those schools, which is something you know that is still in
process.
Mr. Bilirakis. Anyone else? Dr. Clark?
Dr. Clark. From the research perspective, one of the things
we are seeing is that different partners have different data
available. So for first responders if they can, particularly
when we are talking about events, these natural events like a
storm, if they can get information from the utilities about the
conditions on the ground they can respond much, much quicker
and more safely to an event and help people. And it is building
those partnerships and that trust so there is actually data
exchanged is one of the things we think there could be a lot of
value added.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. Would you like to----
Mr. Pazuchanics. To answer your second question regarding
mobility for the elderly and integration of these technologies
into elderly populations, one of the key initiatives we have
been doing in that regard is building a level of technical
sophistication with our elderly population, getting some of
these technologies deployed out to our senior centers
throughout the city, and enabling residents to understand how
the system works so that new technologies such as TMCs and
autonomous vehicles are a little bit less unfamiliar to that
population.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. Next question, I know I don't
have a lot of time. I understand from a recent Deloitte report
on the impact of wireless connectivity to our communities
consumers are increasingly more attracted to wireless
innovation with their health care with 70 percent saying that
they would be interested in some form of connected healthcare
service.
What are your cities doing to help educate older citizens
to the positive benefits of this technology? Who would like to
go? I know we only have a couple of seconds.
Mr. Chisek. So we are partnering with community
organizations to help explain the technologies and the
capabilities to some of our different populations in elderly,
minority community as well. So we are using trusted voices in
their community that they already have a relationship with to
help communicate those things to those populations.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. Anyone else have any ideas?
Ms. Berman. We partner with Microsoft to provide a program
called Cyber Seniors in our senior centers and libraries that
teaches them basic computer skills if they need that and also
how to use those skills to connect with their doctors,
hospitals, and also non-medical resources as well so that they
can get the resources they need online and learn those skills.
Mr. Bilirakis. How effective has that been?
Ms. Berman. We have had actually pretty good uptake. We
trained more than a hundred thousand seniors in Chicago last
year, and we are seeing increased uptake moving into this year.
Mr. Bilirakis. Anyone else? OK, I will yield back. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Harper. The gentleman yields back. Seeing that there
are no further members wishing to ask questions, I would like
to thank all of our witnesses again for being here. I am sure
when this was scheduled you didn't know you would have a
snowstorm to get through, so I hope the travel wasn't too
difficult, but we appreciate the effort and your attendance
today.
Before we conclude, I would like to include the following
documents to be submitted for the record by unanimous consent:
a statement from a CA Technologies, a statement from Honda
North America, a statement from Panasonic, a statement from ITS
America, a joint statement from CompTIA and Technology Councils
of North America, a joint statement from ITI, CompTIA, Smart
Cities Council and TIA, and a Deloitte report from CTIA for the
record as well as a letter from EPIC. And, without objection,
those are admitted.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Harper. And pursuant to committee rules, I remind
members that they have 10 business days to submit additional
questions for the record, and I ask that witnesses submit the
response within 10 business days upon receipt of the questions.
Without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:57 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
