- THE MISSION OF THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE MISSION OF THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, DECEMBER 7, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-85

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

28-838                         WASHINGTON : 2018

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          GENE GREEN, Texas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     JERRY McNERNEY, California
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            PAUL TONKO, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL FLORES, Texas                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana                 Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           TONY CARDENAS, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       RAUL RUIZ, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              SCOTT H. PETERS, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota           DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina

Subcommittee on Environment

JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
Chairman
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas                    RAUL RUIZ, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             SCOTT H. PETERS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          GENE GREEN, Texas
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       DORIS O. MATSUI, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    officio)
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     5
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     9

Witnesses

Scott Pruitt, U.S. EPA Administrator.............................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Answers to submitted questions...............................    94

Submitted Material

Letter of December 14, 2011, from the Committee to the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, submitted by Mr. Walden.......    73
Letter of May 4, 2012, from the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency to the Committee, submitted by Mr. Walden...............    77
Statement of the American Geophysical Union, submitted by Mr.
Tonko..........................................................    82
Statement of the Asbestos Disease Awareness Organization,
submitted by Mr. Pallone.......................................    83
Statement of Safer Chemicals Healthy Families, submitted by Mr.
Pallone........................................................    85
Letter of August 28, 2017, from the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency to Ranking Member Pallone, submitted by Mr. Cardenas....    88
Letter of October 17, 2017, from the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency to Ranking Member Pallone, submitted by Mr.
Cardenas.......................................................    82
Report entitled, ``Fumes Across the Fence-Line,'' by the NAACP
and the Clean Air Task Force, November 2017, submitted by Mr.
Tonko \1\
Report entitled, ``'Swamped' 200 Ways in 200 Days,'' by Democracy
Reform Task Force, August 8, 2017, submitted by Mr. Sarbanes
\2\
Report entitled, ``'Still Swamped' 300 Ways in 300 Days,'' by
Democracy Reform Task Force, November 16, 2017, submitted by
Mr. Sarbanes \3\
Report on asbestos, submitted by Mr. Shimkus.....................    92

----------
\1\ The information can be found at: https://docs.house.gov/
meetings/if/if18/20171207/106701/hhrg-115-if18-20171207-
sd011.pdf.
\2\ The information can be found at: https://docs.house.gov/
meetings/if/if18/20171207/106701/hhrg-115-if18-20171207-
sd006.pdf.
\3\ The information can be found at: https://docs.house.gov/
meetings/if/if18/20171207/106701/hhrg-115-if18-20171207-
sd005.pdf.

THE MISSION OF THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

----------

THURSDAY, DECEMBER 7, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment,
Committee on Energy and Commerce
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2123 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Shimkus
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Shimkus, McKinley, Barton,
Blackburn, Harper, Olson, Johnson, Flores, Hudson, Cramer,
Walberg, Carter, Duncan, Walden (ex officio), Tonko, Ruiz,
Peters, Green, DeGette, McNerney, Cardenas, Dingell, Matsui,
and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Ray Baum, Staff Director; Mike Bloomquist,
Deputy Staff Director; Samantha Bopp, Staff Assistant; Adam
Buckalew, Professional Staff Member, Health; Allie Bury,
Legislative Clerk, Energy/Environment; Karen Christian, General
Counsel; Kelly Collins, Staff Assistant; Jerry Couri, Chief
Environmental Advisor; Zachary Dareshori, Staff Assistant;
Jordan Davis, Director of Policy and External Affairs; Wyatt
Ellertson, Research Associate, Energy/Environment; Margaret
Tucker Fogarty, Staff Assistant; Adam Fromm, Director of
Outreach and Coalitions; Ali Fulling, Legislative Clerk,
Oversight & Investigations, Digital Commerce and Consumer
Protection; Jordan Haverly, Policy Coordinator, Environment;
Zach Hunter, Director of Communications; A.T. Johnston, Senior
Policy Advisor, Energy; Peter Kielty, Deputy General Counsel;
Ben Lieberman, Senior Counsel, Energy; Mary Martin, Deputy
Chief Counsel, Energy & Environment; Drew McDowell, Executive
Assistant; Brandon Mooney, Deputy Chief Energy Advisor; Mark
Ratner, Policy Coordinator; Annelise Rickert, Counsel, Energy;
Christopher Santini, Counsel, Oversight & Investigations; Dan
Schneider, Press Secretary; Peter Spencer, Professional Staff
Member, Energy; Madeline Vey, Policy Coordinator, Digital
Commerce and Consumer Protection; Evan Viau, Legislative Clerk,
Communications & Technology; Hamlin Wade, Special Advisor,
External Affairs; Everett Winnick, Director of Information
Technology; Priscilla Barbour, Minority Energy Fellow; Jeff
Carroll, Minority Staff Director; Jacqueline Cohen, Minority
Chief Environment Counsel; Jean Fruci, Minority Energy and
Environment Policy Advisor; Evan Gilbert, Minority Press
Assistant; Caitlin Haberman, Minority Professional Staff
Member; Rick Kessler, Minority Senior Advisor and Staff
Director, Energy and Environment; John Marshall, Minority
Policy Coordinator; Jon Monger, Minority Counsel; Alexander
Ratner, Minority Policy Analyst; Andrew Souvall, Minority
Director of Communications, Outreach and Member Services; Tuley
Wright, Minority Energy and Environment Policy Advisor; C.J.
Young, Minority Press Secretary; and Catherine Zander, Minority
Environment Fellow.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Shimkus. The subcommittee will now come to order.
Before I begin my opening statement, I want to make a general
announcement to members about the process today. After months
of trying to find a mutually acceptable date for a hearing, the
committee was able to finally get agreement with the
administrator to join us and we announced it. At the end of
last week, however, the committee learned Mr. Pruitt was being
summoned to meet with his boss, the President, for 90 minutes
around lunch.
Rather than agreeing to start the whole process over and/or
the hearing earlier and to have a defined end time, or push the
entire hearing to a late afternoon start time, or try to find
another mutually acceptable date, we have come to an agreement
which we understand is not ideal, but gives members maximum
flexibility to personally question the administrator about the
Agency's missions.
Therefore, we will proceed with opening statements, the
administrator's testimony, and members' questions until 11:00
a.m. We will recess at that time and reconvene at 2:00 p.m. in
2322 which is upstairs. We expect the administrator will stay
with us until committee members who are present or want to ask
questions have been given their turn to ask questions.
I will also note that there is going to be a voting period
in this last block and we are going to try with the help of my
colleagues to keep the hearing going through that vote series.
I have done it before years ago. It is a juggling, but we are
going to try to get that done.
Administrator Pruitt, I want to thank you for joining us
today and discussing issues the Environment Subcommittee has
jurisdiction over. Notably, the Clean Air Act, CERCLA, which is
a Superfund act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Safe
Drinking Water Act, and Toxic Substances Control Act, one that
this committee is very proud of passing in the last Congress.
A few years ago, we began an effort to tackle updating and
authorizing a number of these laws and have been waiting for
the opportunity for you and someone from your agency to be here
so that we can discuss the Administration's position on these
important changes to the laws and how EPA implements them. We
are also tasked with the oversight of these EPA programs and we
look forward to being able to start conducting oversight
hearings soon.
Today, we would like to start dialogue with you about your
vision and priorities for the EPA. You noted at the outset of
your tenure at the EPA that your goal was to refocus EPA on its
intended mission, return power to the states and create an
environment where jobs can grow. And your agenda focused on the
three Es: environment and protecting the environment; economy,
sensible regulations that allow economic growth; and
engagement, engaging with state and local partners. You also
stated that EPA would ``operate with the statutes that Congress
passes and not reimagining authority to pick winners and
losers.'' That sounds like you are headed in the right
direction.
We support analyzing regulatory barriers to determine
whether they create unnecessary burdens or impede job creation
and we want to work with you to make sure that the EPA develops
and implements regulations that protect the environment while
promoting growth and creating jobs. You said it best in a
statement you made when you kicked off your back to the basics
agenda earlier this year. We can and will achieve a clean air
and a clean water and we will also have strong economic growth
and job creation at the same time.
We have some specific areas of focus that we would like to
discuss today and continue to work with you and your staff as
we go forward. The first is Superfund cleanup. You have
indicated that Superfund cleanup is a priority of the Agency
and that several clean up efforts have been ``restored to the
rightful place at the center of the Agency's core mission.''
You have also noted that you intend to figure out ways to
cut through bureaucratic red tape that has slowed the cleanup
of Superfund sites and that EPA is creating a list of the top
ten sites that the Agency can aggressively address. We want to
work with you on these efforts and work together to figure out
what Congress can do to help make Superfund cleanups more
efficient.
The next issues are the Toxic Substances Control Act and
the Safe Drinking Water Act. Last year, this committee was
responsible for overhauling TSCA and we are interested in the
appropriate and the timely implementation of the rules that are
the outgrowth of the new law. We also look forward to work with
the Agency as we have reauthorized funding and make
improvements in the law to improve compliance with the Safe
Drinking Water Act.
Last but not least, the Clean Air Act. Our members are
actively engaged on several air issues like the Clean Power
Plan, the EPA's recent ozone standard which has created
obstacles to new infrastructure development and manufacturing.
We also want to look into addressing the challenges relating to
obtaining air permits required for new construction and
expansions of the existing facilities under EPA's New Source
Review program.
Administrator Pruitt, the long and the short of it is that
we have an agenda packed with legislative and oversight
activities and we need the EPA to be engaged participants that
work with us as we move forward. We need to be assured that the
Agency will send us witnesses for legislative and oversight
hearings and in turn we will work with you to figure out where
Congress needs to act to help you accomplish your mission, the
Agency's goals of providing regulatory certainty, balancing
environmental benefits and economic practicalities, and
restoring confidence to regulated entities across the country.
Thank you for coming up here and we look forward to
continuing this conversation in the new year. And with that I
will yield back my time and turn to my friend from New York,
Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. John Shimkus

The Subcommittee will now come to order.
Before I begin my opening statement, I want to make a
general announcement to members about process for today. After
months of trying to find a mutually acceptable date for a
hearing, the Committee was able to finally get agreement from
Administrator Pruitt to join us and we announced it. At the end
of last week, however, the Committee learned Mr. Pruitt was
being summoned to meet with his boss, the President, for 90
minutes around lunch. Rather than agreeing to start the hearing
earlier and have a defined end time, push the entire hearing to
a late afternoon start time, or try to again find another
mutually acceptable date, we have come to an agreement which we
understand is not ideal, but gives members maximum ability to
personally question the Administrator about the Agency's
mission.
Therefore, we will proceed with opening statements, the
Administrator's testimony, and Member questions until 11am. We
will recess at that time and reconvene at 2pm in 2322. We
expect the Administrator will stay with us until Committee
Members who are present and want to ask questions have been
given their turn to ask questions.
Administrator Pruitt I want to thank you for joining us
today and discussing issues the Environment Subcommittee has
jurisdiction over, notably, the Clean Air Act, CERCLA, the
Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Safe Drinking Water Act, and the
Toxic Substances Control Act. A few years ago, we began an
effort to tackle updating and reauthorizing a number of these
laws and we have been waiting for the opportunity for you or
someone from your Agency to be here so that we can discuss the
Administration's position on these important changes to the
laws EPA implements. We are also tasked with oversight of these
EPA programs and we look forward to being able to start
conducting oversight hearings soon.
Today we would like to start a dialogue with you about your
vision and priorities for EPA.
You noted at the outset of your tenure at EPA that your
goal was to refocus EPA on its intended mission, return power
to the states, and create an environment where jobs can grow,
and your agenda focused on the three E's:
Environment: Protecting the environment;
Economy: Sensible regulations that allow economic growth;
Engagement: Engaging with state and local partners.
You also stated that EPA should ``operate within the
statutes that Congress passes and not reimagine authority to
pick winners and losers.''
That sounds like you are headed in the right direction. We
support analyzing regulatory barriers to determine whether they
create unnecessary burdens or impede job creation and we want
to work with you to make sure that EPA develops and implements
regulations that protect the environment while promoting growth
and creating jobs. You said it best in a statement you made
when you kicked off your ``back to basics'' agenda earlier this
year, ``we can, and we will achieve clean air and clean water
and we will also have strong economic growth and job creation
at the same time.''
We have some specific areas of focus that we would like to
discuss today and continue to work on with you and your staff
going forward.
The first is Superfund cleanup. You have indicated that
Superfund cleanup is a priority of the Agency and that several
cleanup efforts have been ``restored to their rightful place at
the center of the agency's core mission.'' You have also noted
that you intend to figure out ways to cut through the
bureaucratic red tape that has slowed the cleanup of Superfund
sites and that EPA is creating a list of the top ten sites that
the agency can aggressively address. We want to work with you
on these efforts and work together to figure out what Congress
can do to help make Superfund cleanups more efficient.
The next issues are Toxic Substances Control Act and the
Safe Drinking Water Act. Last year, this Subcommittee was
responsible for overhauling TSCA and we are interested in the
appropriate and timely implementation of the rules that are the
outgrowth of the new law. We also look forward to work with the
Agency as we reauthorize the funding and make improvements in
the law to improve compliance with the Safe Drinking Water Act.
Last, but not least, the Clean Air Act. Our members are
actively engaged on several air issues like the Clean Power
Plan and EPA's recent ozone standard, which has created
obstacles to new infrastructure development and manufacturing.
We also want to look into addressing the challenges relating to
obtaining air permits required for new construction and
expansions of existing facilities under EPA's New Source Review
program.
Administrator Pruitt, the long and short of it is that we
have an agenda packed with legislative and oversight activities
and we need EPA to be an engaged participant that works with us
as we move forward. We need to be assured that the Agency will
send us witnesses for legislative and oversight hearings and in
turn, we will work with you to figure out where Congress needs
to act to help accomplish the Agency's goals of providing
regulatory certainty, balancing environmental benefits and
economic practicalities, and restoring confidence to regulated
entities across the country. Thank you for coming up here and
we look forward to continuing this conversation in the new
year.
With that, I yield back my time and now yield to my friend
from New York, the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee, Mr.
Tonko.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you,
Administrator Pruitt. Thank you for being here this morning.
However, I fully expected that you, Mr. Administrator, as a
proud Oklahoman, would have been here Sooner.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Tonko. All right. In all seriousness, Mr.
Administrator, I hope this is the first of many appearances,
regular appearances before our Energy and Commerce Committee.
Your predecessors came before this committee frequently and I
can tell you it wasn't because they liked being berated every
other 5 minutes for a few hours, it was because they understood
that they had a responsibility to be accountable to Congress.
So I expect moving forward you will provide administration
witnesses, responses to letters, and technical assistance
quickly when we ask. I know many members have serious concerns
about the direction of EPA in the past year which is why there
is so much interest in today's hearing. Members will raise
questions about how you have chosen to be a steward of taxpayer
funds, who has had access to you, and the growing influence of
industry at the Agency.
Members will also question the rollback of a number of
safeguards that were put into place to protect human health. In
July, the New York Times published an article, ``Counseled by
Industry, Not Staff, EPA Chief Is Off to a Blazing Start,''
which reported more than 30 environmental rules being delayed
or undone. And often these public health safeguards are being
undone with little or no legal or scientific justification.
I think it is worthy noting that, historically, the
majority of EPA rules have withstood legal challenges,
including challenges led by you in your capacity as Oklahoma's
attorney general. EPA's decisions should be guided by sound
science, not corporate interests and these concerns touch every
office under your charge--clean water, air quality,
contaminated lands, chemical safety, pesticides to name a few.
From my view, rules across the Agency are being undone
capriciously with little regard to the human impacts or the
science that went into developing them. In fact, many states
and industries were partners during the process when these
rules were developed. Frankly, I believe EPA has all the signs
of an agency captured by industry. You shouldn't need to be
traded on the New York Stock Exchange or need an invite to a
private steak dinner at a Trump hotel in order to get an
audience with the EPA administrator.
I am particularly concerned about Agency actions on climate
change. The Fourth National Climate Assessment Climate Science
Special Report, a thorough, comprehensive report by the federal
government, has reaffirmed what the scientific community has
long known, climate change is real, primarily caused by human
activity, and a serious threat to our people and our economy.
Despite this scientific consensus, EPA has begun to roll
back rules at the behest of special interests to address
greenhouse gas emissions which have been developed over many
years, backed by science, and include economic impact studies.
This is just one example in a trend of dismissing the role of
science at EPA.
Scientific integrity of the Agency must be protected.
Instead, we have witnessed the proposed elimination of research
funding and eroding of technical and scientific capacity. The
dismissal of qualified members of the Scientific Advisory Board
the removal of information from EPA's website and the
censorship of Agency scientists from participating in public
events are incredibly troubling.
Finally, I want to take a minute to recognize the work done
by EPA's career employees. I know these dedicated public
servants joined the Agency to protect human health and the
environment and are to be commended for their hard work in this
difficult environment.
But as the workforce is reduced, as the advice of the
experts is ignored, and as morale at the Agency decreases, I
know there will be an inclination to pursue other career
opportunities. Our country cannot afford to lose the
institutional knowledge at an agency as important as EPA or
fail to attract the next generation of qualified, dedicated
public servants. I want to thank EPA's employees, know that
your work is greatly appreciated by members here and beneficial
to Americans across our great country.
Back to basics does not mean starving the Agency of its
resources and personnel that it needs to do its job. It does
not mean giving lip service to protecting clean air and water
while rolling back dozens of essential rules. EPA's success has
been about making steady progress over time and EPA has proven
to be a resilient agency in the past, but this year we have
witnessed a number of alarming decisions and I hope we will get
answers to better understand some of those decisions today, Mr.
Administrator.
And again we welcome you before this committee. Thank you
so much and I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The chair
now recognizes the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Walden
from Oregon, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Mr. Administrator. We are delighted to have
you before the House Energy and Commerce Committee. I think
this is your first oversight hearing on The Hill and we are
delighted that we could have you here to tell us what is going
on at the EPA, to take our questions and to hear what we have
to say. I am obviously disappointed the President called you
out in between, but I appreciate the fact you will be here this
morning and come back this afternoon and continue to
participate in this process.
With this I am going to yield briefly to my friend from
Oklahoma who would like to formally introduce you to the
committee, and with that I will yield 30 seconds to Mr. Mullin
from Oklahoma.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Chairman Walden. Thank you, Chairman
Shimkus, for allowing me to participate. I have the great
privilege of introducing Oklahoma's own Scott Pruitt to our EPA
administrator. Thank you, sir, for being here.
First, I want to thank Mr. Pruitt for making himself
available for today's hearing. Administrator Pruitt and his
team have worked tirelessly to bring the EPA back to its core
mission, protecting our environment in common sense ways with
input from our states, local government, and tribes to a
collaborated approach which is a breath of fresh air. Nobody
wants to take care of our backyards more than us in our states.
That is why I want to thank Mr. Pruitt for doing what is right
by having the input of those with interests there.
Mr. Pruitt, thank you for coming here today. Thank you for
making the whole state proud. I appreciate you and I yield back
to Chairman Walden.
Mr. Walden. I thank the gentleman for his introduction of
our witness today. And as you know, Administrator Pruitt, the
committee you are appearing before today is charged by the
House of Representatives with legislative and oversight
responsibilities for the bulk of the statutes that the EPA
implements. We may not write the check to the EPA--the
appropriators claim to do that--but we are your authorizing
agency or committee.
It has been almost 10 months since you were sworn in as
administrator of an agency that turned 47 this past Monday, so
today I would like to begin with what will hopefully be a
continuing conversation about the agency that you oversee, your
vision for it, and what challenges you face. I am particularly
intrigued by your back to basics concepts and your stated
intent to return EPA from its freewheeling administrative
pursuits to its mission of protecting air, soil, and water and
doing so according to explicit dictates of Congress. I hope
that this view of governing will guide your EPA, rather than
efforts to end run Congress in the Federal Register or on the
courthouse steps.
I also want to discuss the goals you are establishing for
the programs at EPA and the metrics you intend to use to
measure their progress. In particularly, I want to know that
you have a plan to address staffing issues identified by the
Agency's Inspector General for over the last 2 decades. This is
a 20-year-old problem you are inheriting, but it is one I think
we both take seriously.
So we appreciate your commitment to budget transparency and
as we want to make sure the public knows how each law is being
implemented and how the money is being spent, I expect that
back to basics is not an abdication of environmental
protection, but rather a rededication of mastering the most
fundamental aspects of EPA's mission.
Whether it is cleaning up Superfund sites, ensuring that
safe drinking water is being piped into people's homes, or
keeping air clean and safe to breathe, this is the primary
mission of the EPA. While these jobs may sound mundane, as any
football fan will appreciate they are like the essential
blocking and tackling techniques and so we appreciate what you
are doing on all of that.
I also want to thank you and your team for your attention
to the Superfund cleanup in the Portland Harbor. While this
area is not in my district, it is in my state and what happens
at the Port of Portland has an impact on all Oregonians. You
brought a fresh and a welcome approach to this complicated and
costly cleanup.
Unlike the prior administration, you have proven that this
administration wants to actually clean up this environmental
mess and do the work in a common sense manner in close working
partnership with local stakeholders. To paraphrase an old song,
if you can do it there you can do it anywhere.
And so I thank you for being here. I thank you for your
collaborative work on the Portland Superfund cleanup. We know
we have more effort to achieve there, but everybody--well, not
everybody, but most people affected by it including the port
and city and everybody else saying thank you, now we feel like
we have hope and a chance to get this done right, so thanks for
your work there.
With that Mr. Chairman, I would yield back the balance of
my time to the committee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Good morning, Mr. Administrator, we are glad to have you
here this morning and we hope you will return often during your
tenure. I am disappointed that your appearance must be
interrupted by your meeting with the President, but I
appreciate your willingness to come back and continue the
discussion with our committee.
Before I begin my remarks, I'd like to yield 60 seconds to
Rep. Mullin so he can say a few words about a fellow Oklahoman.
As you know, the committee you are appearing before today
is charged by the House of Representatives with legislative and
oversight responsibility for the bulk of the statutes that the
Environmental Protection Agency implements. We may not write
the check to EPA, but we decide where the agency's money can
best be spent.
It has been almost 10 months since you were sworn in as the
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency--an agency
that turned 47 years old this past Monday. Today, I would like
to begin what will hopefully be a continuing conversation about
the agency you run, your vision for it, and what challenges you
face.
I am particularly intrigued by your ``Back to Basics''
concept and your stated intent to return EPA from its
freewheeling administrative pursuits to its mission of
protecting air, soil, and water--and doing so according to the
explicit dictates of Congress. I hope that this view of
governing will guide your EPA--rather than efforts to end run
Congress in the Federal Register or on the courthouse steps.
I also want to discuss the goals you are establishing for
the programs at EPA and the metrics you intend to use to
measure their progress. Particularly, I want to know that you
have a plan to address staffing issues identified by the
agency's Inspector General over the last two decades and I
would like to make sure that you are committed to budget
transparency, so the public knows how much the agency is
spending to implement each of the laws we passed.
I expect that ``Back to Basics'' is not an abdication of
environmental protection, but rather a rededication to
mastering the most fundamental aspects of EPA's mission--
whether it's cleaning up Superfund sites, ensuring that safe
drinking water is being piped into people's homes, or keeping
air clean and safe to breathe.
While these jobs may sound mundane, as any football fan
will appreciate, they are like the essential ``blocking and
tackling'' techniques that any football team--whether in
Norman, Stillwater, Tulsa, or Eugene--must master if they
expect to be successful. No matter how brilliant the offensive
or defensive strategies may be, if the team cannot nail down
the basics, success will be elusive.
The public deserves to be protected and common-sense
regulations are important and necessary. However, government
solutions should be proportional to the problems they are
tasked by congress to solve. I believe the EPA should focus on
innovative problem solving and partnerships with the states and
the private sector that leverage their resources and expertise.
I want to thank you and your team for your attention to the
superfund cleanup in the Portland Harbor. While this area is
not in my district, it is in my state and what happens at the
Port of Portland has an impact on all Oregonians. You have
brought a fresh and welcome approach to this complicated and
costly cleanup. Unlike the prior administration, you've proven
that this administration wants to actually clean up
environmental messes, and do the work in a commonsense manner
in in close working partnership with local stakeholders. To
paraphrase an old song, if you can do it there, you can do it
anywhere.
Thank you again for being here to discuss the agency's
mission and your vision for it.
I look forward to working with you and seeing you back here
in the future concerning our mutual efforts to protect the
public and the environment.

Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The chair
now recognizes the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone from New Jersey, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have served in
Congress alongside both Democratic and Republican
administrations and in my experience the lack of transparency
and cooperation from this Administration is completely
unprecedented. The Environmental Protection Agency under
Administrator Pruitt has consistently failed to respond to
congressional oversight requests. In a few instances when we
have actually received responses they are perfunctory at best.
EPA has also refused to testify at legislative and
oversight hearings and has refused to respond to some basic
requests for technical assistance on legislation that has moved
or is moving its way through this committee. Even today, after
finally agreeing to appear before this authorizing committee
some 10 months into his term, Administrator Pruitt is planning
to leave after only 1 hour. And this is not the way any agency
is supposed to interact with its authorizing committee.
I would hope that this frustration is not only felt by
committee Democrats and I would hope to see a change from both
the EPA and the overall Trump administration. This lack of
transparency applies not just to Congress but also to the
press, the public, and even EPA's career staff. The stories
coming from the Agency paint a pretty bleak picture. While we
know the Administration has wasted more than $58,000 of
taxpayer money on private jets and noncommercial flights, Mr.
Pruitt's schedule has been largely kept secret and this week a
major newspaper had to sue the Agency for access to this
important public record.
Meanwhile, EPA career staff have been excluded from
meetings. When they do participate they are apparently blocked
from bringing phones and even pen and paper with them.
Moreover, Administrator Pruitt has reportedly used $25,000 of
public funds to build a secret phone booth in his office to
further isolate himself from the staff and any and all
scrutiny. And why all the secrecy, one has to wonder.
Mr. Pruitt has also launched an unprecedented assault on
independent science, purging academic scientists with no
conflicts from Science Advisory Board and replacing them with
industry employees. At the same time, he has ignored the advice
and conclusions of his own scientific staff on numerous
occasions.
Today's hearing is supposedly about the mission of the EPA.
According to the EPA itself, the Agency mission is to protect
human health and the environment and no one cares more about
that mission than EPA's career staff. Ignoring the staff,
undermining the staff, and cutting the staff out of decisions,
amounts to ignoring and undermining that mission, in my
opinion.
Administrator Pruitt has been on a press tour lately
proclaiming his vision of what the EPA's mission means and what
it means to be an environmentalist and his words ring hollow
because his actions have consistently and systematically
undermined protections for human health and the environment.
I have only 5 minutes, Mr. Chairman, so I can't list all
the actions the administrator has taken to undermine
protections for public health and specifically for vulnerable
populations including workers, children, and Native American
tribes, but I want to give a few examples.
First, pulling out of the Paris agreement; second, pulling
back the Clean Power Plan; third, rolling back protections from
toxic air pollutants including mercury, methane, and smog then
handing implementation of the toxic chemicals reform law just
signed into law last year over to industry lobbyists; reversing
the decision to ban the toxic pesticide chlorpyrifos; delaying
and undermining the risk management planning program that
should protect workers and communities; and, finally, reversing
course on Superfund financial assurance requirements putting
more of the burden on taxpayers and less on polluters.
With accomplishments like this, it is no wonder that the
administrator is working so hard to hide his actions. But the
American people need transparency and they deserve honesty from
both the EPA and the White House and perhaps today's hearing
will be the beginning of a new, more transparent era.
To his credit, Administrator Pruitt reached out to me in
advance of this hearing and requested a meeting which we did
have, but if the administrator wants to improve his
relationship with the members of the committee, the steps he
needs to take are clear. He needs to provide the documents we
have requested and will request in the future. He needs to
provide substantive answers to our oversight questions, and he
needs to make himself and other EPA staff available as
witnesses routinely.
And if the administrator wants to earn the trust of the
American people he needs to stop the secrecy and his war on
science and reverse the systematic rollback of public
protections. It is the mission of the EPA to protect the public
health and the environment and not attack it. And I yield back,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
Now we turn to our guest. We would like to welcome and
thank you, our distinguished witness, U.S. EPA Administrator
Scott Pruitt, for being here today. You will have an
opportunity to give an opening statement followed by a round of
questions from members. We appreciate you being here and you
are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT PRUITT, U.S. EPA ADMINISTRATOR

Mr. Pruitt. Well, Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member Tonko,
Chairman Walden, Ranking Member Pallone, it is good to see you
this morning, and other members that I have not had the chance
to meet. I look forward to the discussion today.
It was a year ago today that the President announced my
nomination to the Environmental Protection Agency; thus began
the process, the confirmation process which culminated in mid-
February and began serving in that timeframe as well.
It has been a very, very consequential and I think exciting
10 months as I have been at the EPA. We have focused our
efforts on three core principles as we are seeking to make
decisions. As I said during the Senate confirmation process,
rule of law would again take center as we make decisions around
the responsibilities that I have as administrator.
Fundamentally, my job as the administrator of the EPA is to
administer statutes that you have passed as Congress to advance
the objectives in those statutes from the Clean Air Act to the
Clean Water Act across TSCA and CERCLA and a host of federal
statutes. And rule of law matters, because as we act and adopt
regulation, if we act untethered to a statute it creates
uncertainty in the marketplace and those that have expectations
placed upon them don't know how to conduct themselves. And so
rule of law is not something that is academic. It is not
something that is just legal. It truly impacts how we do our
job at the Agency.
And secondly, I have tried to emphasize process. Process
matters as well. It is this body that has required federal
agencies, executive agencies to go through the EPA to adopt
rules that are consistent with comment and informed discussions
that take place over a period of time.
Where a proposed rule takes place comment occurs, we
respond to that comment on the record, and then finalize our
decisions based upon the comments provided. Just one example,
during the Waters of the United States rule of 2015 over a
million comments were submitted to the Agency as that
definition was adopted, and the Agency took the very, very
important step of responding to each of those to make a
decision. The same needs to take place today. And so we have
incorporated changes at the Agency to respect process to make
sure that citizens' concerns across the country are heard and
that we respond on the record to those concerns.
And then, thirdly, and some of you have mentioned this in
your opening comments as well, is a commitment to federalism.
Federalism is something, again is not just a legal or academic
concept, it is something that you have put into statutes, many
statutes. You have prescribed authority to states across this
country, because when we work together with states to achieve
better outcomes with air and water quality it serves the
citizens of your respective states.
And I will say to you, 2 days after being sworn in as EPA
Administrator, I had 18 to 20 governors in my office on a
Sunday--Democrats and Republicans--Governor Dayton of Minnesota
to Governor Herbert to Utah. And we talked about a host of
issues on air quality and water quality and Superfund and we
began a journey that started in February.
And I have visited almost 30 states since that time,
visiting with governors and respected DEQs to advance the
issues of the respective states. And the reason that is
important is because the issues in Utah, the second most driest
state in the country, are different than the water issues in
Minnesota. And so we must work with our partners at the state
level to achieve better outcomes and that has been a focus
along with these issues of process and rule of law.
I want you to know this dialogue that begins today is
important to me. I have met with some of you individually. I
have met with many of your colleagues across the rotunda in the
Senate, both Democrats and Republicans, on issues that impact
their states. I know that these are very difficult issues that
we handle at the Agency. I seek to engage in a civil discourse
with you. I seek to have a thoughtful discussion about how we
can advance the objectives of what you have passed in these
statutes and I appreciate the opportunity. And I do hope,
Ranking Member Pallone, that we can begin a good discussion
going forward into 2018 on these issues and look forward to the
questions today. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pruitt follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
I also want to note that a full statement of the
administrator has been placed into the record. I failed to say
that earlier. And then I would like to recognize myself for 5
minutes to start the round of questioning. Again thank you for
being here.
At a recent Oversight Subcommittee hearing, EPA's Office of
Inspector General and the Government Accountability Office
testified that EPA cannot ensure that it has the right people
in the right places with the right skills and competencies to
accomplish its mission. According to the Inspector General, EPA
offices would probably achieve better results if they knew more
precisely what the requirements were and what kind of people it
needs to address them.
In addition, EPA has not conducted a workload analysis in
over 20 years. It seems to me that a back to basics agenda for
your agency must include this type of analysis to make sure the
Agency is operating optimally. Can you assure me that you
intend to perform this workforce analysis?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. We are actually engaged in that process
now. There is a gentleman by the name of Henry Darwin that is
the CEO at the Agency. He worked for Governor Ducey in the
state of Arizona. We are actually partnering with Toyota to
begin a Lean process at the Agency to evaluate management
practices. The Agency for many years, and this is something
that I found surprising, has not measured outcomes
consistently. We are actually creating a dashboard of
monitoring in air quality and water quality, Superfund
remediation across the full spectrum of our responsibilities to
measure progress in each of those areas on a weekly and monthly
basis.
And that has been incorporated into the program offices at
the EPA, but it is also being incorporated in the regions
across the country and that is one thing that I will share with
you that I think has been very challenging as I have taken over
this position. We have ten regions across the country, as you
know, from San Francisco to Atlanta, Chicago, Boston, and there
is a great deal of inconsistency with respect to permitting,
compliance and assistance, enforcement in these issues with
respect to how we administer the statutes.
And we need, I think, a more coordinated, collaborative
process to ensure that we don't have different approaches in
Region 8 in Denver versus Region 3 in Philadelphia, so that
process is ongoing, Mr. Chairman. It is a very important
process. And I think a performance based, metric based approach
to these program offices that we are engaged in is so, so
important because it enlivens, I think empowers employees.
You mentioned, Ranking Member Pallone, the career staff at
the Agency. I will say to you that as we have engaged in our
Superfund focus I have had career employees come up to me and
say thank you for awakening areas that have been dormant for a
little while and they are very thankful for the focus that we
have placed on some of those core missions. And the measurement
and metrics that we are incorporating going forward is a part
of this that you referenced, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much. That is important to me.
One of the reasons why I care so much about the workforce issue
is the implementation of the Toxic Substance Control Act. In
particular, I want to comment to the new chemicals. Since the
law's enactment, the Agency has needed to reassign staff from
other offices to address a sizeable backlog in the new chemical
application.
Your team helped clear out substantially the backlog, but I
fear as soon as the borrowed EPA workers go back to their
regular jobs backlogs will come back to be the norm of the
operation. What assurances can you give me that the new
chemical applications will stay on a schedule for the future?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, we had many, and I want to commend
Congress on the good work that was done in updating TSCA. I
mean that was a decade in the making and for you to do that was
a very important thing for our office. There were deadlines
that you put in that statute, as an example, rules that were
supposed to come out by June of this year. I made a commitment
during the confirmation process to meet those deadlines and we
in fact did those rules under TSCA.
The other area that you cite, Mr. Chairman, was the
backlog. As you know, the changes you made in the TSCA statute
required that before chemicals entered the flow of commerce our
agency had to affirm or approve those chemicals. And there was
a backlog of roughly 700 of those chemicals that were at the
office before we arrived and we did actually clear that backlog
out by July by dedicating resources there. It is a commitment
going forward that we do that timely. We are adopting rules now
to ensure that the process is defined so that folks know what
is expected to meet the deadlines going forward.
Mr. Shimkus. Let me cut down my last question to just a
simple question on what is the--so we talk West Lake, this is
parochial, West Lake in the St. Louis metropolitan area. Are
you on track to issue the Record of Decision and can you give
us a sense of timing?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, we are, Mr. Chairman. We are going to--we
should be able to announce a decision in the month of January.
There is proposals that I am looking at this month to make a
decision on West Lake. It has been a long time coming,
specifically 27 years. It is a very important issue to the
people of St. Louis.
For those of you who don't know on the committee, 8,000
tons of uranium comingled with 38,000 tons of solid waste
dispersed over a very large geographical area, buried about 80
feet deep, and it has taken the Agency 27 years to make a
decision on whether to excavate or cap the site. That is
unacceptable and the decision is coming in the month of
January.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
Let me now turn to the ranking member, Mr. Tonko, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And again welcome, Administrator.
Mr. Pruitt. Thank you.
Mr. Tonko. During your confirmation hearing you said that
you ``have no firsthand knowledge'' of the EPA's Scientific
Integrity Policy. However, you did commit to reviewing the
policy and following federal guidance regarding scientific
integrity. Now that you have had some time at the Agency, have
you reviewed the EPA's Scientific Integrity Policy?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. We have reviewed that and implemented it
at the Agency.
Mr. Tonko. So have you reaffirmed the Scientific Integrity
Policy to scientists as well as political appointees at EPA?
Mr. Pruitt. It is a matter of priority to make sure that we
have a scientific review of rules at the Agency that are
objective, transparent, and peer-reviewed, and that is a
commitment that we are enforcing at the Agency, Mr. Ranking
Member.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Thank you, sir. And an essential component
of scientific integrity is strong safeguards against conflicts
of interest. Have you required recusals among your staff,
including yourself, when serious conflicts of interest occur?
Mr. Pruitt. Absolutely. We have done that and we will
continue to do that. And that is one of the areas that has been
mischaracterized with respect to some of these advisory boards.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Thank you, sir. I only have 5 minutes, so if
I could move along. I have been very concerned by changes to
EPA's Science Advisory Board. These concerns are shared by the
scientific community. Mr. Chair, I would like to enter this
letter signed by over 1,000 scientists into the record as well
as the letter from the American Geophysical Union which
represents more than 60,000 scientists.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, I am sure we will. Let me make sure my
staff sees it and then we will.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Administrator Pruitt, do you believe scientists are a
special interest group?
Mr. Pruitt. I am sure I don't understand the question,
Ranking Member Tonko.
Mr. Tonko. Well, are they a fundamental contribution to the
Agency or seen as a special interest?
Mr. Pruitt. Look, when we engage in rulemaking at the
Agency we build a record. And scientists at the Agency, whether
it is in the chemical shop, the air program office, it is
important that we hear from our scientists internal to the
Agency----
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. But also those advisory committees
in building the record and that is a point of emphasis,
absolutely.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Do you believe scientists that
receive EPA grant money are less qualified to give technical
advice to EPA than states or industry which may also have a
financial relationship with the Agency?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, I believe that these advisory committees
as you know them are independent advisory committees to the
Agency to equip us in making informed decisions about the
efficacy of rules that we adopt. And these advisory committees,
Ranking Member Tonko----
Mr. Tonko. It is----
Mr. Pruitt. May I finish?
Mr. Tonko. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt. The advisory committees----
Mr. Tonko. If you could just answer the question though
too.
Mr. Pruitt. I am.
Mr. Tonko. OK.
Mr. Pruitt. These advisory committees had scientists
serving in an independent capacity. Twenty of them made up
three of the committees that have received $77 million from the
Agency in grants. That causes a perception or an appearance of
a lack of independence in advising the Agency on a host of
issues. And we went to those scientists and advised them that
they could continue serving on these advisory committees or
receive the grants but they could not do both, to ensure the
independence of the counsel they were providing to us in the
rulemaking process.
Mr. Tonko. Administrator, can you provide specific examples
of a time when an EPA grant recipient on an advisory committee
provided conflicted advice?
Mr. Pruitt. I can say to you that as a grantee, we the
grantor, Ranking Member, and we have an ongoing obligation to
oversee those grants, that creates an appearance of a lack of
independence and that was addressed with the policy that we
instituted. And we can provide you examples, many examples of
scientists who received grants over a period of time that were
substantial and it called into question that independence and
we addressed that to the policy that we implemented.
Mr. Tonko. At the same time, does it make sense to ignore
the advice of the very scientists that EPA determines are
worthiest of grant funding?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, we are not in fact. We simply said to
those individuals that they could continue receiving the grants
and advise the Agency in the counseling role or receive the
grants and continue providing that authority we granted them to
provide substance to the Agency going forward.
Mr. Tonko. I would just hope that they would be seen as a
very reliable source. EPA's actions over the past year have led
many people, myself included, to conclude that EPA's current
political leadership has been dismissing the role of science in
its decision making. It appears that independent and Agency
scientists' recommendations are being ignored for the benefit
of industry. It happens with chlorpyrifos, it happened with the
Clean Power Plan, and it appears to be happening with TSCA. In
many cases, scientific data are even being removed from EPA's
website. This is incredibly concerning.
Will you commit to making scientific information, including
information about climate change, prominently available on
EPA's website?
Mr. Pruitt. Science is essential to our NO
x

program in review of those pollutants. It is essential as we
make decisions on Superfund sites. It is essential as we review
pesticides under statutory authority. It will remain central
and core to what we do and is in fact central and core to what
we are doing presently.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
now recognizes the Chairman of the full committee, Mr. Walden,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walden. I thank the gentleman.
And again, Administrator Pruitt, thank you for being here
and thank you for coming back later this afternoon when the
President concludes his meeting with you.
To the Portland Superfund site as you know that was
declared in 2000, 17 years later they finally have a Record of
Decision. One of the concerns I have heard from folks that are
involved in that is that there isn't the personnel in the
Portland area----
Mr. Pruitt. I am sorry. I didn't hear, Chairman.
Mr. Walden. There isn't the personnel in the Portland area
to fully implement the program, you have a lot of people up in
Seattle. And I just draw that to your attention they are
concerned about that and urge that you dedicate adequate
resources to the Portland site so they can get going on that.
And I know you are very committed to that whole cleanup
operation.
One of the other issues that has come up is the Clean Air
Act has the exceptional events exception process. We have had
all these wildfires. My gosh, they have these horrible
wildfires again in California. We had them in the Northwest. It
has been subject of some of our hearings here about how that
process works today, the amount of time, money it takes to go
through it to get an exception.
What can you do to ensure a more timely, cost effective EPA
process on exceptional event determinations?
Mr. Pruitt. There is actually quite a bit of work, Mr.
Chairman, with respect to ozone and exceptional events going
on. Bill Wehrum is our only confirmed AA at this point for air.
Bill is leading a task force review of both NSR but also these
issues around background ozone, but in addition to exceptional
events. We need to provide clarity in that area so that we know
how these rules will be enforced and applied going forward.
That clarity is not there presently and that is a focus of the
Agency presently as we go into 2018.
Mr. Walden. We would like to work with you on that. It is
important to a number of members on the committee. By the way,
you said he is confirmed. How many confirmations are you still
waiting for, for staff? How many do you have, confirmed people
in place, and how many are you waiting for do you know?
Mr. Pruitt. We have one.
Mr. Walden. One what?
Mr. Pruitt. One confirmed.
Mr. Walden. Besides you?
Mr. Pruitt. That is correct.
Mr. Walden. And how many would be pending?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, we have deputy, general counsel, all the
program offices. We have CFO, we have several that need to be
confirmed and hopefully that will occur soon.
Mr. Walden. Wow. EPA air emissions data show how air
pollutants have been steadily decreasing in the United States
over time. Since 1990, carbon monoxide concentrations are down
77 percent, lead down 99 percent, nitrogen dioxide 54 percent,
ozone down 22 percent, coarse particulate matter down 39
percent, fine particulate matter down 37, sulfur dioxide down
81 percent.
What role have advanced technologies such as hydraulic
fracturing played at decreasing the nation's air emissions?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, I think it is substantial. You know, many
don't know that we are at pre-1994 levels today with respect to
our CO
2
footprint. We have reduced our
CO
2
levels from 2000 to 2014 by almost 20 percent
largely through innovation and technology. We have achieved a
lot through mobile sources under the Clean Air Act for
reduction of CO
2
, but with respect to stationary
sources and other forms it has been primarily through
innovation and technology.
But you do highlight something, Mr. Chairman, that I want
to say. We need to celebrate progress that we have made as a
country with respect to our air quality. We have reduced those
pollutants that we regulate under the Clean Air Act by over 65
percent. That is a good thing and we need to celebrate that.
And that has been because of the actions you have taken here
and that has also been because of the actions we have taken at
the EPA.
But it has also been because of the actions taken by the
private sector in states across the country. It is a
collaborative process that has achieved good outcomes with
respect to air quality. We have much work to be done. Forty
percent of the country live in areas that don't meet air
quality standards, about 120 million people. We need to focus
upon that and it is an important metric that we are measuring
at the Agency.
But we do need to celebrate the progress we have made and
that has been through innovation and technology in a very, very
important way.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, sir. In addition, our committee has
submitted, I think, at least five letters to your agency
seeking records and documents and information. In the past
administration it was very, very difficult to get responses to
many of our requests. We appreciate the fact that we have
received more than a thousand pages of documents on grant
management issues. I also want to say we appreciate the
numerous bipartisan briefings you and your team have provided
especially in light of the hurricanes that took place. We do
appreciate that.
So know that when we send a letter we want a response and
we want it--you hear it from both sides I think that we expect
all the agencies to respond to our requests so we can do our
oversight work. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I would yield back
the balance of my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The
minority's request for those letters to be accepted into the
record, without objection, will be permitted.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Shimkus. And with that the chair now recognizes the
ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Pallone from New
Jersey, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I wanted to talk to you about, Mr. Administrator, about
TSCA, because unfortunately under your leadership I think EPA
is retreating from the important task of TSCA in regulating
toxic chemicals. The framework rules for implementation of TSCA
published in June are not consistent with the law in very
dangerous and worrisome ways, in my opinion, and I think this
is because Nancy Beck, a former lobbyist for the chemical
industry, was allowed to completely rewrite the rules in
flagrant violation of ethics rules.
And I have written to you twice regarding Nancy Beck's
involvement in these rulemakings, but I have not gotten a
response. So let me ask you a few questions and I would like
you to just answer yes or no. Did you ask Nancy Beck to recuse
herself from the framework rulemakings?
Mr. Pruitt. Nancy Beck like every employee at the Agency--
--
Mr. Pallone. Just yes or no. I don't have a lot of time.
Mr. Pruitt. Ranking Member Pallone, I need the ability to
answer your question and I will answer your question. Every----
Mr. Pallone. Well, I just, can you say yes or no before you
proceed with the answer?
Mr. Pruitt. Nancy Beck went through ethics review by the
ethics official at the Agency.
Mr. Pallone. So you did not recuse her. So let me ask you--
--
Mr. Pruitt. Mr. Ranking Member Pallone----
Mr. Pallone. Well, you didn't recuse her.
Mr. Pruitt. That is something that we have career----
Mr. Shimkus. Let's be respectful and let's let people
answer.
Mr. Pallone. I understand but----
Mr. Shimkus. But let's answer shortly and concisely so the
Ranking Member can----
Mr. Pruitt. We have career employees at the EPA that are
ethics officials that review those issues.
Mr. Pallone. OK, look. Mr. Chairman, he refuses to answer
the question. He obviously has not recused her, so I want to
move on. I have asked you for copies of all of Nancy Beck's
ethics agreements and waivers. Will you provide those to the
committee, yes or no?
Mr. Pruitt. Absolutely.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. The framework rules had already
been completed and sent to various internal EPA offices for
concurrence before Dr. Beck started at the Agency. We
understand that they were completely rewritten after she
started at EPA, by her. Now I asked you for a document tracking
the changes she made to the rules. Will you provide that to the
committee, yes or no?
Mr. Pruitt. We will provide the information that is
requested and make sure it is available.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Thank you, that is fine. I would
like to quickly focus on one specific chemical undergoing
review right now under the TSCA.
Mr. Pruitt. I am sorry. I didn't hear.
Mr. Pallone. I am sorry. I would like to quickly focus on
one specific chemical undergoing review right now under TSCA
and that is asbestos. Unfortunately, your EPA's work on
asbestos, in my opinion, clearly illustrates the problems in
how you are implementing the act.
TSCA requires EPA to look at the intended conditions of use
for a chemical defined as the conditions under which a chemical
is manufactured, processed, distributed, used, and disposed of.
But in the scoping document for the asbestos risk assessment,
your EPA has announced that you will look only at manufacturing
processing and distribution and you will completely ignore
asbestos that is being used and disposed of in this country.
Let me just explain. The use and disposal of asbestos is
the main source of risk from asbestos. If you ignore those
things you will produce a risk assessment that fails to capture
the risk to workers and ordinary Americans and, in my opinion,
will not be scientifically valid and will not be protective of
public health.
So my question really is this. Do you think you can just
ignore certain things that are inconvenient for the industry?
In other words you are saying we will look at the manufacturing
process, distribution, but we won't be looking at how it is
used and disposed of in this country. Do you understand what I
am asking?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, absolutely. And I think you raise a very
valid concern. In fact, I had a conversation last week about
this issue with the chemical office. I think you raise a very,
very meaningful concern.
Mr. Pallone. All right. So hopefully, we will see action on
looking at the use and disposal. Is that correct?
Mr. Pruitt. That is a very important factor that we need to
consider and that is something that I have already raised with
the office that is overseeing this.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Well, I appreciate that. Thank you,
Mr. Pruitt. The other concern I have is that now that Brazil
has banned asbestos mining all of the asbestos that is going to
continue to flow into the United States will come from Russia,
OK, because Brazil has banned it. So again my concern is that
the EPA is basically protecting Russian mining at the expense,
I think, of American workers by saying that asbestos is going
to continue to flow into the country but it can't come anymore
from Brazil. So would you just respond to that the fact that
right now Russian mining is the only source for it and we
continue to allow it.
Mr. Pruitt. Well, I think that as you have indicated, this
factor that hasn't been considered up until this point that is
something we are going to do going forward and I think that is
very important. I am not really familiar with the import issue
that you have raised. If there is an impact we can have on that
I look forward to the discussion on how better we can influence
that. I don't know what role we would play in that regard, but
look forward to that discussion.
Mr. Pallone. Well, I appreciate again your willingness to
look at that, Mr. Administrator. Thank you.
Mr. Pruitt. I think the primary issue is what you raised
earlier which is the disposal issue I think is very valid and
something we need to look at going forward.
Mr. Pallone. All right, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, can I just ask unanimous consent to put into
the record a letter from Linda Reinstein, who is executive
director of the Asbestos Disease Awareness Organization, and a
letter from the Safer Chemicals, Healthy Families coalition.
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
now recognizes the former chairman of the full committee, Mr.
Barton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Chairman Shimkus. I want to give
Ranking Member Tonko A+ for the line of the day so far, his
Sooner comment. That was----
Mr. Pruitt. That was very good. That was very good.
Mr. Barton. Excellent. Mr. Administrator, at the very
beginning of the Obama administration there had been a Supreme
Court case, Massachusetts v. EPA, that said the Clean Air Act
amendments didn't specifically say that CO
2
was or
was not a pollutant, therefore it might be found to be a
pollutant. As soon as President Obama came into office he asked
the EPA for a findings document.
This finding document was rushed through very quickly
within about, I want to say, 60 days and surprise-surprise said
that they found that CO
2
was a pollutant. There was
a career analyst at EPA that took exception to that and wrote a
scathing report that ripped it apart. That analyst was
discouraged from bringing his report forward and ultimately
forced to retire.
Are you aware of that finding document and, if so, do you
have any plans to revisit it?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, I am aware of the Mass. v. EPA decision
as you indicated that occurred in 2007. There was work actually
being done in 2008 by the Bush administration that was left to
the Obama administration, and you are correct, Congressman,
that the work done in 2009 was accelerated by the Agency.
In fact, there was something done in 2009 that in my
estimation has never been done since and not done before that
event, where they took work from the U.N. IPCC and transported
it to the Agency and adopted that as the core of the finding.
So there was a breach of process that occurred in 2009 that
many believe was not handled the proper way. But the Mass. v.
EPA decision and the processes that followed involved both the
Bush and the Obama administrations and that process was again
in 2009, I think, short shrifted.
Mr. Barton. I would encourage you to go back and revisit
the finding document and get the report that this career
analyst put forward. If you can't find it let me know, because
I have it and it is very damning on what they found.
My second question, I have been told that you plan at some
point in time to set up a red team-blue team review of pending
regulations where you have scientists basically engage in an
internal debate pro the regulation, con the regulation so that
you really get a balanced scientific understanding of the
pending regulation. Do you plan to use a red team-blue team
approach and if so when might we expect that to start?
Mr. Pruitt. That is an ongoing review internally,
Congressman. It is something that I hope to be able to do and
announce sometime beginning part of next year at the latest.
But that is something we have been working on for the last
several months in trying to put that together and that would be
a process that would be focused upon an objective, transparent,
real-time review of questions and answers around this issue of
CO
2
.
I think one of the most important things we can do for the
American people is provide that type of discussion, because it
hasn't happened at the Agency. As I indicated, the Agency
borrowed the work product of a third party and we need to
ensure that that discussion occurs and it occurs in a way that
the American people know that objective, transparent review is
taking place. And so that red team-blue team concept is
something that is ongoing as far as an evaluation and we may be
able to get there as early as January of next year.
Mr. Barton. Good. I would commend you on that. And I think
you know under the Obama administration EPA became more than
just an enforcement agency. It more and more began to intervene
in the policy arena, in many cases going further than at least
those of us on the Republican side felt that they should go.
Do you believe that before you set a standard you
absolutely ought to check with the Department of Energy and the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission so that you really get a
balanced analysis of what is going on, and do you feel that as
we take a look at the reauthorization of your agency and the
Department of Energy that it might be necessary to try to
rebalance that equation between the energy policy arena and the
environmental enforcement arena?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, as I indicated in my opening comments,
Congressman, it is important that as we do our work at the
Agency that we only do what Congress permits and authorizes us
to do. I think the challenges over the last several years--it
was mentioned in some of the opening comments about the Clean
Power Plan. It was unprecedented for the U.S. Supreme Court to
enter a stay against the Clean Power Plan, and as you know you
don't get a stay of enforcement on a rule unless there is a
likelihood of success on the merits later.
And so there was an understanding that the steps taken by
the previous administration, building blocks 1, 2, 3 and 4,
there was a reimagining of authority that took place under the
Clean Air Act that caused a lot of confusion on what was
authorized and what wasn't. That is not the proper way to
approach these issues and we are addressing that at the Agency
in ensuring that we hew to rule of law in these processes to
make sure that there is confidence in the rules that we adopt
going forward.
Mr. Barton. My time has expired. I thank you,
Administrator, for your answers.
Mr. Shimkus. All right. And the gentleman yields back. An
announcement for my colleagues, we are going to go to
Congressman Ruiz. He will have the last 5-minute block of
questions before we allow the administrator to get downtown,
and then I will make an announcement about getting back
promptly at 2:00 for the administrator and for us to follow up.
So with that the chair now recognizes the gentleman from
California, Mr. Ruiz, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ruiz. Administrator Pruitt, welcome to the committee. I
am Dr. Raul Ruiz and it is a pleasure to meet you. I want to
talk about particle pollution. Fine particle pollution is
harmful to human health and can be deadly even at the very low
concentrations. Hundreds of peer reviewed studies have found
that these microscopic particles can reach the deepest regions
of the lungs and actually enter the bloodstream. Exposure to
fine particles is associated with premature death, asthma
attacks, chronic bronchitis, decreased lung function, and
respiratory disease.
As an emergency medicine physician from the Inland Empire
in California, which has some of the country's highest levels
of particle pollution, I have seen firsthand the impacts of
exposure to dangerous levels of fine particle pollution and let
me tell you it is not nice. It is not a pleasant experience to
treat kids who come in with asthma because of a bad air
particle pollution day.
The scientific consensus long recognized by the EPA during
both Republican and Democratic administrations is that fine
particle pollution is a non-threshold pollutant, meaning that
there is no level of fine particle pollution exposure below
which no harm occurs, including premature death. So
Administrator Pruitt, do you agree that fine particle pollution
is a non-threshold pollutant?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. And I would say to you that particulate
matter under the NO
x
program, as you know we can't
engage in a cost-benefit analysis there. It is all about
health.
Mr. Ruiz. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt. And it is a very important role that we play
in those criteria pollutants under the NO
x
program.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you. Administrator Pruitt, were you aware
that the Bush administration used the health benefits
associated with reducing this non-threshold pollutant to
justify their 2003 Clear Skies legislation cosponsored by
Senator Inhofe?
Mr. Pruitt. I am familiar with the legislation.
Mr. Ruiz. Yes, they did.
Mr. Pruitt. I didn't know about the cosponsoring aspect.
Mr. Ruiz. They did. All right. And that the Bush
administration relied on those same health benefits for its
economic analysis for the 2004 Tier 4 rule to control emissions
from nonroad diesel engines? That is a good thing.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, it is, Congressman.
Mr. Ruiz. Yes, they did. They relied on that. Isn't it true
that the Bush EPA agreed that there are no safe thresholds for
fine particle pollution related health effects including
premature death in the 2005 Clean Air Interstate Rule?
Mr. Pruitt. I think you have stated it well, Congressman.
Mr. Ruiz. They did. The recently confirmed Assistant
Administrator for Air and Radiation, Mr. William Wehrum, played
a key role in developing those rules during the Bush
administration, and Andrew Wheeler, the nominee to be the
deputy administrator handled the Clear Skies bill when he
worked for Senator Inhofe.
Administrator, are Mr. Wehrum and Mr. Wheeler wrong about
fine particle pollution having no safe level?
Mr. Pruitt. Wrong about what?
Mr. Ruiz. That there is no safe level for particle
pollution, so I don't think they were wrong.
Mr. Pruitt. I don't think I stated that they were wrong.
Mr. Ruiz. OK, great. So you agree that----
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. So I am not entirely sure what your
question is. That Bill Wehrum is doing a fine job, is focused
on these issues as is Andy when he is confirmed as deputy and I
agree with your position that it is a very important criteria
pollutant that we need to regulate on the NO
x
----
Mr. Ruiz. Wonderful.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. In a very, very important way.
Mr. Ruiz. So despite that, this well-established scientific
reality, your proposed repeal of the Clean Power Plan, EPA
assumes for the first time that there are safe levels of deadly
fine particle pollution. That is a concern of mine. Did you
rely on any new peer-reviewed scientific studies to support
reversing EPA's position on fine particle pollution?
Mr. Pruitt. As you know, Congressman, no, we did not base
that upon--our withdrawal of the Clean Power Plan is largely
based upon the jurisdictional issues of the Clean Air Act.
Mr. Ruiz. OK.
Mr. Pruitt. And all I have to have is a reasonable basis to
withdraw a rule, a U.S. Supreme Court stay of the Clean Power
Plan----
Mr. Ruiz. Well, that is obviously a point of difference
in----
Mr. Pruitt. We did not base our withdrawal of the Clean
Power Plan upon the issues that you have cited.
Mr. Ruiz. OK. So I do think that the mission of the EPA was
charged by the people to protect the health and the environment
of the American people so that everybody, regardless of
socioeconomic status, can enjoy a healthy environment and
therefore live their life to full health potential. And this
Clean Power Plan was part of that mission to make sure that we
protect the environment so therefore we could protect the
people's health.
And there is no reliance on any scientific studies whether
they were peer-reviewed or non-peer-reviewed, as you just
admitted, in withdrawing this. This was your interpretation of
the jurisdictional matter of the EPA which we beg to differ, of
course, because we are here to protect the American people's
health.
Do you believe therefore that it was appropriate to reverse
the EPA's positions on the deadliness of fine particle
pollution? Because there is the assumption here that now the
EPA is saying that there is a threshold for that to happen.
Mr. Pruitt. We did not reverse it, Congressman. And
moreover, we are going to be introducing a replacement rule too
in place of the Clean Power Plan.
Mr. Ruiz. Before my time has expired----
Mr. Shimkus. Your time has just expired, but be quick.
Mr. Ruiz. Let me submit this unanimous consent to place
this 2012 letter from EPA to Chairman Upton into the record,
please.
Mr. Shimkus. Again we will look at it and I am sure we will
do it.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. And the gentleman's time has expired.
I want to remind all my members that pursuant to my
announcement at the start of the hearing, we are recessing now
so Mr. Pruitt can attend a meeting with the President at the
White House. Mr. Pruitt will be returning to the committee to
answer member questions. We will convene at 2322 Rayburn House
Office Building. This is for people who don't know the
operations here at 2:00 p.m. sharp, and stay as long it takes
for every member who is present and wants to ask questions to
be given their turn to ask questions.
For our guests in the gallery, your seat here does not
guarantee your seat when we resume the hearing. Seats will be
allocated on a first come-first serve basis starting at 1:45.
Should you wish to join the proceedings in 2322, and it is a
smaller hearing room, you will need to be in line outside of
2322. And I apologize for the inconvenience and the committee
stands in recess.
[Whereupon, at 11:00 a.m., the subcommittee recessed, to
reconvene at 2:28 p.m., the same day.]
Mr. Shimkus. The subcommittee will come to order. When we
recessed, it was Mr. McKinley's turn to be recognized. So with
that I want to recognize the gentleman from West Virginia for 5
minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Administrator, for coming and participating in this. Over the
years we had asked your predecessors to come particularly as it
relates to Section 321(a) to see the impact some of the
regulations were having in the coal fields and they declined to
do that.
But I am particularly appreciative of the fact that a week
ago or 2 weeks ago the EPA, you sent--other folks came to West
Virginia to get the impact of what these regulations are
having, because it is pretty clear in the statute that we have
to abide by the economic impact. We have to take that into
consideration when rules and regs are promulgated. They didn't
do that.
And I know you and I have had that conversation that you
want to follow the law very clearly, and I know a federal judge
has already ruled that the EPA in the past considered them
discretionary and not mandatory. I think your position I have
heard from you is that you think that they are mandatory and
you intend to abide by them. Am I correct on that?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, Congressman. And we did in fact as you
indicated send representatives to West Virginia as part of the
proposed withdrawal. And I do think it is important that that
is a rulemaking process. We have talked a little bit this
morning about the withdrawal of the Clean Power Plan, and as I
indicated earlier that is primarily jurisdictional as far as
the basis for that withdrawal.
But that is a rulemaking process, and so that rulemaking
process means that we go out and solicit and receive comment
from across the country. We are not just going to be in West
Virginia. We are going to be in Gillette, Wyoming soon. We are
going to be in San Francisco. We are going to be Kansas City.
There is going to be a crosscurrent of viewpoints with respect
to this issue and it is important we hear all voices and that
process is ongoing.
Mr. McKinley. Well, I think I particularly appreciate the
fact that you sent people to the coal fields to understand the
impact of what those regulations were doing when 86,000 coal
miners lost their job during the Obama administration and no
one paid attention. No one came to those communities to find
out what was going to be the impact of another regulation that
was going to put them out of business.
But part of the question is have they been able to debrief
you? What were some of the salient issues? What were the points
that were raised at the meeting in Charleston?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, quite a few comments that were offered,
it was multiple hours of information, and again a crosscurrent
of information that we are reviewing. And I think that,
Congressman, you hit on some very important matters with
respect to the cost of the Clean Power Plan that wasn't taken
into consideration before and that is something that came out
in the process in West Virginia.
Mr. McKinley. I know you have made a commitment. You said
you are going back to blocking and tackling the fundamentals of
rulemaking. Is there something that we should be doing here in
Congress to make sure that we don't revert back to that old way
of just following the ideology rather than science?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, I think there are some things we have
done recently that I think are very important to the process
that I talked about earlier. For many years the APA, the
Administrative Procedure Act that governs how we do rulemaking
has not been really followed as closely as it should. We have
used guidance as forms of rules at times which I think subverts
the voices that need to be heard on substantive actions. We
have engaged in regulation through litigation. We talked about
a sue and settle practice at the Agency that literally has
impacted state implementation plans across the country with air
quality.
And so there is much that we need to do to ensure that we
respect that process and make sure that rulemaking is adhered
to. Excuse me, the APA is adhered to as we are engaged in
rulemaking.
Mr. McKinley. Well, in the time--or is there something you
would suggest, because that has been on the books that they are
supposed to do that but we saw 8 years where they did not
follow that. Is there something that we should do to tighten up
that?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, I think that anytime an agency, and it is
not just the EPA it is any agency of the executive branch that
engages in litigation to change substantive requirements in the
statute, you know, timelines that Congress sets or taking
discretionary duties and making it nondiscretionary, as an
example, that is something that should be dealt with by
Congress. And I think speaking to that through codification is
something that could be, I think it would be very helpful.
Mr. McKinley. OK, thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Peters, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Mr.
Administrator, for being here. I wanted to ask you about the
methane rule. EPA has an effort to control dangerous methane
pollution from the oil and gas industry. The common-sense rule
asks operators to put our natural gas resources to productive
use rather than wastefully leaking them. I support the rule
because it will boost energy supplies, reduce air pollution
including smog, air toxins, greenhouse gases, and the estimated
benefit of capturing methane emissions from the oil and gas
industry is $2 billion annually.
Do you support this rule and if not, without it what would
you do to reduce wasted natural gas?
Mr. Pruitt. Congressman, historically, the way the Agency
has dealt with methane has been part of a VOC approach where
volatile organic compounds as we have regulated the VOCs
methane has been part of that bundle. What happened with that
particular rule is the EPA for the first time pulled methane
out of the bundle and regulated it separately. We haven't taken
any action on that as you know as far as the substantive rule
itself. There are compliance dates that are forthcoming that
have been extended and that has really been the focus up until
now.
But I think there is a meaningful debate, discussions that
should occur about whether the rule should be focused on a
bundle approach, a VOC approach, or whether methane should be
pulled out. As you know, methane is very valuable. Companies
don't like to flare methane because it can be captured and used
in other ways and it is very marketable, if you will. And so I
think having a rule in place that incentivizes that and ensures
that we approach it pursuant to the statute is something we
should look at.
Mr. Peters. OK. I think you and Secretary Perry have both
made appearances on CNBC and on March 9th you said that carbon
dioxide is not a primary driver contributing to recent climate
change, and that said differently you said CO
2
is
not the only contributor to climate change. Do you agree that
methane, nitrous oxide, and other greenhouse gases are air
pollutants?
Mr. Pruitt. Absolutely. Absolutely, and are more potent,
actually, than CO
2
.
Mr. Peters. Right, so----
Mr. Pruitt. Methane is more potent than CO
2
as
you know in that regard.
Mr. Peters. So I have to say it seems to me, I knew you
have emphasized the importance of points of process before, but
if the object is to reduce methane, nitrous oxide, and other
greenhouse gases what would be the strategy whether as part of
a bundle or is not part of a bundle, how do you think we should
go about controlling and reducing those greenhouse----
Mr. Pruitt. I think that distinction matters though,
Congressman.
Mr. Peters. OK.
Mr. Pruitt. I think as we look at the statutory framework
and how methane should be regulated the question whether it
should be part of the bundle is a significant question and so
that is what we are evaluating. Again the focus in the first 10
months has been on those compliance dates, and as you know the
rule is in effect presently and that has been the primary
focus. As we go forward, the discussion and the focus will be
on whether it needs to be a part of the bundle or not.
Mr. Peters. So I understand the procedural point you make
about whether it is part of the bundle, but whichever avenue we
take, whether it is part of the bundle or not, how would we go
about reducing the emissions of methane gas?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, you look at the wellhead, you speak to
companies with respect to the flaring practices that have gone
on historically, and there are best management practices and
best practices that can be deployed by companies to ensure
again there is not an incentive for companies to waste methane.
It is something that can be used and it is very valuable. We
need to recognize that and encourage and incentivize that.
Mr. Peters. Right. And I think one of the things that we
have noticed is it has many benefits and the price of natural
gas has gone down, so perhaps the incentive to lose that cheap
gas isn't as great as it might be to actually force the control
of it. But you mentioned a couple of things like looking at the
wellhead and so forth. Substantively, do you think that what is
the methane rule is the right kind of approach to deal with
that?
Mr. Pruitt. I think, Congressman, it is probably best that
in the rulemaking process it is important that I don't prejudge
outcomes and I think that what will be important is taking
comment on those issues as we go forward.
Mr. Peters. Do you intend to start from zero or do you
intend to put out the methane rule for additional comment? How
do you intend to land this plane?
Mr. Pruitt. It is yet to be determined.
Mr. Peters. All right. Well, I would say I think we have
made a lot of progress on it. I think that there is a lot of
understanding within the industry that natural gas can be a
better burning fuel than some fuels we use, but you have to
control methane to really get the benefit out of it from a
climate change standpoint and that is kind of where we should
be.
Mr. Pruitt. Thanks, Congressman.
Mr. Peters. Thank you.
Mr. Peters. The gentleman yields back his time. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Olson, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair. And welcome, Administrator
Pruitt. My congressional district, Texas 22, may be the biggest
one in America. Right now we have 850,000 people and growing
quickly. The huge majority of these people wanted me to tell
you thank you, thank you, thank you for making EPA what it
should have been, an agency in D.C. that works with local
governments, local private sector to get clear air and cleaner
water. Thank you for that.
They are frustrated by the last 8 years. The administration
used the EPA that became a combatant that actually kept us from
getting cleaner air and cleaner water, and they are thrilled to
have you there. They got tired of things we can't achieve as
human beings, technology that is not available and yet it is
demanded. They are tired of arranging lawsuits to sue and
settle and that is now gone also. Thank you for that.
There are many frustrations back home, one example, the
RFS. As you know, sir, I have had long and serious concerns
with the RFS. I hope this committee will act to take care of
this matter quickly. But in the meantime, until we act, guess
what, you are on point and you have a lot of leeway going
forward.
My question is how have the concerns about the ethanol
blend wall, or even RIN prices, figured in your decisions about
the 2018 targets?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, a couple things. Number one, I was very,
very appreciative to the Agency of the work that was done to
meet the deadline. Historically, as you know the November 30th
deadline to publish those volume obligations has been missed
and it creates uncertainty. People don't know what is expected.
It affects capital outlay, et cetera, and so it was very
important to meet that November 30th deadline and we did in
fact do that.
As we have looked at volume obligations with respect to
conventional cellulosic, bio-based diesel, the advanced
categories, the focus is try, we try to focus our efforts on
objective criteria whether it is production levels and/or
demand. As an example, the most we have ever produced with
cellulosic is about 180 to 190 million gallons domestically,
yet the volume obligations, historically, by the agencies have
been set around 300 million or so.
So when you set those levels artificially high it creates
other problems elsewhere and so I think in the administration
of that statute it is very important upon our agency to be as
objective as possible at setting those volume obligations to
reflect true production levels.
Bio-based diesel, the capacity is about 2.6 billion I have
heard, but the production levels have not eclipsed 2.1 billion.
We imported about 700 million gallons from last year to meet
that level, so there are a lot of questions obviously around
the administration of RFS. Please know that we are committed to
doing it pursuant to that statutory framework that you have
established, but at the same time that statutory framework is
very challenging because the levels that have been set by
statute have never been met. And so we have got a lot of
challenge there.
Mr. Olson. And as you know, Senator Barrasso asked EPA to
complete a long overdue study on the environmental impact of
the RFS. That is something that is required by the Clean Air
Act. Any update on the progress of this study?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. Actually, I have been briefed on that
within the last couple weeks and we have begun the process to
provide that study to Congress. That is something that is
statutory and something that needs to be done.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. And also talk about Hurricane----
Mr. Pruitt. I am sorry. Say it again?
Mr. Olson. Hurricane Harvey, sir----
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, yes.
Mr. Olson [continuing]. Hit my district hard. As you know,
hit us twice basically, the most expensive hurricane in
American history. Talking with Dr. Bryan Shaw, who heads up our
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, he is quite pleased
with the working together with EPA during that storm. You guys
deployed all over the Gulf Coast, on the coast, inland, and got
acting pretty quickly.
One concern is having money to go forward and one solution
may be what is called the State Revolving Fund. Can that be
used to address repairs in Texas? It is under your control and
will you do that?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, SRFs as you know have been used in a very
good way to address infrastructure challenges at the state
level and I think it is something that Congress ought to
consider.
Again I want to highlight something though with respect to
Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma and then what is going on
in Puerto Rico. We embedded officials from EPA with local towns
and cities across Texas, Florida as the storms approached in
order to have real-time decisions made on the threats that it
posed to drinking water, Superfund sites, chemical facilities,
and the rest, and it was truly an example of federalism in
action between the state, local towns and cities, and the U.S.
Government working to address those issues. So I am very, very
thankful for the leadership of Region 6, which is in Dallas and
then obviously Region 4 as it relates to Florida. It was good
work by their folks, employees, but also the folks at the state
level.
Mr. Olson. And speaking for Dr. Shaw, he would say great
teamwork with the EPA. Thank you, thank you. One final thank
you, the San Jacinto Waste Pits.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
Mr. Olson. Harvey knocked them loose. All this benzene came
out.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
Mr. Olson. You stepped up and said we will stop this
forever. So thank you for that.
Mr. Pruitt. I think it is important, Mr. Chairman, and this
is an example. We talked about the Superfund initiative at the
Agency. San Jacinto is a site in Houston, Texas that is just
off of I-10. It has dioxin that has been placed there and
embedded for a number of years and it is near a harbor and
barge traffic goes through.
The Agency has been working with folks at the state level
and responsible parties for a number of years and the solution
has been to take a covering and put it over the site and then
pile rocks on top of the site and it has been that way for 10
years. I was in Houston in mid-September and looked at the site
and it is totally unacceptable to have that type of temporary
situation because of potential hurricanes coming through and
displacing those rocks.
So we provided a permanent solution there, about $115
million of cost that responsible parties are going to bear to
provide a permanent solution and the citizens, I think, have
been very pleased with the outcome.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired. Let me go to
the other member from Texas, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you for being here today, Mr.
Administrator. I used to have the San Jacinto Waste Pits but in
Texas they keep changing our lines. I think it was in Pete
Olson's for awhile. Now it is in Brian Babin's. Ted Poe had
part of it. So, we change our lines in Texas.
But I want to thank you for visiting right after Harvey and
seeing what was there. And I appreciate EPA continuing to make
sure we have a permanent fix there because that area is like
you said, barge traffic, people crab and fish in that area and
both the city, the county, and the state have signs up in
Spanish, English, in Vietnamese that expectant mothers or small
children should not eat the crabs or the fish. But I don't know
if that day you were there, but every time I go there everybody
is fishing.
So, but thank you and hopefully we can move that as quickly
as possible because it is an industrial area but it also is a
recreational area, because I water-skied in that water back
when I was young.
But is there a contradiction of priorities of EPA between
the cleanup of the Superfund sites and the Agency's commitment
to the drastic cuts in the Superfund program? I know the EPA's
budget request was 30 percent cut in the Superfund program. I
know that may not affect San Jacinto Waste Pits because we have
a responsible party, but there are a lot of Superfund sites
around the country that don't have a responsible party.
Mr. Pruitt. Well, it is a concern, Congressman. In fact,
during the appropriations process, I conveyed to our committee
that if monies were necessary to address those orphan sites--we
have orphan sites that make up the Superfund portfolio--that I
would come and advise Congress and ask for those funds. I mean
it is very important that as we go forward on Superfund cleanup
that money not be the problem on how we get those cleanups. We
need accountability there.
I will tell you that in my time evaluating the Superfund
portfolio there are very few orphan sites and most of it is
just a lack of direction on how we should clean up. There are
several examples, in Chicago. I think one of the members
earlier today mentioned Portland. San Jacinto was one of those
where there just simply wasn't much direction on how to get
accountability and how to get cleanup with these responsible
parties.
And so we are trying to do both, but I commit to you that
if there are issues, deficiencies on funding with respect to
that Superfund priority we will advise you and ask for help as
we work through the appropriations process.
Mr. Green. OK. Well, thank you. Because I know back in
September the EPA Inspector General issued a report about the
distribution of Superfund full time FTEs among the EPA regions
does not support the current regional workloads. As a result,
some regions have to prioritize work and are slowed down like
you mentioned or discontinued. And are you aware of that OIG's
report?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. I have actually talked to the Inspector
General about the Superfund issues going forward and we have
looked at some management issues. How we bid projects,
sometimes they are not competitively bid. We sometimes are
getting bids that take--routinely I hear something will take 15
or 20 years. And I have pushed back saying that perhaps that is
not how long it should take and maybe the bid is just trying to
prolong things as far as receiving funding for 15 or 20 years
in those contractors.
So we are trying to get reform both in how we process and
how we bid out and do remediation, but also making decisions
early in the process to make sure that we get accountability on
outcomes.
Mr. Green. OK, since I come from the Houston area and the
Houston ship channel, where we have five refineries, my next
question. The EPA recently released its final ruling on
renewable fuel standard that said 15 billion gallon standard
for conventional ethanol. I know many of my refineries in my
district and along the Gulf Coast were disappointed with this
final number.
Would you commit to lowering future RFS requirements to
avoid this blend wall that we are having? And I know from
Oklahoma you understand.
Mr. Pruitt. Well, Congressman, I can't commit to certain
outcomes with respect to that process. That is a rulemaking
process. But what I can tell you is what I shared earlier with
the question, we will objectively determine each year what the
production levels look like they are going to be. We are
tracking those numbers now.
Biodiesel has been as big of a challenge as conventional.
We have routinely set that at 2.1 or higher. 2.1 was the last
number before this year. And as I indicated, we imported 700
million gallons of bio-based diesel from Argentina to meet that
2.1 billion gallon limit. So we ought not be dependent upon the
people of Argentina to meet a volume obligation that we are
setting domestically so that is something that we will continue
to look at, but we can't prejudge those outcomes at this point.
Mr. Green. Well, and every time I talk to one of my
refineries they talk about the problems of RINs and of course
the chair of the committee is a great fellow from Illinois but
we do have some differences on corn ethanol as compared to
biofuel.
Mr. Pruitt. But Congressman, it is a fair point and I will
say to you it is a real issue as far as RIN reform. We need to
get some accountability in the RIN market. There is a lot of
speculation that goes on with respect to RINs. There are
enforcement issues, fraud that occurs. In fact we just
prosecuted a company, I think it was 30 million plus as a fraud
that occurred in the RIN market. There is a lot of work to be
done to get reform and accountability in the RIN market.
Mr. Green. I would be glad to work with you on that. Thank
you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Mr.
Administrator, thank you for being here with us today. Let me
first express my support for your comments on cooperative
federalism. When issuing drastic regulatory changes like the
Clean Power Plan, the previous administration did not take into
account the people that would have been most truly affected by
those regulatory changes and those are the hardworking coal
miners, the power plant workers, and others throughout the
industry supply chain, all of which, many of which live in
eastern and southeastern Ohio where I live and represent.
As you well know, the Ohio EPA along with many other states
breathed a sigh of relief when the Supreme Court issued a stay
of this rule that would have had a devastating effect on not
only Ohio's electricity generation and economy, but other
states as well. That in my opinion is not cooperative
federalism. Now EPA's recent public hearing in West Virginia on
the proposed repeal of the Clean Power Plan I think exemplifies
the Agency's willingness to listen to those that would have
been most affected by the rule.
No one cares more about the air we breathe nor the water we
drink than those of us that live in regions where that kind of
work goes on, places like eastern and southeastern Ohio where
some of the best paying energy and manufacturing opportunities
for jobs reside. There is a necessary balance to environmental
protection and a process to share that responsibility with
states and local leaders like you have suggested is a crucial
and much needed change to how these regulations have been
approached in the past. So I applaud your work in that regard.
Mr. Pruitt. Well, if I could say, Congressman, and to give
you an example about how it shouldn't work, when I came into
this position there were 700 approximate state implementation
plans that many of your states had prepared on how to improve
air quality where resources had been devoted, expertise
delegated at the state level to improve air quality pursuant to
those state implementation plans. They were sitting on a shelf
at our agency that we had not acted upon and that is just
simply not a good way to do business.
We as an agency need to respond up or down on those kinds
of plans to give input and direction back to states. We need to
encourage and want to encourage states to take those kinds of
steps. And I think it was very disheartening over the last
several years for that to take place. We are trying to remedy
that.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I thank you for that collaborative
approach. I want to move on to another subject though that is
important in our state, the deadlines under which the Brick
MACT which were set up under, set under a 2015 EPA rulemaking
are soon approaching. These regulations affect domestic brick
and tile manufacturers among other small businesses typically
located in rural communities, and in most cases are the primary
source of jobs in those little small communities especially in
my district. The EPA, your agency, recently announced its
intentions to reconsider these regulations. Can you please
elaborate on status and timing of the Agency's reconsideration
of the Brick MACT regulations?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, as far as the timing it would be very
difficult to provide that to you at this point, Congressman. I
think we need to assess what that process will look like. It is
not a rulemaking process, per se, but it approaches that and so
that is something that we will have to evaluate.
I apologize that I don't have that answer, but----
Mr. Johnson. Can you look at it and get back to us?
Mr. Pruitt. Sure.
Mr. Johnson. OK, all right. That will work. Let me just
make some comments about that. The last Brick MACT rule was
enacted in 2003. Hundreds of millions of dollars spent by the
industries to comply then later vacated by a federal court, but
only after most brick manufacturers had already committed to
facility modifications to comply and the money had been spent.
So for all practical purposes, judicial review was
meaningless in that case in terms of the economy and the jobs.
Do you agree we don't want to see a repeat of that kind of
situation?
Mr. Pruitt. Absolutely. And I think as we look at other,
there are other examples, Congressman. Where that has happened
where there has not been a stay of enforcement on a particular
rule. Those that are required to meet the rule's obligations
take those steps and by the time that judicial review takes
place it is somewhat hollow with respect to whether the rule
was constitutional or lawful in the first instance. So I think
it is very important that we work to get these things right so
that that doesn't happen.
Mr. Johnson. I appreciate it. Mr. Chairman, I yield back a
5 whole seconds, and I thank you for your service, Mr.
Administrator.
Mr. Shimkus. The chairman thanks him and the chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Colorado for 5 minutes, Ms.
DeGette.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Administrator
Pruitt, thank you for coming today. I am the ranking Democrat
on the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee of this
committee and I will tell you, we all take our obligations very
seriously. Effective oversight relies on receiving the
information from the agencies that we oversee.
And members of the committee have sent the EPA over 34
written requests this year including requests about the lack of
transparency at the Agency, removal of climate data from the
website, and other critically important topics. Now to date,
Mr. Administrator, we have received no response to eight of
these letters. Let me give you an example and I can give you
copies of all of these.
On May 18th, members of this committee and the Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology sent a letter requesting
documents and additional information on EPA's premature removal
of qualified experts from EPA's board of science counselors.
Now we still, 7 months later, have not received a response.
Mr. Pruitt, can you commit to giving us a timely response
to this request?
Mr. Pruitt. Are you referring to BOSC? Is that what you are
referring to, the Board of Scientific Counselors?
Ms. DeGette. That is correct.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. We will provide whatever information you
need there.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Mr. Pruitt. I would disagree that it was a premature
removal. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. Well, no, no. I am not arguing with you about
the substance.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. I just need to get the information.
Mr. Pruitt. Sure.
Ms. DeGette. And then there are seven other letters that we
have not gotten responses. Can you also commit that you will
give us responses to those letters?
Mr. Pruitt. If you inventory those. I have a----
Ms. DeGette. I will give you copies of all of them.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. Now there are 22 other letters, Mr. Pruitt,
that the minority at least feels have had incomplete response.
For example, there was one on April 20th where Ranking Member
Pallone sent a letter requesting a briefing on the budget
requests and they got a five-sentence letter back that
basically said we are developing the President's budget based
on the framework provided by the blueprint and gave no other
information. It is hard for us----
Mr. Pruitt. What timeframe is that? I am sorry,
Congresswoman.
Ms. DeGette. It was April 20th.
Mr. Pruitt. OK.
Ms. DeGette. So it is hard for us to develop our oversight
if we don't have this information. I am going to work with
other members of this committee on those other 22 letters to
drill down and see what additional information we feel we need
from the Agency. Can I get your commitment to please also
respond to those and I will give that all to you?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, ma'am. And I will say we have got a group
of individuals that----
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. Thank you very much. I only have 5
minutes. I am so sorry. One of the things about the lack of
information is the TSCA bill. And I will tell you, my buddy Mr.
Shimkus and I and all of us on this committee, we worked really
hard to revise TSCA and that is one of the crowning
achievements, we think, of this committee.
But since we did this on a bipartisan basis, the Obama
administration proposed banning methylene chloride from use as
a paint stripper based on extensive evidence of unreasonable
risk to human health, and so we haven't heard yet from the EPA
whether they are giving the public an indication about whether
they are finalizing the rule. I just have a couple of questions
around that.
Have you personally met with Dow Chemical or the American
Chemistry Council to discuss this rule while we are waiting for
the update?
Mr. Pruitt. No, ma'am.
Ms. DeGette. OK. And will you commit to finalizing this
TSCA rule for methylene chloride and doing so soon?
Mr. Pruitt. I will commit to reviewing it and giving you an
answer soon, yes.
Ms. DeGette. That would be great. When do you think we can
get an answer?
Mr. Pruitt. I don't know, but we will advise you soon after
this meeting.
Ms. DeGette. OK. That would be great, thanks. We will be on
top of it, don't worry. Now one last thing, a press account
said that you installed a $25,000 soundproof booth in your
office at EPA headquarters. Is that true?
Mr. Pruitt. It is a secure phone line.
Ms. DeGette. OK, so it is a SCIF, what we call a sensitive
compartmental information facility; is that right?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. And did you do that because part of the EPA's
mission involves classified information?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, ma'am, part of that but also
communications with the White House. There are secure
conversations that need to take place at times and that is----
Ms. DeGette. So you believe it is appropriate to use the
SCIF to talk to the White House?
Mr. Pruitt. I believe that there are secure conversations
that need to take place that I didn't have access to that----
Ms. DeGette. OK. So what percentage of your work would you
say is conducted in this SCIF?
Mr. Pruitt. It is hard to predict that----
Ms. DeGette. Well, is it 50 percent of your conversations?
Is it 75 percent?
Mr. Pruitt. Cabinet level officials need to have access to
secure communications.
Ms. DeGette. Oh. I am talking about the one that you put
into the EPA. How often do you use that SCIF?
Mr. Pruitt. It is hard to predict in the future----
Ms. DeGette. 95 percent?
Mr. Pruitt. I haven't taken any calculations of that.
Ms. DeGette. Well, when you use that----
Mr. Pruitt. It is necessary for me to be able to do my job.
Ms. DeGette. OK, let me ask you. So you use that only for
classified information or for communications with the
President. Is that your testimony?
Mr. Pruitt. It is used for secure communications that need
to take place at the office.
Ms. DeGette. And that is what you think is appropriate for
a SCIF. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady yields back her time. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, I believe, Mr. Flores,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank you,
Administrator Pruitt, for joining us today. I want to thank you
for the EPA's timely rollout of the RFS standards. I think it
is the first time in the RFS that that was done, so I
appreciate that. There is a bipartisan group of us here in
Congress including Chairman Shimkus, Peter Welch, others, and
myself that are working on a solution to this, the challenges
of the current RFS statute also with respect to RIN reform, so
we may need data and input from you and so be expecting a
request from us on that.
Moving to ozone for a minute, one of the challenges with
ozone regs is that the 2008 standards were rolled out and then
there were huge delays in the rollout methodology from the EPA
and then the 2015 standards were levied out on top of that.
That has created substantial uncertainty in our communities in
terms of trying to comply with two standards essentially at one
time.
And then when you add to that there is a growing
recognition that--well, before I get to that, today I think
most people agree that most of the country even based on some
of the EPA's own modeling show that most of the country will be
in compliance in 7 years with both standards.
And then you add to that there is a growing recognition
that international pollution is causing several communities to
not be able to meet the standards. There is actually a recent
analysis by the Midwest Ozone Group of the EPA said that but
for international contributions the United States east of the
Rockies would attain the 2008 and 2015 standards by 2023.
So a couple of questions in this regard, the first one is
does it make sense to force new compliance burdens on states
before existing controls have been implemented?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, speaking generally to those pollutants
that we regulate under NO
x
, I think the 5-year
review process that we engage in should be a review and not
necessarily just an automatic ratcheting down, because I think
when you look at the 75 parts per billion versus the 70 parts
per billion that was the focus of the ozone rule, there are
issues that you describe. Air transport issues, background
ozone, exceptional events I think came up earlier today. There
are issues that we need to calculate and understand as those
standards are set.
So going forward, I think the 5-year review process should
not be interpreted as an automatic ratcheting down. It should
be a review of whether the levels are protective of human
health.
Mr. Flores. OK. Do you think it makes sense for states or
communities to be punished for ozone that is beyond their
control that comes in from other areas or background ozone?
Mr. Pruitt. No. And in the designation process,
Congressman, we try to take that into consideration. There are
areas in Wisconsin as an example that are facing compliance
issues because of air transport issues.
Mr. Flores. Right.
Mr. Pruitt. And we are trying to calculate that into the
designation process as best we can.
Mr. Flores. Good. In order to address the situations that
we have just talked about, supplementally, in order to comply
with my time limit, I would like you to tell me what you think
Congress could do to help with this and also what EPA could do
under its current statutory authority.
Mr. Pruitt. Well, I think that, mentioning background ozone
and background levels, I think there are certain parts of the
country that really have--there is no economic activity that
could occur and they still would be violative of the standard
that has been set. So I think Congress assisting the EPA in how
to address background levels would be substantially important.
I think also the exceptional events, there is a lot of
confusion, better put, lack of clarity on how to apply
exceptional events in the designation process and otherwise and
so I think some clarity around that would be much appreciated.
Mr. Flores. OK, great. We are working on that. I wanted to
take a second of my remaining time to ask for your help with an
agricultural herbicide that is called glyphosate. I think it is
more commonly known as Roundup by the manufacturer.
Last month, HHS released an agricultural health study that
determined that this particular chemical does not cause cancer,
again does not cause cancer, and that is similar to a study,
the outcome of a study that the EPA made this past March. The
challenge is that the state of California and the International
Association for the Research of Cancer claiming that it does
and that creates uncertainty among our agricultural community
as well as the manufacturer of this particular herbicide.
And of course we have got to get all of this sorted out
because you have one group of folks saying it does, you have
got two other government agencies saying it does not cause
cancer. Can I get a commitment from you to have your team take
a look at this to try to sort this out?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. And there has been another study I think
at NIH that was similar to the one you cited. So there is some
clarity that we need to provide on this going forward and, yes,
we need to work with you and others on the committee that are
concerned about that.
Mr. Flores. OK, thank you. I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney, for
5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. I thank the chairman and I thank the
administrator for coming here in front of us today. In response
to Chairman Walden's questions, you said that the U.S. should
celebrate the progress that has been made in reducing air
pollution. I agree. You also said that that is in large part
due to technology and innovation. I agree completely. But do
you think that the progress that has taken place would have
been made without the EPA regulations enforcements? And these
are regulations that you are now eliminating.
Mr. Pruitt. I think the EPA's regulation framework has
helped, absolutely, in contributing to those outcomes, but I
think it has been a partnership between regulatory response as
well as technology in the private sector. So I think it has
been a combination of factors.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Ozone pollution is one of the most
widespread pollutions in the United States and scientists have
been studying its effect on health for decades. Hundreds of
research studies have confirmed that ozone harms people at
levels currently found in the United States. The Clean Air Act
requires that the EPA to review the latest scientific evidence
and set air quality standards that will protect public health,
these standards that we rely on to know whether ozone is safe,
what levels of ozone are safe.
Administrator Pruitt, do you agree that the ozone pollution
is a problem that the EPA should address?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. It is a criteria pollutant under the
NO
x
program that needs to be addressed.
Mr. McNerney. Good. Approximately 30 percent of the people
in my district suffer from asthma partly related to ozone, but
your actions, in my opinion, do not demonstrate a commitment to
addressing the problem. For example, on October 1st, 2017
marked the legal deadline for the EPA to identify communities
with levels of ground level ozone pollution above the EPA's
2015 ozone standard. These are also known as non-attainment
areas.
Administrator Pruitt, you spoke a lot about the rule of law
in your statement. Did the EPA announce attainment designations
by the October 1st statutory deadline?
Mr. Pruitt. Congressman, we have designated all but 50
sites across the country, approximately, and we have made
tremendous progress since the timeframe that you are talking
about, so we are very close to finishing that process.
Mr. McNerney. But you didn't make the October 1st deadline.
Mr. Pruitt. Some of those were designated prior to that
time, yes, but not all.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I think you mentioned this already,
about half of the counties that were not designated by October
1st comprise about half of the United States population.
Mr. Pruitt. Some of that is based upon, Congressman, on
information that has not been provided by the states. So
sometimes there is insufficient information in which for us to
make a determination and so there is a communication to those
states to get that in to help us finish that process. It is not
exclusively, you know, something we can do without that
information.
So it is a combination of factors, but we are working
diligently to finish that process. The designations are
occurring. And as I indicated, there is only approximately 50
sites across the country that need to be designated, out of
hundreds by the way.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Will the EPA engage in a transparent and
science-based process in setting designations for the remaining
parts of----
Mr. Pruitt. I am sorry, Congressman.
Mr. McNerney. Will the EPA engage in scientific and
transparent process in designating those areas----
Mr. Pruitt. It will absolutely be a part of the record.
Mr. McNerney. Well, on your website you state that the
purpose of the EPA is to ensure that all parts of society--
communities, individuals, businesses, state and local and
tribal governments--have access to accurate information
sufficient to effectively participate in managing human health
and environmental risks. Are you fulfilling the purpose of the
EPA keeping information from Americans about the ozone levels
in their area?
Mr. Pruitt. I am not sure in what ways, Congressman. Maybe
you can clarify your question, how we are keeping it from those
citizens.
Mr. McNerney. Well, you haven't, you didn't meet the
October 1st deadline and you still haven't fulfilled the entire
requirement. So you are keeping information from communities
that need to know what their attainment levels are.
Mr. Pruitt. That is not information, it is a designation
process which is a legal process, Congressman, that we are
going through to make those designations, which we need
information to do that and I think we are making tremendous
progress and should be done very soon.
Mr. McNerney. Administrator Pruitt, you have made it clear
that you are committed to Superfund cleanup, but what about
preventing creation of new Superfund sites? What is your
commitment in that regard?
Mr. Pruitt. In what regard, Congressman?
Mr. McNerney. Well, the EPA's job is to protect public
health, so it should be the job to prevent companies or
entities from creating Superfund sites. Are you committed to
that?
Mr. Pruitt. Correct. That is something--when you say
creating Superfund sites, sometimes states actually ask for us
to put Superfund sites on a list which I was just trying to get
clarity about that. Yes.
Mr. McNerney. I am not talking about designation. I am
talking about creating pollution that could be designated as a
Superfund site.
Mr. Pruitt. Obviously lead, uranium, these issues, we want
to do all we can to eliminate those things so we don't have
those kinds of sites across the country, absolutely.
Mr. McNerney. Well, in your rush to eliminate regulations
that is exactly what you are doing is creating opportunity for
new Superfund sites to be created.
Mr. Pruitt. I wouldn't interpret it that way, Congressman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Hudson,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Mr.
Administrator, for making the extra effort to come back and
take all of our questions and thank you for your strong
leadership at the Agency. I appreciate also your efforts to
make the EPA focus on air and water and soil contamination.
My state of North Carolina has been shaken by a discovery
of a chemical called GenerationX in the Cape Fear River. I know
my state reports that GenX is no longer getting into the river
and that treated drinking water is within state health goals.
The previous EPA administrator permitted use of this chemical
within conditions in 2009. Can you say whether EPA has
discovered if GenX was used in an impermissible fashion?
Mr. Pruitt. I am not aware, Congressman. We can provide
that information to you. I don't have any information on that
today, but we can get that to you.
Mr. Hudson. I appreciate it. I understand the EPA is
updating its risk assessment of GenX and is performing an
independent laboratory analysis and several other compounds in
water samples that are being collected now by the North
Carolina DEQ along the Cape Fear River including waste water,
surface water, ground water, and treated drinking water
samples. Are there any findings that you can discuss on that so
far?
Mr. Pruitt. Again on that I would have to get the
information from the office and provide that to you to make
sure it is complete, comprehensive, and up to date.
Mr. Hudson. Great. I appreciate that. One issue that is a
real concern to folks in my part of North Carolina, whether it
is agriculture or just property owners in general, is the
Waters of the USA regulation. And I have heard some of your
critics say that you have done the same thing as your
predecessor in that you have already decided the outcome of the
rule and are just casting about for justifications. That is
sort of the claim that we keep hearing. I would love to give
you a chance to respond to that.
Mr. Pruitt. Well, I think oftentimes with respect to issues
like Waters of the United States and CPP, it is not
deregulation in the true sense. The Waters rule that was
adopted in 2015, the stated objective was to provide clarity.
That was what the past administration said. If that were the
stated objective it was they failed miserably.
Mr. Hudson. I agree.
Mr. Pruitt. Because the confusion across the country on
what a Water of the United States is where federal jurisdiction
begins and ends. And so there is a process that we are going
through to deal with the deficiency. There is a court stay
against this 2015 rule that you are aware of, and so our
obligation is to provide a definition and that process has
begun in earnest and we should have a proposed rule by April of
next year timeframe and we are taking significant comment on
that along with the withdrawal of the 2015 rule. So it is not
deregulation in the truest sense, it is regulatory clarity
going forward so we know where federal jurisdiction begins and
ends.
Mr. Hudson. Sounds good to me. One of the main arguments in
favor of the Obama administration's Waters rule is that it is
essential to protecting drinking water and that without this
version of the rule public health would be at risk. The Safe
Drinking Water Act, however, has provisions addressing both the
protection of source water, Sections 1453 and 1454, and
underground sources of drinking water, Part C. Do you agree
that the Safe Drinking Water Act has these provisions and
provides protection to source waters?
Mr. Pruitt. Absolutely. And let me say to members of the
committee, one of the things that we are focused upon as we
head into 2018 is lead in our water supply, safe drinking
water. And I think there are tremendous challenges we have
across the country with respect to service lines in particular
communities and the lead that is seeping into the water supply
of our children. It is one of the greatest environmental
threats I think we face as a country.
And one of the things that I hope that I can work with this
committee on as we go into 2018 is a strategy over a 10-year
period to eradicate those concerns. And it is going to be a
very ambitious initiative at our agency and it is something
that we have various offices in the Agency working upon. There
are about 17 agencies actually that are working on this issue
of lead as well.
And I am sending a letter to my colleagues in other
agencies to make this a point of emphasis as we go into 2018.
So not only do I agree with what you are saying about the reach
on these issues, but I think there are important matters that
we can take on lead that will make a difference for our
citizens across the country going forward.
Mr. Hudson. Well, thank you for your answers.
And Mr. Chairman, I think I can speak for folks on both
sides of the aisle that we look forward to that discussion. And
with that I will yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman----
Mr. Pruitt. And I understand, if I may for a second.
Mr. Shimkus. You may.
Mr. Pruitt. I understand that that is a costly endeavor.
Replacing service lines across the country it has been
estimated may cost as much as $30 billion or maybe upwards of
$50-, $30- to $50 billion. But I will say to you that if we can
develop a 10-year strategy on how to address that across the
country--the State of Michigan as an example, right now, is
considering lowering its levels from 15 parts per billion down
to 10 parts per billion on the standard, but they are also
spending a tremendous amount of money to replace those lead
lines, as I understand it.
And that is good leadership with the governor of Michigan
and I think, frankly, we in Washington need to have that kind
of conversation with states across the country to focus on that
issue. The President has talked about infrastructure, the
importance of using some of the infrastructure discussion to
address some of these things and I look forward to that
discussion with you.
Mr. Shimkus. So if the gentleman would allow me to yield,
so we passed a Safe Drinking Water Act out of the full
committee which should be helpful in this. My friends on the
other side wanted more money, so maybe in a supplemental and
stuff in this process, we have already started moving to try to
do that legislatively, but executive branch focus would be
helpful.
Mr. Pruitt. Look, it is not just service lines. It is
corrosion control measures that need to be deployed, obviously
paint as well. So there is a multifaceted approach that we need
to evaluate on how to declare a war on lead, if you will, but I
want to let you know as a committee it is something I desire to
work with you going forward in 2018.
Mr. Shimkus. You will have some interest.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Cardenas, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Pruitt, appreciate the opportunity for us to--as I
quote you, the dialogue that begins today. I hope that future
dialogue doesn't span 10 months between these opportunities. Is
your current office, place of work, Washington, D.C.?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. And prior to becoming the EPA
administrator what city or state did you live in?
Mr. Cardenas. Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Mr. Cardenas. Tulsa, Oklahoma, OK. Well, Mr. Pruitt, I
would just like to point out for the record that you traveled
to Oklahoma for 43 out of 92 days this spring according to the
Washington Post. That is almost half of every day in March,
April, and May of this year. I am extremely troubled by reports
that your frequent travel to and from Oklahoma occurred at the
expense of the U.S. taxpayer and cost more than $15,000 just on
those trips alone. And it appears I am not the only one
concerned.
At the request of members of this congressional committee,
EPA's Office of Inspector General has begun an audit to review
issues of potential waste, fraud, and abuse associated with
your frequent travel back to Oklahoma at taxpayers' expense.
Also, your record of wasting taxpayer dollars does not end
there.
Later news reports uncovered that you along with other
members of the Trump administration have been using private
jets and military aircraft at tremendous taxpayer expense. One
of the most expensive examples was in early June when you and
several of your staff traveled on a military jet from
Cincinnati, Ohio to John F. Kennedy Airport in New York on your
way to Italy. The cost of that flight alone was reportedly over
$36,000. In August, you chartered a private plane to fly from
Denver, Colorado to Durango, Colorado, in the same state,
costing the U.S. taxpayers over $5,000. You did so even though
the governor of California had reportedly offered to fly you on
a state-owned plane.
Mr. Pruitt, the taxpayer bill for your travel on private
jets and other non-commercial aircraft is a record total more
than $58,000 since February of this year alone. These costs are
especially offensive given the severe cuts you have proposed to
essential and lifesaving EPA programs. Take, for example, the
Office of Environmental Justice which helps poor communities
who are being disproportionately impacted by environmental
pollution. This administration proposed to eliminate the Office
of Environmental Justice.
So Mr. Pruitt, are the American people supposed to believe
that we cannot afford $2 million to help our most vulnerable
communities but we can afford tens of thousands of dollars for
you to fly on private jets?
Mr. Pruitt. First, I want to say to you, Congressman, I do
look forward to the dialogue and I appreciate your comments
going forward. I think there is much work that we can engage in
together and I look forward to that discussion.
Environmental justice is something that I met with,
actually, internal members of our team, yesterday, talking
about issues like East Chicago. Environmental justice is an
important issue. It is something that we seek to translate to
real action on the ground and we have since I have been
serving, with particular emphasis on Chicago in the east, the
Superfund situation there.
On the travel that you have highlighted I would just say to
you, every trip that I have taken to Oklahoma with respect to
taxpayer expenses has been business related. When I was in
Oklahoma for a WOTUS meeting, a Waters of the United States
meeting, we had three states converge in the Panhandle of
Oklahoma that had Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas come together.
There were hundreds of individuals in attendance. That is a
very important effort.
Bird Creek in Osage County had high salinity levels. Region
6 had not responded to those high salinity levels. There was
harm taking place with fish in that water and as such we needed
to take action and I was there to address that. There are
concerns that affect Oklahoma and Region 6 just like every
state. Every dollar that was expended with respect to those
travel was business related. When I have traveled back to the
state for personal reasons I paid for it and that will bear out
in the process.
But let me say this to you, finally, with respect to the
travel, commercial travel is what we fly almost exclusively.
The situation in Cincinnati, I fly with the President for a
meeting on infrastructure. We were going to the G7 in Italy and
could not make the flight at JFK unless we got a public
transport, so that is why that decision was made. But it has
been only four instances during the entire time that I have
been serving as administrator and it was always based upon
circumstances.
You mentioned the one in Colorado, the reason that occurred
is because we were going into Gold King, Colorado to address
the needs and concerns of the citizens there and couldn't make
it otherwise. And I would dispute the governor's reference that
you made earlier.
Mr. Cardenas. Oh, really. OK. Well, thank you very much for
stating for the record, because the Inspector General is
looking into those details and I hope it all bears out and
let's see what the outcome is.
Well, I wanted to be respectful of giving you an
opportunity to answer and there goes all of my time. So with
the last 5 seconds, I just would like to ask that I be able to
insert these two letters from the EPA's Inspector General
agreeing to investigate this travel. I ask unanimous consent to
enter them into the record.
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Shimkus. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
North Dakota, Mr. Cramer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Administrator, for your candor, for being
here, and for your strong leadership. And I might just say you
used a term in responding to Mr. McNerney that I think is a new
term at the EPA and that was partnership. And I think that my
friend from California's line of questioning bears out that you
see states as stakeholders and partners not as subordinates.
Thank you for going to places like Oklahoma and to North Dakota
and other states in the middle of real America that are
affected by what for the last 8 years has simply been a
dictatorship by the EPA. So thank you for that and we
appreciate your willingness to address us in our home states.
I also want to congratulate you on your incredible work on
meeting these deadlines, the 27 years that gets done in a
matter of weeks and months. It probably shouldn't seem like
such a high standard, but by comparison and doing all that with
only one confirmed AA is really quite remarkable. So I look
forward to when you have a full staff and a full team and we
can really get to it.
And I know CPP and WOTUS are the big topics obviously in
North Dakota as you know, but I want to get to the heart of a
couple of things that you have emphasized. And like my friend
from Texas, Mr. Olson, I appreciate your commitment to process
and rule of law. I appreciate your commitment to cooperative
federalism.
And I know you are very familiar with a couple of North
Dakota cases. One in particular of course, the regional haze
case that started in California and North Dakota was blocked
from intervening in, which just kind of blows me away that
states don't have as a matter of right, constitutional right,
standing in cases that affect them especially with regard to
regulations that they have primacy over regulating.
The more recent one is one that sort of straddled your memo
on sue and settle that I want to bring to your attention and
see if we can't work more closely together--you, me, our
attorney general--on addressing it as we go forward. And that
was a RCRA revision of rules that was proposed in 2016, a
consent decree was declared between the EPA and
environmentalist groups and North Dakota was blocked from
intervening.
And this is, it related to oil and gas industry in our
state, where our state has primacy we were blocked from
intervening. Oral arguments in October of this year, about the
same time as you were putting out your memo, occurred in the
D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals and we were blocked again. The
environmentalists and the EPA prevailed.
But what was most disturbing about that and why I want to
bring it to your attention is because you have a really big
task in front of you to meet not just the rules but the culture
change that we hope to achieve, and that is it was the
Department of Justice attorneys that argued so effectively
against the State of North Dakota in the D.C. Circuit.
So as we go forward, what I would love to do is be able to
maybe have a meeting with my attorney general and you and me
and plan the next phase of this and use the State of North
Dakota as a partner as opposed to a litigant on the other side.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. As I indicated earlier in my opening
comments and I think in response to questions, from your
perspective, you have put into place a process by which we are
supposed to adopt rules. And rules are supposed to be what,
laws of general applicability. And so when you are involved in
litigation and you change requirements under a statute,
discretionary to nondiscretionary or timelines or otherwise and
then you apply it in a general fashion, that is something that
I think is offensive with respect to the APA process and should
be dealt with.
And that is why the sue and settle practice is important as
we go forward. We may consider codifying that loosely said with
respect to rulemaking, but it is important that we implement
this directive I have sent to respect the APA as we make
decisions.
Mr. Cramer. Well, with regard then to states' rights,
because I really feel like it is not just RCRA, it is all of
the acts under the EPA, it is several other agencies where it
seems like the right for a state to have standing somehow has
to be based on some finding of harm or injury. And it seems to
me that in a cooperative federalism states should just have
that right, especially if it is a regulation that they have
primacy over.
I am wondering if we should be doing something to codify
that which it seems to me the Constitution should be adequate
for, but whether we should do it broadly or whether we should
do it very specifically. And I might add and then you can
answer and wrap up my time, should you have some more
independent litigation authority, independent of, say, of the
DOJ or other----
Mr. Pruitt. Well, look. I think on the first point, I do
think that perhaps Congress addressing the standing of states
to address some of those. Most of those are state
implementation plans. Many of them deal with regional haze
requirements under the Clean Air Act, and I do think it is
important that the voice of those states are heard.
And that is the reason as it relates to the directive that
I issued, we asked Justice to take a very accommodating posture
with respect to the state intervention on these issues, but
there probably is more that can be done to make sure that that
happens going forward.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you. And I thank you for your service.
Mr. Shimkus. Time is expired. The chair now recognizes the
young lady from Michigan, Ms. Dingell, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Pruitt, it is good to see you here and I was
very glad to hear you talk about this war on lead we need to
have. I share like every one of us, I have met those children
in Flint. I have lived with some of those families. It is a
very serious problem and we all need to work together to make
sure it never happens in another community again.
We have been meeting with my mayors for the last year even
in my own community, included the state.
Mr. Pruitt. It is not just Flint either.
Mrs. Dingell. No, it is all--I have it in my district. I
don't have Flint in my district, but it is a concern all over
the country. But having said that there are some things I think
that are happening at EPA that actually threaten that what you
are talking about. So I have got a lot of stuff to talk about,
EPA matters in Michigan.
Could I ask for some yes or no questions just to this. For
example, the EPA budget for 2018 eliminated two programs that
provide grants to states and tribe grants to support their lead
training and certification programs for lead paint removal
contractors and the lead risk reduction program; is that
correct?
Mr. Pruitt. We welcomed Congress restoring that and we
talked about that in the appropriations process.
Mrs. Dingell. OK. It would have represented a 90 percent
reduction or a $26.5 million in funding. In addition to
proposed cuts, we have seen delays on several key rulemakings.
You talked about one of them which isn't only in Flint. It is
another plume that I have got in mind, which is the Agency's
long overdue update to the Lead and Copper Rule for drinking
water system. It was supposed to be completed by June of this
year and now it appears to be delayed to next month. Will we
see it next month?
Mr. Pruitt. The Agency, Congresswoman, as you know has
taken over a decade on that.
Mrs. Dingell. I nudged them too.
Mr. Pruitt. No, no. 1991 was the last time we had a Lead
and Copper Rule.
Mrs. Dingell. But we need it and you have been promising
it.
Mr. Pruitt. And there is much work that has gone on over a
decade and I will tell you it is a major part of what we need
to be about with respect to this war on lead.
Mrs. Dingell. So when are we going to see it?
Mr. Pruitt. We are working on it and it is something I am
committed to.
Mrs. Dingell. All right. And the Agency recently delayed
implementation of a 2015 rule to require steam electric power
plants to install pollution control equipment to limit
effluents, including lead, from being discharged to rivers. The
2015 rule was the first update to these regulations in 30
years; is that correct?
Mr. Pruitt. I am not sure about the timeline,
Congresswoman. I take that but I don't know for sure if it has
been 30 years.
Mrs. Dingell. All right. Can we work together to get these
things done, because they matter to our communities.
Now I am going to quickly--but I am going to make one
little--I am not trying to be--I just care. You made a comment
to MDEQ that you should have made about reducing the amount of
staff that they had and that they needed to have more people on
their team addressing these Flint issues.
Mr. Pruitt. MDEQ.
Mrs. Dingell. Michigan Department of Environmental Quality,
do you know that? You recommended that MDEQ hire more staff
with water management expertise. I agree with that, but you
have only got one person. You are offering buyouts and cutting
experience and manpower at your agency, the one with oversight
responsibility for all these state programs while advising
Michigan to do the opposite. So I would encourage you to look
at that.
But I have got to do two more things. First, I am going to
go to my--all politics is local, but it is not just local. It
matters to this country. We have an EPA lab in Ann Arbor that
is doing critical work for every single state on automotive
emissions and fuel economy. The budget would have eliminated
that. The auto companies support it. The environmentalist
community supports it. Everybody knows what good work it has
done.
Will you support keeping that lab open with all the
important work we have got coming down the road?
Mr. Pruitt. I will.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. You just made my day. But now
having said that the Great Lakes. Michigan is, it is not just
Michigan. It is all the states that are on the Great Lakes.
They matter. They are more than 20 percent of the fresh water
supply in the world. The EPA, the President's budget would have
eliminated all the dollars for the Great Lakes Restoration
Initiative or the GLRI. Republicans and Democrats on this
committee and in the House and Senate worked to restore that.
The EPA had something to do with eliminating that down to zero.
Can you explain why and can we work with you to make sure that
never happens again?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, I actually talked to your senator about
this a couple nights ago.
Mrs. Dingell. We care.
Mr. Pruitt. Oh, I know, and not just Michigan, but other
regions. The Great Lakes Initiative is something that has been
very successful. You have an issue with invasive species there
with carp.
Mrs. Dingell. A serious one.
Mr. Pruitt. And it is something we need to pay attention to
and I respected Congress and their restoration of those funds
and appreciate that and we will continue to work with you in
that regard.
Mrs. Dingell. And not cut them again?
Mr. Pruitt. Excuse me?
Mrs. Dingell. And not make an effort to cut them again?
Mr. Pruitt. That is a process that we will go through next
year. That is not something that is unilaterally our decision
as you know. That is a combination of decisions----
Mrs. Dingell. We will be back if you do.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady's time has expired. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, believe it or not,
Mr. Walberg, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. And Michigan works together on
these things, so I want to thank my colleague for some of the
questions there.
But also, Administrator Pruitt, I want to thank you for
being here. Thank you for your straight talk. I thank you for
the fact that we don't have to watch you use a lot of notes.
That says something about your understanding of the issues.
You made a statement in this Great Lakes Restoration, the
Initiative report that had a lot of good things in it, your
Interagency Task Force on the Great Lakes that you--I am
grateful--chair, and you said that the GLRI is protecting
public health in the Great Lakes more than any other
coordinated interagency effort in the U.S. history in helping
to ensure that our children and their children live in safe,
healthier communities. I thank you for that statement. I agree
with you on it.
I would just follow up my good friend and colleague from
the other side of the aisle. My question is this. Can I count
on you and your agency to work with my office, our Michigan
delegation, and the state to support programs to protect
cleanup and preserve the Great Lakes?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, sir.
Mr. Walberg. I appreciate that and whatever it takes I
would assume that that would be the case.
Mr. Pruitt. I mean as an example, Congressman, as was
mentioned earlier, the Great Lakes Initiative is similar to the
Chesapeake TMDL and how the states came together to address a
concern. There it was something different, but this process is,
the Great Lakes Initiative is something that we should work
together to make sure that it is achieving good outcomes and I
think it has and we will continue that discussion as we head
into 2018.
Mr. Walberg. Right. Well, thank you. Another issue I feel
very strongly about is the environmental threat the algae
blooms pose to Lake Erie which is in my district. This
committee has worked over the years to address this issue and
encourage cooperation between federal agencies and the states.
I supported my colleague from Ohio. It is tough for a
Michigander to support Ohio at times especially after the game
2 weeks ago, but I supported Bob Latta's legislation in 2015
that required the EPA to develop and submit a plan to Congress
for assessing and managing risks from the cyanotoxins. Could
you please update me on the latest efforts by the Agency to
address the harmful algae blooms in the Great Lakes and more
specifically Lake Erie?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. The algal blooms there, but other parts of
the country have been a primary point of emphasis for the
Office of Water working with states on nonpoint source
discharge for a number of years as you know, Congressman. It is
something that we actually have a task force internally and a
dedicated team of individuals looking at that to try to achieve
better outcomes and that is ongoing.
I can provide other specifics to questions that you have as
it relates to Lake Erie. I would have to get that from the
staff to get an update for you, but it is something that is
absolutely a priority.
Mr. Walberg. And we are taking a broad perspective.
Agriculture has its problems, we know that. We also know in
Michigan the MAEAP program has attempted to be very effective
in trying to address the concerns about excess nutrients,
fertilizers, all sorts of things that come from agriculture.
But there are other processes that go into this as well and I
would assume that you would be looking at the total.
Mr. Pruitt. Well, look. And I think we need to recognize
that there are farmers and ranchers all over the country that
have taken very important steps to address those issues. I have
said many times those farmers and ranchers are our first
conservationists or our first environmentalists. They care
about these issues as well and we need to make sure their
voices are heard to ensure that we are working together to
achieve those outcomes.
Mr. Walberg. I thank you for that. What cooperative efforts
has EPA undertaken with other federal agencies in this matter
dealing with algae blooms?
Mr. Pruitt. Congressman, I am not entirely sure if
Department of Ag has been a part of our discussion. I am sure
that they have been historically. Sonny Perdue and I have not
addressed it, but it is something that we ought to do going
forward and ensure that there is partnership like with the
Department of Ag and there are probably others, but perhaps the
Department of Interior with certain aspects of Secretary
Zinke's shop. But I think Department of Ag would be a very
important partner in this process.
Mr. Walberg. OK, invasive species, specifically Asian carp.
What is the involvement with EPA in looking at that? It is a
huge, huge problem for the Great Lakes. The Army Corps of
Engineers, any involvement with them, other federal agencies as
well as state and local governments, what is the EPA doing
there?
Mr. Pruitt. A point of emphasis and you mentioned the
Corps, the Corps has been very, very involved in that.
Mr. Walberg. Very, very slow in that as well.
Mr. Pruitt. Well, perhaps we can encourage them.
Mr. Walberg. I would appreciate that and we will look
forward to----
Mr. Pruitt. We are working together with the Corps on a
multitude of issues, Congressman, not the least of which is
WOTUS. But the leadership there has been responsive and so we
will take that information and make sure that we communicate
that to our partners.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you and I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
now recognizes the gentlelady from California, Ms. Matsui, for
5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Pruitt, for being here today.
Mr. Pruitt, I understand that you and President Trump have
decided to reopen the Midterm Evaluation, the greenhouse gas
emission standards from model year 2022 to 2025. Can you
briefly list for us which groups and companies asked you to
revisit the evaluation?
Mr. Pruitt. I wouldn't say reopen, Congresswoman,
necessarily. This is, as you know the Midterm Evaluation was
supposed to have taken place in April of 2018. That is when it
was supposed to occur. The past administration accelerated that
for it to happen in December of '16 into January of '17. And
this was simply a restoration of process to ensure that the
midterm review took place consistent with the original
understanding.
Ms. Matsui. So this is the halfway step, it is not a total
evaluation?
Mr. Pruitt. That is right.
Ms. Matsui. OK, all right. OK, so I will go along with you
for that. I just want to suggest to you though that this half-
step evaluation I am somewhat concerned about this because
these standards to save consumers particularly dollars at the
pumps and reduce oil consumption has been validated many times
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions that contribute to climate
change. And the standard is good for American drivers and good
for the environment and it is really necessary, particularly
because the International Energy Agency found that the
transportation sector is the only area in which the U.S. has
become less energy efficient
Now I also believe that our country should be investing in
clean transportation options and many auto companies share my
opinion. One of our major domestic auto manufacturers recently
announced it is cutting spending on internal combustion engines
and instead investing billions of dollars in electric vehicle
development. Another company plans to release 20 all-electric
vehicles in the coming years.
Can you please answer yes or no, do you support efforts to
strengthen American innovation and manufacturing through
electric vehicle R&D and production?
Mr. Pruitt. It definitely should be a part of the mix,
Congresswoman. And I would say this to you as well, the Agency
has not adequately considered with those standards high octane
being used as well. There has been a lot of focus on the design
of vehicles and access to electric vehicles as well, but not as
much on the fuel side and I think that we need to incorporate
that into the discussion as well.
Ms. Matsui. So you have a plan to support the electric
vehicle market in the long term?
Mr. Pruitt. That would definitely be part of the evaluation
as we head into April of 2018 and we continue in the years
ahead, I am sure.
Ms. Matsui. All right. I am pleased to hear that because
EVs will be a significant portion of our vehicle mix in the
future and we need to be positioning the United States to
benefit from their adoption.
Mr. Pruitt. We want to ensure, if I may for a second?
Ms. Matsui. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt. We want to ensure that as we set those
standards that you don't want people staying in older model
vehicles. The whole purpose here is to ensure that as the
vehicles are manufactured that they meet efficiency levels and
outcomes that are important to the environment.
Ms. Matsui. I understand.
Mr. Pruitt. And so if you don't look at the cross section
of issues from high octane fuel design and what you have
raised, Congresswoman, the very purposes are not achieved. And
so we are taking all those into consideration as we head into
April '18.
Ms. Matsui. OK, certainly. Mr. Pruitt, I am now running out
of time. Does California currently have a waiver to set its own
light-duty vehicle emission standards through 2025?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. There is, as you know, a statutory waiver
for California that is evaluated as part of the midterm review.
Ms. Matsui. Right. Is the EPA involving the State of
California in your review or partial review to a 2022 through
2025 emission standards?
Mr. Pruitt. I missed the first part of the question, I am
sorry.
Ms. Matsui. Are you involving the State of California in
your review of the 2022 to 2025 emission standards?
Mr. Pruitt. As part of the midterm review the California
waiver is necessarily a part of that process.
Ms. Matsui. OK, great. That is encouraging because I
believe that the communication of all involved stakeholders is
very important. And Mr. Pruitt, can you please answer yes or
no. Do you believe that environmental laws envision a
cooperative relationship between states and the federal
government?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
Ms. Matsui. In the past you have said that the previous
administration was ``aggressive about dictating to the states
and displacing their authority.'' Is this correct?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Matsui. Given your support for states' rights under
federal environmental laws, do you support California's ability
to seek a waiver to set its own Clean Air Act light-duty
vehicle standards?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, federalism principles, Congresswoman, do
not say that one state can dictate to the rest of the country
the standard for the entire country. So there are a multitude
of considerations with respect to the waiver and those we
considered in due time.
Ms. Matsui. That we will definitely work with states in
order to do this.
Mr. Pruitt. We have already reached out to the governor of
California and are waiting for a response.
Ms. Matsui. OK, great. So as I mentioned previously,
certain auto manufacturers asked for changes to the emission
standards. Some have specifically asked for flexibilities under
the current program. Are you considering providing these types
of flexibilities or are you also looking at relaxing the
standards entirely?
Mr. Pruitt. As part of that midterm review all things will
be considered.
Ms. Matsui. OK. NHTSA has made----
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Matsui. All right. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
South Carolina, Mr. Duncan, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Pruitt, thank you for being here today. This
hearing has been extremely informative to me for learning the
Trump administration priorities within the EPA and I have to
say I have been extremely impressed and supportive with the EPA
thus far under the Trump administration and your leadership.
You all understand what the intended role of the Agency is and
have effectively worked to roll back the bureaucratic overreach
and power abuses of the Agency under the previous
administration.
Through cooperative federalism you prioritized what should
be left up to the states when it comes to both energy and
environmental matters. The states should be the ones to set
their own limits in regards to the environment and I thank you
for understanding the crucial role the states and localities
play in this process. A quick question about the February 28th
presidential executive order on Waters of the U.S., could you
inform me of the status of that AEO?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. On February 28th, the President issued an
executive order asking the Agency to review that definition
from 2015. We in fact are doing that. There is a two-step
process presently that is ongoing. One is a proposed withdrawal
of the Waters rule and that is in the marketplace.
There is comment being taken upon that, in fact the comment
period is closed. And we have a substitute definition of what a
Water of the United States is that will come out sometime in
April of next year. So there is a substantive replacement that
is forthcoming and a withdrawal that is already in the
marketplace that makes up the response to the February 28th
executive order.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you. A lot of us were alarmed when we saw
what was defined as a navigable waterway under the previous
administration. A lot of times these were ditches that didn't
hold any water, no stream bed, only had water during a
significant rain event, but yet they were regulated under the
Waters of the U.S. and that was to the detriment of the
developer, the landowner, the farmers, and what not. So I thank
you and the administration for doing that.
I want to shift gears to ports. The South Carolina port
regulated by the Ports Authority in South Carolina, our
Charleston port, is important. One in every 11 jobs in South
Carolina is attributed to some sort of port activity. So could
you explain how under the Trump administration the permitting
process for ports is carried out in a more timely and efficient
manner to ensure that these ports continue to maintain, be a
main economic driver while still protecting the environment?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, it is not just a port issue, Congressman,
but I think the permitting process at the EPA has been very
inconsistent. I talked about this, this morning, with respect
to the ten regions and how individuals in Region 8 or Region 6
are being treated differently than Region 5 and Region 10. And
so we are trying to get processes in place to ensure that there
are timely responses.
A permitting process shouldn't go on for years and years
and years, and we have many examples at the Agency where,
literally, the decision on whether to grant or deny a permit
has taken over a decade. That is entirely unacceptable. And
what we are doing is trying to set an outside time limit that a
decision will be made up or down on whether a permit should
issue.
In fact, I have been told, I mentioned the chief operating
officer earlier today, it is our goal by the end of 2018 to
have processes in place to ensure an answer up or down on
permits within 6 months as we go forward. So that is something
states are doing across the country. It is a major undertaking
at our Agency but we are trying to reform the processes
internally to provide answers with more clarity and more
certainty.
Mr. Duncan. I applaud you for that and I wish this
committee had jurisdiction over the Corps of Engineers and we
could encourage them to manage river systems in this country on
a regional basis instead of a one-size-fits-all. Because I can
tell you, eastern river systems like the Savannah River system
is different than western river systems, and how the Savannah
River Basin is managed from a Corps of Engineers standpoint and
possibly even an EPA standpoint is different than how a western
river system should be managed. That is important to my
district that has core lakes and downstream flows that affect
Mr. Carter's district.
So Mr. Administrator, I appreciate you being here. With
that Mr. Chairman, I yield back a minute of my time.
Mr. Pruitt. Well, if I may, I really appreciate the comment
about regional variation, because as we look at the Waters of
the United States rule as an example, I mentioned this earlier
today. The states have, North Dakota has something called
prairie potholes and as I spent time in North Dakota I had
never seen a prairie pothole. But that is a unique aspect of
that state that needs to be taken into consideration as we look
at these issues. So I really appreciate your feedback. That is
the reason we were reaching out to governors and these DEQs,
DNRs across the country to make sure that we are making
informed decisions not only on just permitting, but the
substantive rules that we are talking about.
Mr. Duncan. Yes. That is critical. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Carter, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Administrator. I appreciate you
being here today very much. Pardon me?
Mr. Shimkus. My apology, talking to another member here.
Mr. Carter. No worries.
Administrator Pruitt, during the last administration,
toward the end of the last administration there was a rule that
was titled Greenhouse Gas Phase 2 Rule for Medium and Heavy-
duty Trucks. And in my opinion this had a lot of overreach in
it because it included regulating truck trailers as self-
propelled vehicles. And I have introduced legislation to deal
with this and I just wanted to ask you.
You issued a statement on this rule back in November and in
that rule you issued a statement on the review of glider kits,
but you didn't include anything about tractor trailers. Do you
intend to do that? Are you familiar with this at all?
Mr. Pruitt. I actually appreciate you bringing it to my
attention. I was aware of the latter that you mentioned but not
the former, so that is something that I will definitely take a
look at.
Mr. Carter. OK. I appreciate it because it is something
that is very important to us, particularly to the tractor
trailer industry which is a big industry down in our area as
well.
I also wanted to ask you, in my district in the coastal
region of Georgia, the entire coast of Georgia I have the honor
and privilege of representing that area. We have got three
significant Superfund sites, and very briefly can you just
bring me up to date where we are at with that with the
Superfund sites and the status of the program and the
improvements you may have made with this?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes. There were 42 recommendations that we
would be happy to make available to the committee, but in the
month of May-June timeframe we commissioned this task force to
evaluate how we can better manage the Superfund portfolio and
out of that came 42 recommendations. Those recommendations are
being implemented as we speak and the great progress is being
made.
And we are trying to address because there are certain
areas, and in Portland--I am sorry. I can't recall the member
that brought it up this morning, but the City of Portland and
the harbor there were substantial issues. It was a large area
that was impacted. There was progress that could be made in
certain parts of the Superfund area and not others. And so we
made a call to get started on those areas, because what has
happened historically is that we delayed taking any positive
action until the entire area had been decided upon on how to
proceed.
So we are trying to make those kinds of changes to provide
clarity to the communities and also ensuring that we are
hearing the voices of those cities and towns and citizens about
those decisions. I think that has been neglected in the past.
So there are many things we are looking at, but ultimately it
is to ensure that we get outcomes and we get decisive outcomes
and decisions are made and responsible parties are held
responsible for the harm they have caused in those areas.
Mr. Carter. Are there any kind of legislative actions that
you feel like you need that we would be able to make that would
help you in that area?
Mr. Pruitt. It is a good question because in the
brownfields program as an example this body has been very, very
successful with respect to changes in the brownfields program.
I think there are some reusability opportunities with respect
to Superfund sites, sites that are more marketable going
forward. Ultimately, our goal in the Superfund portfolio should
be to remediate those sites, protect human health, and see
those sites redeemed as far as using them going forward. And so
there may be some things we can work on together to adopt a
brownfields kind of approach to some of the Superfund areas
within the portfolio.
Mr. Carter. Good. As I mentioned before, I represent the
entire coast of Georgia, over a hundred miles of coastline. So
as you can imagine, we have a lot of boaters in that area and
our office has been getting a lot of calls about the tiers of
engine classes that are available for specialized boats
particularly among the harbor pilots and the bar pilots. They
are having a lot of trouble with the lack of flexibility that
is in the framework.
They have got situations where we have heard requirements
of them forcing people to, in the scenarios where the
manufacturers don't necessarily make an appropriately tiered
engine for a boat type and they are having a lot of trouble
with this and it is causing them problems with being able to
order these boats. Are you familiar with this or is this
something that you have been addressing at all?
Mr. Pruitt. It is not something that I have been privy to
as far as discussions at the Agency, but I would be happy to
look at it.
Mr. Carter. OK. And if it is OK I would like my office to
be able to send you this information so that you can review it
because it is a serious problem down here. They want to comply
and they want to do this to do the right thing, but they need
some flexibility with it as well.
Mr. Pruitt. OK.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Administrator. One last
question, as I understand it, Mr. Administrator, you are from
Oklahoma; is that correct?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. Can you say Go Dawgs?
Mr. Pruitt. It is hard. It is hard.
Mr. Shimkus. I think the gentleman is out of order.
Mr. Carter. Out of order.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, Boomer Sooner comes out easier.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Harper, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks so much for being here, Administrator Pruitt,
and congratulations on a great, almost 10 months I guess that
you have been in this role. And while I was born in
Mississippi, my late father was born in Altus, Oklahoma and
grew up there, so we have a great affinity for the State of
Oklahoma in my household. So I appreciate you taking the time
to be here and go through this.
Yesterday, I was appointed chairman of the Subcommittee on
Oversight and Investigations here in Energy and Commerce, an
important responsibility that I will now have and I certainly
don't take that lightly. Many of the matters that we have
reviewed and will review will concern the EPA.
While I cannot comment on the minority's interest and
agenda, I can pledge to my colleagues across the aisle and to
you that I will work with you when at all possible and that in
the weeks ahead I will be reviewing available information with
the chairman of the full committee and committee staff to
determine our oversight agenda regarding the many agencies
under the committee's jurisdiction including EPA.
I will also work closely with the chairmen of the other
subcommittees to identify issues we think deserve focus and
attention. In addition, I wanted to emphasize that as with all
agencies in the committee's jurisdiction, we do anticipate and
expect that the EPA will cooperate with our inquiries and I
hope you, Administrator Pruitt, will respect our constitutional
prerogatives and will be fully responsive to our inquiries and
requests for information, and I assume we can count on that.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Harper. Thank you.
Mr. Pruitt. And it is good to meet you and I am glad to
hear about your connection to Altus.
Mr. Harper. Thank you so much. The Obama administration's
EPA rule on wood heaters had two steps. Step one took effect in
2015 that reduced emissions up to 90 percent. Step two is
scheduled to take effect in 2020 and will reduce emissions a
bit more. The 2015 step one has already gone into effect.
But the wood heater industry, many of them are having great
difficulty developing models that meet the 2020 step two
standards. So one of the things we have looked at is giving
more time in a matter that was actually marked up yesterday to
extend that by 3 years. Do you believe that it makes sense to
give this industry a little more time to meet the step two
standards rather than seeing companies going out of business
and letting workers go?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, I think it is always helpful,
Congressman, in response to your question, for Congress to
provide those kinds of direction to the Agency, and I am glad
to hear and encourage that this body is looking at that to give
us the path forward in that regard. And as that occurs we will
make sure we work with you to address the issue.
Mr. Harper. Many of the customers for these wood heaters,
many of them will be in the rural areas, many low-income
individuals or households. So, it is a feeling I would assume
that you would agree that the EPA needs to make sure that its
rules don't drive up prices unnecessarily.
Mr. Pruitt. All those things have to be considered in the
regulatory process, but I very much appreciate the
congressional response as well on those deadlines.
Mr. Harper. One last thing in the time we have. Last week,
the Oversight and Government Reform Committee held a hearing on
the Regulatory Reform Task Force. During the hearing, Deputy
Associate Administrator Bolen testified that retrospective
review of regulations was nothing new to EPA. What are some
regulations that have been repealed and what are some others
that have been proposed but maybe not yet finalized?
Mr. Pruitt. Goodness. Are you talking about Brittany Bolen?
Mr. Harper. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt. And I am not sure. I haven't reviewed her
testimony, but are there any specific rules or areas that you
are concerned about?
Mr. Harper. Just wondering if there is something that you
have got on your radar that we need to be aware of that you are
looking at.
Mr. Pruitt. I think that we have been very, regulatory
reform pursuant to the executive order and that task force is
something that I think is going to be ongoing as we head into
2018. The agenda that we have spelled out there is very
apparent and I think we have addressed some of those here
today.
If there are certain rules or regulations that are of
concern to you or others on the committee, we look forward to
that discussion but I can't point to any particular one that
hasn't been discussed already. My apologies in that regard,
but.
Mr. Harper. Administrator Pruitt, we want to thank you for
your time and your insight. We look forward to working with you
in the years ahead. Thank you.
Mr. Pruitt. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. Just an
announcement of my apologies to my colleagues who have been
here for a long time, the committee rules dictate that members
who don't serve on the committee go by seniority on the full
committee. So with that I recognize the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Rush, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank you, Administrator Pruitt, for your
attendance here. After your confirmation hearing in January you
were submitted questions for the record asking you to define
environmental justice and whether you considered it a serious
issue. And in your response you seemed to give the issue, in my
opinion, short shrift as you reported as saying that you were
``familiar with the concept of environmental justice.''
You then went on to say in a vague way, and I quote you
directly, ``the administrator plays an important role regarding
environmental justice.'' And this statement you repeated 11
times in your written response. Then a few months later, after
you took over the Agency, the former Assistant Associate
Administrator for Environmental Justice, Mr. Mustafa Ali, an
individual who worked with my office on several occasions, Mr.
Ali resigned in March after 24 years of service stating that he
did not see any indication that you or the rest of the
Administration are interested in any way in helping vulnerable
communities.
I just want to say this is deeply disturbing to me because
as you know protecting these communities is an essential aspect
of the EPA's mission and is one that appears to have been, in
my opinion, summarily neglected. So Mr. Administrator, how
would you prioritize EPA's responsibility to protect the
nation's most vulnerable populations from pollution? Is it a
high, medium, or low priority? How would you define it?
Mr. Pruitt. Congressman, thank you for your comments. And
let me say to you it is a priority and I will give you
feedback.
Mr. Rush. Is it a high, medium, or low priority?
Mr. Pruitt. It is a very important priority at the Agency,
and I will give you an example. East Chicago, an area that I am
sure you are familiar with, with respect to a Superfund site
there, there are threats to water supply and there is a
community in East Chicago that has faced those threats for a
number of years.
I traveled to East Chicago, met with members of the
community there that make up the constituency group, those that
have not had a voice in some of these areas, and met with them
about a progress and an answer on that East Chicago area. In
fact, we have sent staff there multiple times since I left to
ensure progress. So it is something that I consider an
important priority.
I met with internal members of our team as recently as
yesterday, the NEJAC group that meets internal to the EPA on
environmental justice, and we talked about these very issues of
making sure that individuals who historically have not had
voice to impact outcomes with respect to Superfund or other
issues that we take that seriously and actually take that into
account going forward. So it is something that is an important
priority going forward.
Mr. Rush. So it is an important priority, all right. The
record shows that you--let me ask you another question then.
The record shows that you have met either in person or by phone
with the API on at least three different occasions, on the 28th
of June, on the 29th, and also on the 6th of November. My
question to you, there is as an individual who is a scientific
advisor for the API and her name is Ms. Una Blake. Are you
familiar with this individual?
Mr. Pruitt. The name doesn't sound familiar, Congressman.
Mr. Rush. So have you had any occasion to discuss her
position on hydraulic fracturing? She indicated that hydraulic
fracking is a health benefit to minority communities, to
African American communities specifically and this is in
contrast to NAACP study that found that many African American
communities face an element of risk of cancer due to air toxic
emissions in natural gas. Are you familiar with the NAACP
study?
Mr. Pruitt. The person to whom you refer, I am not familiar
with that person. So I am sorry.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much, Administrator Pruitt. I
also want to thank you personally for meeting with me earlier
this year to discuss some of the issues in the 9th
congressional district of Virginia, and I appreciate that you
will continue to work on those. One of those that I think that
we talked at that time but I want to discuss again today dealt
with the EPA's regulations affecting medium and heavy-duty
vehicles. Now the problem that I have is that the prior
administration wanted to regulate both the tractor and the
trailer.
But the code says that the motor vehicle which is the area
where the authority comes from, the term motor vehicle means
any self-propelled vehicle designed for transporting persons or
property on a street or highway, and of course a trailer is not
self-propelled. It has to have the tractor component and we
make both in my district. I have Volvo which makes the tractor
and then I have companies that make the trailers and about
2,000 employees just making trailers in my district. So it is a
very important question.
And so I guess what I have to ask is, is that with that
reading of the law--and look, I have to applaud you all for
agreeing to reconsider those regulations overall, but at some
point the EPA needs to either acknowledge that there is no
authority over the trailers or come and ask Congress for that
authority. Do you know how long it will take before you get to
that point?
Mr. Pruitt. And I agree wholeheartedly. It is one of those
areas where the text of the statute is something that governs
whether we have authority or not and we need to provide clarity
on that and do it soon and advise Congress if there is a
deficiency. So I agree wholeheartedly with your position.
Mr. Griffith. Well, I appreciate that. In fact, one of the
folks there before said that since you had to have goods in the
trailer to move anything that that is how they got authority.
And I made the analogy at the time, well, that gives the EPA
the authority to restrict the weight of the driver because you
can't drive at least at this point until we get to the
driverless trucks. At this point you have still got to have a
driver in the truck and if you are going to get to weights and
that kind of thing on things that aren't self-propelled motor
vehicles then you can do anything.
All right. I do want to talk about some New Source Review
issues and I am concerned that the EPA has been using New
Source Review programs inappropriately in the past as a weapon
against coal-fired power plants using enforcement actions to
change the way the program is supposed to work and making it
hard for these plants to do the type of maintenance projects
that are needed to keep them running reliably and efficiently.
I have introduced legislation to address this problem. A
lot of us are hoping that you will help on this. Can you give
me some yes or no answers to the following questions? One, EPA
has taken New Source Review enforcement actions against coal-
fired power plants because they have taken steps to become more
efficient. Are you aware of this?
Mr. Pruitt. I am.
Mr. Griffith. And do you think that this is the way the
program is supposed to work?
Mr. Pruitt. I don't.
Mr. Griffith. To be more efficient?
Mr. Pruitt. I don't.
Mr. Griffith. Do you think that a power plant should be
required to go through a long and costly permitting process
before it can do something to improve its efficiency including
less pollutants?
Mr. Pruitt. I don't.
Mr. Griffith. And do you believe that such a requirement
might actually discourage plant owners from doing things to
make their plants more efficient?
Mr. Pruitt. In fact it is happening across the country. And
I would say to you, Congressman, we have a task force. I
mentioned earlier today that Bill Wehrum, who is an AA for air
recently confirmed, there is a task force internal to the
Agency to address NSR steps going forward in 2018. It is a very
important area as you have indicated. There are companies
across this country that seek to invest capital to improve
emissions and they are very concerned if they do that it will
trigger new permitting requirements and it is a disincentive.
And that is not the way that it should work and we are trying
to address that and believe it is a very important issue.
Mr. Griffith. Well, I appreciate that and look forward to
working with you on that issue because I do believe it is a
very important issue. And while I do represent a coal district,
it is also, I think, important for those who are concerned
about pollution because we are going to continue to need coal
well into the future at least at some percentage level to keep
our grid reliable. And as we use that coal we want to do it
more cleanly and more effectively and more efficiently and to
discourage people from taking on the new technology because it
might put them out of business is not a good idea.
Mr. Pruitt. We should remember that this is really an issue
that affects all utility companies that seek to invest monies
to improve emission outcomes. We celebrate that and encourage
that. We don't want there to be disincentives in place to
impact that adversely.
Mr. Griffith. And I know the technology is changing. I am
going to switch gears on you a little bit. I know the
technology has changed, but I would like to allay some people's
fears. Every rock, every rock system is a little bit different
and I know that too, but they have been fracking in my district
for probably about 40, 45 years. And so for those people who
are afraid of it, if you have the right rock and you are taking
a look at the ingredients that are being put into that rock, I
think it can be done very safely.
Mr. Pruitt. To your point, Congressman, hydraulic
fracturing itself is not new technology. It has been around for
decades. And the uniqueness, the shale revolution that has
occurred is largely because of horizontal drilling combined
with the fracking process. So----
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
will now recognize the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms.
Schakowsky, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate being
allowed to be at this hearing today.
Thank you, Secretary Pruitt. I have a number of questions
so I am going to try and push through these. Last Congress,
Assistant Administrator McCabe appeared before the subcommittee
on Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection--I am the ranking
member there--to discuss EPA and NHTSA technical assistance
report, the technical analysis that supported the decision to
retain EPA's greenhouse gas standards for the 2022 to '25 model
year cars and light trucks. You reopened the midterm review
after receiving a request from the auto industry in February,
and I have a number of questions that may help me understand
why you agreed to their request.
So first, let me ask you this. Is there a revised technical
report that you used as a basis for reopening the midterm
review of the EPA fuel efficiency standards?
Mr. Pruitt. The reopening, Congresswoman, was to keep
consistent with what was committed on the midterm review when
it was supposed to happen initially. It was supposed to occur
April of 2018. This was not a change of that date, it was just
a commitment to keep the date that was agreed to at the
beginning.
And that date was not--actually accelerated by the previous
administration, December of '16, January of '17, so this was
just restoring order to the process to make sure that the
original date was upheld and enforced and it occurred in the
time it was supposed to occur initially.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK. So you are saying there were no changes
and is that already closed now again?
Mr. Pruitt. No, the review is ongoing. But the review is
ongoing because the initial commit was April of 2018. So this
is a restoration of process to say that the midterm review
should occur pursuant to April 2018 as originally discussed.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, my understanding is that it was
already approved in the last Congress. So in answer to my
question, is there a revised technical report that you used as
a basis for reopening and is it----
Mr. Pruitt. The Agency accelerated the review process
inconsistent----
Ms. Schakowsky. All right.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. With the original understanding
and this was a restoration of that process.
Ms. Schakowsky. So let me ask you this. I would like to
know if you agree or disagree with the information your agency
provided to us at that time, that is, last Congress. I don't
have any----
Mr. Pruitt. What timeframe is that? What timeframe would
that be as far----
Ms. Schakowsky. So that was in September of 2016. Do you
agree or disagree with the information that your agency did
provide, now your agency, provided to us at that time?
Mr. Pruitt. I think my comment is what I said earlier,
Congresswoman. It is consistent with the commitments were made
that the midterm review would occur in April of 2018.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK. So I am a bit confused, because Ms.
McCabe testified that the EPA found that fuel efficiency
technology development was moving faster than they had expected
and is being implemented in the early years of the program. Has
this finding changed?
Mr. Pruitt. I am not aware, Congresswoman.
Ms. Schakowsky. The EPA found that to meet the proposed
standards automakers do not have to manufacture and sell large
numbers of hybrids and electric vehicles. The Agency projects
that the 2022 through '25 standards can be met largely with
more efficient gasoline powered cars. Has this finding changed?
Mr. Pruitt. That will be part of the review that occurs in
April of '18.
Ms. Schakowsky. So all of these are dependent on a review
that was opened earlier than expected. In other words you
decided----
Mr. Pruitt. The Agency concluded their process,
Congresswoman, inconsistent with the original timeframe that
was established and we have restored that process. So this
review that you are referring to will occur and culminate in
April of 2018.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK, so we are going to be interested then.
And the transportation sector accounts for a third of the total
greenhouse gas emissions in the United States. With light-duty
truck vehicles making up more the 60 percent of the emission
standards in that sector, the EPA found in that original review
that these standards are a critical part of any program to
reduce greenhouse gases. Would you agree and do you expect that
that finding may change?
Mr. Pruitt. The progress made in the mobile source category
has been significant and the auto industry has made significant
progress over the years. That is why the process matters and we
are going to go through that and it will culminate in April of
'18.
Ms. Schakowsky. And EPA and NHTSA found that the average
cost increase for a car by 2025 due to the standards will be
about $1,200 and that that cost would be offset by an estimated
fuel cost savings of about $1,900. Are you aware of that
finding that there would actually be a savings in the cost of a
car?
Mr. Pruitt. The vehicle emissions and efficiencies are
dramatically more than people anticipated several years ago so
there has been great progress as I indicated.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bilirakis,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Thanks for letting me sit in on the subcommittee as well. And I
thank you for your testimony, Administrator, and your patience.
Administrator Pruitt, this subcommittee recently held a
hearing regarding the status of the hurricane response in
Florida, Texas, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. A key
issue of concern was how EPA addressed the Superfund sites both
in advance of and in the wake of the hurricanes. This is a big
priority for me because in my district I have the Stauffer
Chemical Company Superfund site.
I want to thank you for having your staff be so responsive
again during and leading up to the hurricanes as well. I
appreciate that very much. Can you walk us through EPA's
process to secure Superfund sites before and after a hurricane
and how does EPA coordinate with state and local agencies?
Mr. Pruitt. Thank you, Congressman. And there are
assessments that are made in conjunction with governors,
Governor Abbott in Texas, the Florida governor, Governor Scott.
That is going to be bad because he is going to call me a little
bit later.
Mr. Shimkus. And I knew it. I am from Illinois, so.
Mr. Pruitt. The governor of Florida and the governor of
Texas, we were in conversations with them leading up to the
hurricanes in both instances to talk about how to secure those
sites. So you have conversations that are ongoing with
responsible parties, the governors in those states, the DEQ,
DNR at the state level.
There is a pre-assessment on whether proper steps are being
taken to secure those sites, and there is constant evaluation
during the storms. And then postscript a determination whether
there has been any release. So it is both a pre-, during, and
post process that occurs with those states and members of our
agency.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK, thank you. Again the Stauffer----
Mr. Pruitt. Governor Scott is a great governor.
Mr. Bilirakis. And Governor Scott--I will repeat it.
Governor Scott is a great governor and did a great job during--
--
Mr. Pruitt. He is. And I will say he showed tremendous
leadership. In fact, I will tell you with respect to the fuel
waivers that occurred, access to fuel is a key issue for
citizens during those kinds of storms and working with Governor
Abbott in Texas and Governor Scott in Florida we were able to
address that in a proactive way to ensure better access to fuel
during those storms and Governor Scott was a tremendous leader
in that regard.
So I really commend his leadership, the leadership of the
State of Florida, the DEQ there, but also in the State of Texas
as well.
Mr. Bilirakis. Ditto. I agree. OK, the current status of
the Stauffer site, the Superfund site that I referred to
earlier, is better than most of the sites on the national
priority list in that the remedy is largely in place and the
most recent 5-year review found that the remedy was protective
of people and the environment. I know that not all sites on the
National Priorities List are in such good shape. I have a
couple questions for you about the Superfund cleanup program if
I may. Number one, how does EPA plan to work through the sites
on the National Priorities List and how does EPA prioritize
existing sites on the National Priorities List?
Mr. Pruitt. We have had some changes at the Agency to
address sites that are over $50 million, because historically
regions have been the primary place where that has been decided
and we have had inconsistency on large sites based upon it
being a region by region evaluation. And so what we did is
institute a change that on sites of over $50 million, that
would actually be a decision made at headquarters to ensure
greater consistency and uniformity and urgency to address those
sites.
So that is ongoing based upon the task force
recommendations that came out in June of this year, as I
previously referred to that. And the other thing we are looking
at is to ensure that if we have sites as I indicated earlier
that have the ability to be cleaned up partially, where it is a
large site and we can make progress, instead of waiting until
there is a remedy or proposed remedy for the entire site, we
are trying to address those hot spots, if you will, throughout
the process to get some clarity and success, if you will,
through the cleanup process. So those are just a couple of
examples.
But the Superfund program, overall, in my view, has lacked
a sense of focus, a sense of leadership and management over
making decisions. It is really unacceptable for an agency to
take decades to make a decision on how you clean up sites. I
would love to tell you that that is an isolated situation at
the Agency. It has not been historically.
I have had individuals in the Land and Emergency Management
Office that have been in EPA for a number of years that really
appreciate how we have vitalized that area and really focused
in this and they look forward and are actually making a
difference in as early as the time we have been in there.
Mr. Shimkus. I am going to ask my colleague to yield back
that time so we can get--and also make an announcement that
they are going to call votes real soon. We are going to try to
drive through our last colleagues. And with that----
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Chair?
Mr. Shimkus. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. Yes, just quickly. If I might ask the Fumes
Across the Fence-Line issued by the Clean Air Task Force and
NAACP referenced by Congressman Rush be entered into the
record.
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Shimkus. And the very patient Kathy Castor is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pruitt, I appreciate the work that the EPA
professionals out of Region 4, the work they did before and
after Hurricane Irma, so thank you for that.
Mr. Pruitt. They worked very diligently.
Ms. Castor. But clean water and clean air are vital to our
economy in Florida. And I had to choke a little bit when you
called our governor a great governor, because one of the
things--and I wasn't going to mention this. One of the things
he has done is to deny the rising cost of the changing climate.
Florida is probably one of the most impacted states when it
comes to that, looking at flood insurance, property insurance,
property taxes from these extreme weather events and
hurricanes.
And I hope that EPA was not taking a page out of Governor
Scott's book. Governor Scott at one point prohibited folks at
our environmental agencies from using the term climate change
at all and also scrubbed websites. And now you have an
unfortunate, now you are laying down that same legacy and I
think that is unfortunate as well. To be great you have to
great things and work in the public interest and not for
private interests. And----
Mr. Pruitt. I think the Governor did exercise tremendous
leadership during the hurricanes. And----
Ms. Castor. On climate he has been a denier and that is a
problem and that is going to cost us dearly in the State of
Florida. Mr. Pruitt, prior to becoming administrator of EPA you
served as attorney general of Oklahoma. In that role you sued
the EPA repeatedly, in fact, 14 different times fighting clean
air protections, fighting clean water protections.
And interestingly, the CEO of one private company, Murray
Energy, was a co-plaintiff in 8 of the 14 lawsuits. You also
acted with other energy companies and special interests such as
Peabody Energy, Southern Power Company, the American Fuel &
Petrochemical Manufacturers, Oklahoma Gas & Electric, and
others. How many of these groups have you met with during your
10-month tenure at the EPA?
Mr. Pruitt. Look, the claims that were made by those
companies were separate from the claims of the states----
Ms. Castor. No, just answer that question because we have
limited time.
Mr. Pruitt [continuing]. And the state interest.
Ms. Castor. How many times have you met with those
companies?
Mr. Pruitt. I don't know, Congresswoman.
Ms. Castor. All right, so please submit that information
for the record. These groups also reportedly contributed money
to you or your political action committees. Murray Energy CEO
Bob Murray was a top donor to your Super PAC. In fact,
according to the National Institute on Money in State Politics,
you have received over $345,000 in campaign contributions from
these fossil fuel interests.
You previously served two terms as chairman of the
Republican Attorneys General Association, correct?
Mr. Pruitt. That is correct.
Ms. Castor. And Murray Energy donated not only to your
Super PAC but also to the RAGA. In fact, in 2014, press report
describes a ``secretive alliance between energy firms and
attorneys general,'' according to this report, under your
leadership at the RAGA that set up a separate entity called the
Rule of Law Defense Fund which could accept unlimited anonymous
donations from companies benefiting from your lawsuits.
Under this arrangement, fundraising reportedly skyrocketed.
The report also states that ``the work in Mr. Pruitt's office
has sometimes seemed to blur the distinction between his
official duties and the advancement of his political career.''
And I have to be frank. Many of us are very concerned that you
continue to blur the distinction between your official duties
and your political ambitions. You pledged that while you are
administrator you would recuse yourself from any active cases
where Oklahoma is a party/petitioner/intervener; is that
correct?
Mr. Pruitt. I have, in fact.
Ms. Castor. So given your extensive history of suing the
Agency you now oversee and the vast amounts of money you have
raised from the fossil fuel industry, offering to recuse
yourself from only active cases and only cases from where
Oklahoma, itself, is a party is grossly inadequate. So will you
commit to recusing yourself from cases involving your past co-
litigants and donors to the Rule of Law Defense Fund?
Mr. Pruitt. It has not been inadequate according to the
ethics official at the EPA who is a career employee. And that--
--
Ms. Castor. So you are saying you will not commit today?
Mr. Pruitt. I follow the advice of counsel.
Ms. Castor. So yes or no, you will not----
Mr. Pruitt. Mr. Chairman, if I may.
Mr. Shimkus. The time is the gentlelady's from Florida, so.
Ms. Castor. So I understand----
Mr. Pruitt. If I may.
Mr. Shimkus. Well, let the gentlelady ask her question.
Ms. Castor. So if you cannot do that you will cement your
legacy as one who serves the powerful special interests and not
the public interest. I am also deeply concerned that you have
not recused yourself from regulatory proceedings on specific
rules you have previously targeted despite the fact that your
position on the issue is clearly already established. Will you
commit to recusing yourself from rulemakings and other
regulatory actions that were the subject of your past lawsuits?
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady's time has expired. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Maryland for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. He can answer that.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady's time has expired. The chair
recognizes the gentleman from Maryland.
Mr. Pruitt. No, you don't, Congresswoman. These issues have
been addressed by the ethics official at the EPA.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman will suspend. The chair
recognizes the gentleman from Maryland.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for being
here, Mr. Pruitt, and staying until the end.
President Trump has promised the American people he and his
administration would drain the swamp in Washington, overturn,
``decades of special interest dealing.'' Do you agree that as
EPA administrator your job is to protect public health and the
environment by serving the public interest and not wealthy
special interests?
Mr. Pruitt. A very key mission of the Agency.
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes.
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
Mr. Sarbanes. That is a yes answer. The Democracy Reform
Task Force, which I am privileged to chair, has been monitoring
the Administration's progress with respect to draining the
swamp. And as you might suspect from the title of our most
recent report, it is still swamped and it is only getting
deeper. We didn't want to do this report, but we felt compelled
to do it when we looked at all of the ethical lapses that exist
within this administration.
On March 30th you met with CropLife America which is a
trade association run by several large pesticide companies
including Dow Chemical; is that correct?
Mr. Pruitt. If that is what the calendar reflects.
Mr. Sarbanes. OK. This was a day after you denied a
science-based petition to ban a widely used pesticide tied to
developmental delays in children and that action was strongly
supported by Dow Chemical, which I will mention donated a
million dollars to President Trump's inaugural committee. On
April 26th you met with Southern Power, one of the nation's
largest coal-burning utilities, and had dinner with Alliance
Resource Partners, a major coal mining company. Is that also
correct?
Mr. Pruitt. If that is what the calendar reflects.
Mr. Sarbanes. Well, I think that is what the calendar
shows. Since then, the EPA has announced that the Agency will
consider rolling back rules that protect mining communities
from toxic coal ash, and Alliance Resource Partners CEO donated
almost $2 million to elect the President. I am not mentioning
this stuff as a gotcha thing. I am mentioning it because it
really makes a lot of Americans anxious when you consider the
conflicts of interest that this suggests.
Let me turn now to a topic of importance to my home State
of Maryland, if I can, the Chesapeake Bay Program. In your
confirmation hearing before the Senate Environment and Public
Works Committee, you commended the state and federal
partnership to restore the Chesapeake Bay and you committed to
enforcing the Bay pollution diet or the TMDLs; is that correct?
Mr. Pruitt. That is correct. In fact, Senator Cardin and I
had wonderful conversations during that process.
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes, I am going to get to that conversation
you had with the senator. Despite the fact that as Oklahoma
attorney general you sued the EPA challenging the Bay TMDLs
previously, you also pledged with Senator Cardin that you would
support the federal government's role in Chesapeake Bay
partnership through funding critically important programs and
supporting the grantmaking role of EPA; is that correct?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
Mr. Sarbanes. You would say that is correct. And yet if you
look at the President's fiscal year 2018 budget, it completely
eliminated the Chesapeake Bay Program at EPA. Now we have
pushed back against that, but that is hardly a follow-through
on the pledge that you made to Senator Cardin and the
statements that you made about the Chesapeake Bay Program. So
that is not standing up and enforcing the TMDLs, making the
grants that we need to support Bay restoration. It appears
rather that under your leadership that commitment is being
zeroed out.
Mr. Pruitt. I think, Congressman, that the comments that I
made during the appropriations process should also be
referenced, which I spoke to members of this body as well as
the members of the Senate on the very issue and expressed my
commitment.
Mr. Sarbanes. I appreciate that. What I guess I am looking
for is a follow-through on the original commitment that you
made in the sense of fighting back inside the Administration
and saying programs like the Chesapeake Bay Program are
valuable, the funding needs to be there. Don't just rely on
Congress to restore these things, which by the way we have
tried to do on a bipartisan basis demonstrating the commitment
to the program here----
Mr. Pruitt. Those discussions happen.
Mr. Sarbanes [continuing]. But become an ally of ours----
Mr. Pruitt. Those discussions in fact have taken place
historically.
Mr. Sarbanes [continuing]. In that respect. OK. Well, I
appreciate you continuing to do that. Let me finish real
quickly to speaking to Executive Order 13770, which relates to
ethics commitments by executive branch appointees, which
requires, ``every executive agency appointed on or after
January 20th, 2017, agency employee to be contractually
committed to an ethics pledge;'' is that correct?
Mr. Pruitt. Yes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes. And that pledge stipulates that
Administration appointees are prohibited for 2 years from the
date of their appointment from participating in any matter
involving specific parties that is directly or substantially
related to the former employer or former clients including
regulations and contracts.
Executive Order 13770 states that appointees have a 2-year
cooling off period in terms of handling matters related to
their previous lobbying. But I am concerned that several of
your personnel decisions deviate from those guidelines. There
is a growing list of appointees at EPA that appear to have
substantial conflict.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman needs to wrap it up.
Mr. Sarbanes. So I hope that you will bring some real
attention to these conflicts as we move forward and I yield
back my time. I thank the chairman for allowing us to
participate off the committee and I would ask for unanimous
consent to submit these Still Swamped----
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Shimkus. And you are welcome. The chair recognizes the
gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Loebsack, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I do appreciate the
opportunity to be here today.
And Administrator Pruitt, I am sorry I haven't been able to
meet you yet, even though I am from Iowa and I know you were
just there last week. Thank you for coming to Iowa. I am sure
that you heard a lot about the RFS while you were there. I know
you have heard a lot about it since you have been
administrator. We have bipartisan concerns in Iowa, as you well
know, about the RFS in making sure that the Administration
lives up to what the RFS demands and what the statute says we
should be doing. And I am a Democrat but I also held the Obama
administration accountable. I probably wore my Do Not Mess with
the RFS button to the White House on one occasion and talked
about that with folks there.
The renewable fuels industry as you know, including
biodiesel, supports over 40,000 jobs in Iowa. And simply put, I
think the RFS works for Iowa. I think it works for America. I
think it works to make sure that our economy grows when it
comes to jobs. I think it works for our environment. And there
is no question that it works for our energy security, because
when we are able to produce biofuels I think that contributes
to a reduction in our dependence on foreign oil and I think
that is really, really critical. It is a security issue as much
as it is an economic issue.
During your confirmation hearing, you affirmed without
question your belief that Congress intended for the RFS to
increase the amount of renewable fuel blended into our
transportation fuel supply, yet on November 30th as you know
you finalized the 2018 RVO that lowers the amount of cellulosic
biofuels called for in the statute and flatlines biodiesel
volumes. I have the numbers in front of me here as well.
How can you explain these actions when it is clear that
these two industries have enormous potential for growth?
Mr. Pruitt. By the way, Congressman, the visit to Iowa last
week was very good. I enjoyed the conversation with your
constituents. I met with my farmers and ranchers on this issue
along with others and it was a very good dialogue. And I think
as you look at the volume obligations you reference cellulosic,
as you know under the statute there is a waiver authority that
is given to the EPA to address production levels. The most we
have ever produced domestically is around 190 million, 190
million gallons of cellulosic. The Agency has routinely set
those levels higher than that and we did this year as well. I
think it was around 280 million gallons of cellulosic. So it is
in excess of production levels that we have seen.
Mr. Loebsack. After you increased it by 50 million over
your previous proposal, the light proposal.
Mr. Pruitt. That is right.
Mr. Loebsack. But actually it is down 23 million from last
year.
Mr. Pruitt. It is, but it is----
Mr. Loebsack. Far short of what the statute calls for.
Mr. Pruitt. But the statute calls for billions of gallons
to be--and that waiver authority is there for a reason.
Congress gave it to us to address real market issues,
production and demand, and that has been utilized in that area.
With biodiesel we did keep it flat. There is some consideration
that it is 2.6 billion as far as capacity, but we never
breached the 2.1 billion in production. In fact, we imported
about 700 million gallons last year from Argentina. So that is
the reason those were flatlined and we discussed those numbers
in Iowa last week.
Mr. Loebsack. And a lot of us that issue is with the logic
of what you are saying, and I understand what you are saying
and I have heard that from Gina McCarthy as well as from you.
But I think a lot of us in Iowa and other places have real
concerns about the logic of those statements. I will move on.
When it comes to the Reid vapor pressure issue, I know that
is something that EPA is looking into. I have introduced
legislation along with Adrian Smith, bipartisan legislation--
that is what is great about the RFS, I think, is we have
bipartisan support for the RFS--to lift the restrictions on the
sale of E15 in the summer months. I am a strong supporter of
doing that.
And this is something as you know that will put more
biofuels into the market. It will help to stabilize the RIN
market as well, I believe, create jobs, support farmers, and
quite frankly I think consumers are demanding it. I think if we
had more infrastructure out there, if we had more opportunities
for E15, I know at least in Iowa but I think around the
country, folks would in fact buy the E15.
I know you have talked about a legislative fix achieving
that goal. Members of this Administration including your deputy
administrator have indicated that the RVP fix can be made
through the administrative process through EPA and that EPA is
committed to completing the analysis. Can you update us at this
point where you are in that analysis?
Mr. Pruitt. Well, I am not sure to whom you refer as far as
the deputy, but I will say to you that I have been personally
involved in the evaluation of the statutory authority for us to
grant a national waiver 12 months a year and it is something we
are evaluating, but that has not been concluded yet.
Mr. Loebsack. I really hope that you will move in that
direction, then we wouldn't have to have a legislative fix. It
is clear that the demand is there for that and it is clear that
I think what was done previously by the EPA was the wrong way
to go. So I would look forward to you moving forward on that.
Mr. Pruitt. What I would say to you is I appreciate that
and I would say to you that as I shared with the folks there in
Iowa on Friday, if the statute permits us to do that we will
proceed that direction, if it doesn't we will advise Congress.
Mr. Loebsack. All right, thank you very much. And thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back. I thank my
colleagues. Seeing no further members wishing to ask questions,
I would like to thank our witness again for being here.
Mr. Pruitt. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. We have a unanimous consent request. Earlier
today we entered into the record a 2012 letter response to the
committee from Administrator McCarthy regarding policy
decisions concerning the use of particulate matter. This
information was also entered into the record of an EPA hearing
last year along with the initial committee letter and EPA's
supplemental response.
To ensure this hearing is just as complete, I ask unanimous
consent to enter the full correspondence surrounding that
letter into the hearing record as well. Without objection, so
ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Shimkus. Pursuant to the rules, I remind all members
that they have 10 business days to submit additional questions
for the record and ask the witnesses to submit their responses
within 10 days of receipt of the questions. Without objection,
the committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:34 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
