- DISRUPTER SERIES: UPDATE ON IOT OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DISRUPTER SERIES: UPDATE ON IOT OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DIGITAL COMMERCE AND CONSUMER PROTECTION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 13, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-39

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

26-707 PDF              WASHINGTON : 2018
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            GENE GREEN, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                   Massachusetts
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             TONY CARDENAS, California
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           RAUL RUIZ, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia

Subcommittee on Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection

ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
Chairman
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            TONY CARDENAS, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virgina      DORIS O. MATSUI, California
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana                   Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           GENE GREEN, Texas
MIMI WALTERS, California             FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania           officio)
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Robert E. Latta, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Ohio, opening statement.....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, opening statement...........................     4
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6

Witnesses

William S. Marras, Ph.D., Executive Director and Scientific
Director, Spine Research Institute, The Ohio State University..     8
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Gary D. Butler, Ph.D., Founder and Chief Executive Officer,
Camgian Microsystems Corporation...............................    15
Prepared statement...........................................    17
William Kuhns, President, Vermont Energy Control Systems LLC.....    22
Prepared statement...........................................    24
Cameron Javdani, Director, Sales and Marketing, Louroe
Electronics....................................................    25
Prepared statement...........................................    27
Mark Bachman, Ph.D., Chief Technical Officer, Integra Devices LLC    31
Prepared statement...........................................    33
Peter B. Kosak, Executive Director, Urban Active Solutions,
General Motors Company.........................................    44
Prepared statement...........................................    46

Submitted Material

Letter of June 13, 2017, from Marc Rotenberg, President, and
Caitriona Fitzgerald, Policy Director, Electronic Privacy
Information Center, to Mr. Latta and Ms. Schakowsky, submitted
by Ms. Schakowsky..............................................    73

DISRUPTER SERIES: UPDATE ON IOT OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES

----------

TUESDAY, JUNE 13, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Digital Commerce and Consumer
Protection,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:35 a.m., in
Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Robert Latta
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Latta, Harper, Burgess,
Upton, Lance, McKinley, Bilirakis, Bucshon, Mullin, Costello,
Schakowsky, Cardenas, Dingell, Welch, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Blair Ellis, Press Secretary/Digital
Coordinator; Melissa Froelich, Counsel, Digital Commerce and
Consumer Protection; Adam Fromm, Director of Outreach and
Coalitions; Giulia Giannangeli, Legislative Clerk, Digital
Commerce and Consumer Protection/Communications and Technology;
A.T. Johnston, Senior Policy Advisor, Energy; Bijan Koohmaraie,
Counsel, Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection; Katie
McKeough, Press Assistant; Alex Miller, Video Production Aide
and Press Assistant; Paul Nagle, Chief Counsel, Digital
Commerce and Consumer Protection; Mark Ratner, Policy
Coordinator; Madeline Vey, Policy Coordinator, Digital Commerce
and Consumer Protection; Evan Viau, Staff Assistant; Michelle
Ash, Minority Chief Counsel, Digital Commerce and Consumer
Protection; Jeff Carroll, Minority Staff Director; Lisa
Goldman, Minority Counsel; and Caroline Paris-Behr, Minority
Policy Analyst.
Mr. Latta. Good morning. I would like to call the
Subcommittee on Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection to
order. And the Chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes for
an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT E. LATTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

And good morning again. And today we continue the Disrupter
Series with our focus on the Internet of Things. Most of us
just came from the Rayburn forum where our panelists and 17
other companies and universities showcased the important work
they are doing in this sector. Members and staff saw firsthand
the innovative ways companies and universities are using the
Internet of Things to better meet consumer demands.
I want to thank all of you who participated in this event.
And I also want to thank our hard-working staffs who put this
all together, because without their hard work it would not have
occurred.
The Internet of Things, or IoT, loosely refers to a network
of connected devices, services, and objects that collect and
exchange information. And new devices are being connected all
the time. Today, for example, C-SPAN is tapping into the
Internet of Things by testing a new and innovative 360 degree
HD camera right here in our committee hearing room. While this
footage will not be publicly available, this is just one more
illustration of how connectivity in this day and age is used to
collect, share, and exchange data in real time.
These connected devices offer businesses and consumers
significant benefits. For businesses, IoT is improving
efficiency and increasing productivity for all, while helping
to drive down overhead costs. For consumers, IoT provides
quick, responsive services, enhanced experiences, and
convenience.
We are seeing IoT revolutionize a variety of industries and
optimize everything from manufacturing and home appliances to
automobiles and healthcare.
Specifically, in the healthcare industry IoT is being used
to both enhance preventive measures as well as streamline
treatment for other health issues. Joining us on the panel
today from my home State of Ohio is Dr. Marras. And Dr. Marras
is Executive Director and Scientific Director of the Spine
Research Institute at The Ohio State University, and plays an
important role in the IoT and healthcare space.
His team is using IoT in a variety of ways to help diagnose
spine disorders, improve effective back treatments, and
identify occupational tasks that cause back injury so that
businesses adjust those tasks to reduce the on-the-job
injuries.
I look forward to hearing more about the work that our
panelists are doing in the IoT space and how IoT has improved
the important work you are all doing. I also look forward to
exploring how we, as policymakers, can continue to promote IoT
and address any regulatory obstacles or barriers you foresee
that may stifle innovation or otherwise hinder the industry.
And, again, I want to thank you all for joining us today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Latta follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Robert E. Latta

Good morning and welcome to the Digital Commerce and
Consumer Protection subcommittee hearing. Today we continue the
Disrupter Series with our focus on the Internet of Things. We
just came from the Rayburn Foyer where our panelists and 17
other companies and universities showcased the important work
they're doing in this space. Members and staff saw first-hand
the innovative ways companies and universities are using the
Internet of Things to better meet consumer demands. I want to
thank you all as well as everyone who participated in the
showcase.
The Internet of Things, or IoT, loosely refers to a network
of connected devices, services and objects that collect and
exchange information. And new devices are being connected all
the time. Today, for example, CSPAN is tapping into the
Internet of Things by testing their new and innovative 360-
degree HD camera right here in this very room. While this
footage will not be publicly available, this is just one more
illustration of how connectivity in this day in age is used to
collect, share, and exchange data in real time.
These connected devices offer businesses and consumers
significant benefits. For businesses, IoT is improving
efficiency and increasing productivity all while helping drive
down overhead costs. For consumers, IoT provides quick
responsive services, enhanced experiences and convenience. We
are seeing IoT revolutionize a variety of industries and
optimize everything from manufacturing and home appliances to
automobiles and healthcare.
Specifically, in the healthcare industry, IoT is being used
both to enhance preventative measures as well as streamline
treatment for other health issues. Joining us on the panel
today from my home State of Ohio is Dr. Marras. Dr. Marras is
the Executive Director and Scientific Director of the Spine
Research Institute at The Ohio State University and plays an
important role in the IoT and healthcare space. Dr. Marras and
his team are using IoT in a variety of ways to help diagnose
spine disorders, improve effectiveness of back treatments and
identify occupational tasks that cause back injuries so that
businesses adjust those tasks to reduce on-the-job injuries.
I look forward to hearing more about the work our panelists
are doing in the IoT space and how IoT has improved the
important work you all are doing. I also look forward to
exploring how we, as policymakers, can continue to promote IoT
and address any regulatory obstacles or barriers you all
foresee that may stifle innovation or otherwise hinder the
industry. Thank you all for joining us today.

Mr. Latta. And is there anyone on our side wishing to claim
my additional time? I recognize the gentleman, the vice
chairman of the subcommittee, for the remaining time.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling this
hearing today on the Internet of Things, or IoT. And I would
like to extend a warm welcome to Dr. Gary Butler from my
hometown of Pearl, Mississippi, on the panel this morning. Dr.
Butler is the founder, CEO, and chairman of Camgian
Microsystems, headquartered in my district, in Starkville,
Mississippi.
Camgian is driving information and innovation in the
industrial IoT world and pioneering efforts to use cutting edge
solutions to help address our growing infrastructure problems
in the United States. Camgian's award-winning IoT product
Egburt, released in October of 2014, is an end-to-end software
application specifically designed to intelligently manage large
volumes of complex sensing and processing operations.
The distributed computing feature of the Egburt design,
otherwise known as edge computing or fog computing, utilizes
multi-sensor and information processing technologies to deliver
real-time, actual intelligence to users for the network's edge.
Egburt was designed to provide commercial and Government
customers a broad range of services for remote monitoring
applications such as smart infrastructure and condition-based
maintenance.
As an example, Egburt powers the new intelligent decision
support, or IDS, systems for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
which is currently installed on the Markland Lock and Dam on
the Ohio River.
I'm looking forward to hearing from each of the witnesses
today to learn more about how IoT is improving our quality of
life, safeguarding the flow of commerce, and strengthening our
economy.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
At this time the Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes the
gentlelady from Illinois, the ranking member of the
subcommittee.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Ms. Schakowsky. I want to thank Chairman Latta and the
committee staff for organizing this morning's Internet of
Things Showcase. I was so excited about what was happening. I
was a little bit late; I'm sorry. But it was so impressive to
see what these young people are doing.
I was especially proud to welcome students from
Northwestern University, which is located in my congressional
district. The Garage at Northwestern is a hub for
entrepreneurship and innovation that brings together students
and faculty across disciplines. In a given quarter, The Garage
is home to some 60 student-founded start-ups and it prepares
students to take those start-ups to the next level.
Each year, The Garage holds the venture cap competition
where students pitch their start-ups. The Northwestern students
at our Showcase this morning were semi-finalists in the 2017
competition. They are not there in the audience yet. I hope
they come.
The PedalCell start-up, founded by Northwestern freshmen
Vishaal Mali and Christopher Aigner, lets you charge your
telephone, your cell phone as you pedal your bike; an energy-
efficient way to stay connected as you move through the day.
LifeMotion, founded by mechanical engineering Ph.D. Michael
Young, is helping oral cancer survivors restore mouth function.
It's a wearable rehabilitation device that logs information for
the patient and physician to improve health outcomes.
These are just two great examples of how innovation can
benefit our country. Research universities like Northwestern
are critical to the future of innovation in the country. And I
am working with my congressional colleagues to provide the
education and research funding necessary to help this
innovation to continue.
Here they are, our students, our innovators for both the
PedalCell and LifeMotion.
Our panel today is made up wholly of participants in our
IoT Showcase. I talked with some of you earlier, and I look
forward to hearing more about your work. You saw the showcase
at the Showcase, the enormous potential for the Internet of
Things. I am interested to hear about the challenges our
witnesses have faced as we are familiar with in the
subcommittee the make-up of connected devices have to think
about user experience, privacy, and security, as well as all
the issues that other entrepreneurs deal with.
We value your perspective as we determine how the Federal
Government can help consumers realize the full benefit of your
technologies. I want to thank you for joining us today.
And now I yield to Congressman Cardenas the remainder of my
time.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you, Ranking Member Schakowsky. And
also thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this committee. And I
would like to thank all of the witnesses for coming here today.
It is exciting to hear from so many great American companies
that are providing technology and jobs of today and tomorrow.
I am especially proud of Cameron Javdani from Louroe
Electronics. Came all the way from the San Fernando Valley, my
district, which has been my home my entire life. And thank you
for representing us here in this hearing.
Southern California remains to this day one of the great
American hubs of innovation in manufacturing. And Louroe
Electronics from my district not only embodies this legacy but
also takes its products beyond Los Angeles and actually to the
rest of the country and to the world. Louroe's state-of-the-art
audio monitoring products are used in almost 60 countries
worldwide, and which is especially impressive for a company
that is actually a small company. And they are constantly
evolving to incorporate technologies like the integrated
network connectivity behind the Internet of Things, all to help
security professionals keep our communities safe.
In fact, in 2015, Louroe Electronics received the
President's E Award for exports, the highest honor given to a
United States exporter corporation. I used to own my own little
small business at one time, so I know what it is like to be in
your shoes.
I visited Louroe Electronics more than once. I have seen
firsthand their commitment to their employees and to our
community. Louroe's CEO, Mr. Richard Brent, as a matter of fact
I ran into him at the airport yesterday, and I said, ``You
going to DC?'' He says, ``No. I am going to Dallas.'' He is a
leader not only in our community but a perfect example of what
it is to be a contributor to knowledge and information and
innovation, not just for a local community but for the country
and the world.
Again, I am also proud to say that Louroe Electronics is
here as part of the presentation today.
And with the interests of time, once again, Mr. Chairman
Latta, thank you so much, and Ranking Member Schakowsky, for
holding this hearing. I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. I yield my time.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields back
the balance of her time.
The chairman of the full committee is not here at this
time. And we will recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, the
ranking member of the full committee, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Today this committee held, is
holding its second showcase of new and emerging technological
products connected to the Internet. The Internet of Things
encompasses everything from an Internet-connected fitness
tracking device that counts and records the steps of an
exercise-conscious person, to a fully autonomous automobile.
And today we had the opportunity to see a range of products
that may help consumers in a variety of ways.
I am particularly interested in some of the products that
reduce our use of fossil fuels. Some IoT devices are helping
homeowners ensure their homes are more energy efficient,
building owners are improving the operational efficiencies of
escalators and elevators.
As we learned at the Smart Committee hearing, cities are
using smart technologies to save precious water resources and
reduce energy usage.
In my district, the city of Asbury Park is installing
sensors that can remotely control the boardwalk's lighting,
which the city expects will help save money on its electricity
bills. Using less energy means using less fossil fuel.
And as we have discussed throughout the Disrupter Series,
technological advances are making financial transactions more
convenient and efficient, healthcare more accessible, and our
roads more safe. The Internet of Things has penetrated all
sectors of the economy. And because technological changes have
come to all aspects of our lives, we are all faced with the
challenges of integrating technology. And particularly, I must
mention the challenge of cybersecurity.
At last week's hearing on healthcare cyberthreats, I
highlighted that our critical healthcare systems are at risk
for attack. Our health records are part of the Internet of
Things, as are many of our medical devices. Right now another
one of our subcommittees is having an informational hearing on
cybersecurity risk to wireless technologies. And I hope that
we, as a committee, will move beyond the informational review
and start considering real legislative solutions such as the
Democratic bills that have been introduced to address these
problems.
After all, it sounds great to have your food delivered by a
robot or drone, but we do not want that robot or drone hacked.
And while sometimes these cybersecurity threats sound like they
come from a science fiction movie, incidents like the Russian
hacking and the interference in our elections demonstrates that
the threat is real. Creators and manufacturers of Internet-
connected technology must take responsibility for mitigating
this threat.
So I implore everyone working in this space, including our
distinguished witnesses today, to ensure that cybersecurity and
data security are built into your products from day one. That
way, consumers will have the confidence to buy and use these
products knowing protections are in place.
And also be mindful of consumer privacy. In the age of big
data, it's tempting to collect more than you need. The more you
collect, the more you must secure. And consumers have already
repeatedly told us that they want control of who has access to
their data.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Good morning. Today, this committee held its second
showcase of new and emerging technological products connected
to the internet.
The Internet of Things--or IoT--encompasses everything from
an internet connected fitness tracking device that counts and
records the steps of an exercise-conscious person to a fully
autonomous automobile. And today we had the opportunity to see
a range of products that may help consumers in a variety of
ways.
I am particularly interested in some of the products that
reduce our use of fossil fuels. Some IoT devices are helping
homeowners ensure their homes are more energy efficient.
Building owners are improving the operational efficiencies of
escalators and elevators. As we learned at the Smart
Communities hearing, cities are using smart technologies to
save precious water resources and reduce energy usage.
In my district, the city of Asbury Park is installing
sensors that can remotely control the boardwalk's lighting,
which the city expects will help save money on its electricity
bills. Using less energy means using less fossil fuel.
As we have discussed throughout the disruptor series,
technological advances are making financial transactions more
convenient and efficient, healthcare more accessible, and our
roads more safe. The Internet of Things has penetrated all
sectors of the economy.
And because technological changes have come to all aspects
of our lives, we are all faced with the challenges of
integrating technology. In particular, I must mention the
challenge of cybersecurity. At last week's hearing on
healthcare cyber-threats, I highlighted that our critical
healthcare systems are at risk for attack. Our health records
are part of the Internet of Things, as are many of our medical
devices. Right now, another one of our subcommittees is having
an informational hearing on cybersecurity risks to wireless
technologies. I hope we as a committee will move beyond the
informational review and start considering real legislative
solutions such as the Democratic bills that have been
introduced to address these problems.
After all, it sounds great to have your food delivered by a
robot or drone, but we do not want that robot or drone hacked.
And while sometimes these cybersecurity threats sound like they
come from a science fiction movie, incidents like the Russian
hacking and the interference of our elections demonstrates that
the threat is real. Creators and manufacturers of internet-
connected technology must take responsibility for mitigating
this threat.
I implore everyone working in this space, including our
distinguished witnesses today, to ensure that cybersecurity and
data security are built into your products from day one. That
way, consumers will have the confidence to buy and use these
products knowing protections are in place.
Also, be mindful of consumer privacy. In the age of big
data, it is tempting to collect more than you need. The more
you collect, the more you must secure. Consumers have also
repeatedly told us that they want control of who has access to
their data.

Mr. Pallone. I yield the balance of my time to Mr. Welch.
Mr. Welch. Thank you, Mr. Pallone. I want to just welcome
Bill Kuhns from North Ferrisburgh, Vermont, U.S. world
headquarters of the Vermont Energy Control Systems. But that is
a great company. And you have got your display downstairs and
presented it to me.
But Mr. Kuhns has 20 years of experience in aerospace. He
started a small company in North Ferrisburgh, Vermont. It's a
small company in a small town with a large footprint. This
morning I saw on display clients using your products from the
East Coast to the West Coast. And you may have made a new sale,
because it looks like my wife and I could, you know, take
advantage of being able to control our thermostat from afar. We
don't like to get home to chilly houses in Vermont.
But it's an amazing thing to me to see how, what your
technology allows to be done. You know, it was amazing. First
of all, you can control your home. But, also, beer makers were
able to get precise measurements about the malt making process.
So there's no end to the benefit of the precision that can come
with the use of the Internet.
And this, Mr. Chairman, you and I started our bipartisan
committee. It has got 21 members on it. This is an area of
enormous potential. And the folks here, we want to hear from
you about what you did, Bill, with your partner, with Mr.
Shepard who's down there, fielding, fielding inquiries, is
really tremendous. And we're proud of you in Vermont and look
forward to your testimony today.
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Pallone.
Ms. Schakowsky. If I could just have the remaining couple
of seconds, I wanted to add Adam Hokin and Andrew Brown, who I
hadn't mentioned before as part of PedalCell, for the permanent
record. Thank you.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentleman's time has
expired. And at this time that will conclude our Members'
opening statements.
The Chair would like to remind Members that, pursuant to
committee rules, all Members' opening statements will be made
part of the record.
Again I want to thank all of the witnesses for being with
us today. We greatly appreciate your time to testify before us
at the subcommittee. And today's witnesses will have the
opportunity to give opening statements, followed by a round of
questions from the members of the subcommittee.
Our witness panel for today's hearing will include Dr.
William Marras, Executive Director and Scientific Director are
the Spine Research Institute at The Ohio State University. When
they wrote my notes up, they didn't put the ``The'' in there
that I put in. Because in Ohio we do know it is The Ohio State
University.
Dr. Gary Butler, Founder, Chairman, and CEO at Camgian
Microsystems Corporation.
Mr. Bill Kuhns, President at Vermont Energy Control Systems
LLC.
Mr. Cameron Javdani, Director of Sales and Marketing at
Louroe Electronics.
Dr. Mark Bachman, CTO and Co-Founder, Integra Devices.
And Peter Kosak, Executive Director of Urban Active
Solutions at General Motors North America.
We appreciate, again, you all being here today. And we will
start our panel discussion this morning with Dr. Marras. And
you are now recognized for 5 minutes. Thank you very much.

STATEMENTS OF WILLIAM S. MARRAS, PH.D., EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND
SCIENTIFIC DIRECTOR, SPINE RESEARCH INSTITUTE, THE OHIO STATE
UNIVERSITY; GARY D. BUTLER, PH.D., FOUNDER AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, CAMGIAN MICROSYSTEMS CORPORATION; WILLIAM KUHNS,
PRESIDENT, VERMONT ENERGY CONTROL SYSTEMS LLC; CAMERON JAVDANI,
DIRECTOR, SALES AND MARKETING, LOUROE ELECTRONICS; MARK
BACHMAN, PH.D., CHIEF TECHNICAL OFFICER, INTEGRA DEVICES LLC;
AND PETER B. KOSAK, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, URBAN ACTIVE SOLUTIONS,
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM S. MARRAS

Dr. Marras. Thank you, Chairman Latta, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for this
opportunity to speak about transformational innovations,
leveraging the Internet of Things occurring at The Ohio State
University's Spine Research Institute.
My testimony today will highlight the way in which Ohio
State University's Spine Research Institute, or SRI, is
coordinating the communication of advanced sensors, imaging and
modeling through the Internet to help prevent and better treat
spine disorders.
Spine disorders, worldwide, are the most disabling
condition known to mankind, are responsible for over 100
million lost workdays per year in the United States alone. The
condition affects 80 percent of the population some time in
their lives, and is the second leading cause for physician
visits. And we spend over $100 billion a year treating people
for low back pain in the U.S. Despite increasing treatment
costs, the source of the disorder is often difficult to
pinpoint, resulting in spine surgeries which are frequently
unnecessary.
At the SRI our mission is to quantitatively understand the
causal pathways for spine disorders and use this information to
prevent and treat spine disorders. The SRI is unique in that it
is a true collaboration between engineering and medicine. This
collaboration has resulted in important breakthroughs, which
have contributed to the prevention of countless workplace
injuries and improved the lives of patients.
The use of innovative technology to collect and exchange
data through the IoT has made all of this possible. I would
like to highlight three specific examples of how we are using
technology associated with the IoT to make a positive impact in
this important research area.
First, we have developed smart, wearable sensored devices
that are capable of quantifying the extent of low back
impairment. The sensors track the patient's spine motion
patterns and wirelessly transfer it to our laboratory servers
via the IoT where it is compared to our spine motion databases.
This information is then sent to the physician to assist in
diagnosis and clinical decision-making. The test can be
repeated after treatment to objectively track the effectiveness
of the treatment.
This system is currently used to evaluate spine patients at
the OSU Wexner Medical Center and is being tested at the Ohio
Bureau of Workers' Compensation.
And the second example, we use advanced sensors and
biomechanical modeling to prevent spine injuries in the
workplace. We can simulate work and objectively evaluate
occupational risk in our laboratory. Workers perform their job
while a variety of smart sensors measure how they move, how
they activate their muscles, and monitors the forces they
exert.
This information communicates with our sophisticated
personalized biomechanical models via the IoT. These models
allow us to understand the forces imposed on the spine tissues
during work, and help us understand how much exposure to
specific work tasks is too much exposure. Using this approach,
we are able to redesign work tasks and objectively evaluate the
effectiveness of the interventions.
We have used this approach to help numerous companies,
including Honda, Ford, Toyota, BMW, Boeing, and many others
reduce low back disorders. In fact, Honda has been recognized
by industry experts and Forbes magazine for reducing injuries
in North America by 70 percent in just over 5 years. A current
project with the Ohio Bureau of Worker's Compensation has
developed occupational pushing and pulling guidelines that will
soon be distributed throughout the State via the IoT.
A final example of our use of technology relates to the
IoT, involves predicting the outcome of spine surgeries before
the surgery takes place. By combining IoT data from wireless
motion, force, and muscle activity sensors with a patient's own
biomedical imaging data from CT and MRI, we are able to build
precise personalized computational models of a patient's spine.
These models can be used to better understand the root cause of
patient's injuries and help the surgeon choose the best
treatment options. The personalized modeling has the potential
to improve the current success rate for spinal surgeries.
In addition, this virtual modeling can be made tangible by
simply sending the data to a 3D printer. We are able to print
exact models of the patient's spine and help the surgeon better
understand the patient's specific anatomy and explore the use
of this technology for custom spinal implants.
Many of these advances have been made possible through the
compilation of massive amounts of data regarding the unique
aspects of the patient's tissue architecture. However, one of
the biggest challenges in this work involves getting access to
patient information because of the patient protection laws.
While patient identity protections are certainly necessary,
they also create significant hurdles in attempting to assemble
large database of patient outcomes and hamper the effectiveness
of machine learning efforts.
Another significant roadblock is sustainable Federal
funding for long-term research efforts such as these. Given the
lack of certainty in Federal research funding in recent years,
these and future efforts could be in serious jeopardy.
I would like to thank the committee again for their time. I
look forward to the committee's questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Marras follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much for your testimony.
And, Dr. Butler, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Thank
you.

STATEMENT OF GARY D. BUTLER

Dr. Butler. Good morning, Chairman Latta, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
My name is Gary Butler and I am the founder and CEO of
Camgian Microsystems Corporation, a developer of advanced
sensing and analytical processing technologies. Camgian, a
Starkville, Mississippi based high tech company, has been
recognized by leading technology analysts such as Gartner for
our product innovation in the Internet of Things sector. While
much of the attention in IoT has been focused around consumer
applications, our efforts are addressing the commercial market.
Sometimes described as the Industrial Internet of Things, this
segment of the IoT space represents a new form of intelligent
systems that are optimizing the dynamic of humans, data, and
machines to drive revolutionary gains in productivity and
efficiency.
From maximizing asset utilization to improving safety,
industrial IoT technologies stand to transform business and
drive a new wave of global economic expansion.
To address this opportunity, we developed Egburt, an award-
winning IoT software platform built in an edge computing model.
Egburt performs advanced multi-sensor data processing at the
network's edge to enable efficient and scalable IoT operations
with economical utilization of communications resources.
In partnership with our clients, we are developing
industrial IoT applications built on Egburt in areas related to
condition-based monitoring and maintenance of remote, high
value assets and equipment. Based on our experiences in
developing and deploying such systems, I would like to offer
the subcommittee my perspective on the state of industrial IoT
and its future.
At Camgian, we see IoT as a critical technology trend that
doesn't merely connect the physical world, but powers it using
advanced computing. That is to say, IoT extends the reach of
today's software and data processing technologies far beyond
traditional Internet boundaries and into the physical world
around us. This is enabled through a system architectural model
where industrial assets are imbued with sensing, processing,
software, and communications technologies. The result is the
generation of critical insights into the operation and
maintenance of industrial systems that were previously
unavailable.
Today, such insights are driving better and faster
decisions and delivering enormous economic business and
economic advantages to companies and organizations worldwide.
A case study includes our work in condition-based
monitoring where we are partnered with clients responsible for
managing the reliable operations of remote industrial assets.
Examples include large civil infrastructure systems such as
locks and dams, and power systems for marine operations such as
diesel engines and generators. In these cases, downtime due to
unscheduled maintenance can represent millions of dollars of
economic loss.
To address this problem, we are leveraging Egburt in the
development of new applications that will provide operations
and maintenance personnel the ability to remotely and
efficiently monitor the condition of large numbers of
industrial assets across their enterprise. Specifically, this
includes the remote collection and analytical processing of
large volumes of asset sensor data to identify failures before
they happen, and drive radical improvements in operational
reliability and safety.
The potential value of eliminating unscheduled downtime
across the industrial sector is enormous, but represents only
one example of the economic power of this technology trend.
Similar IoT enabled gains in productivity, cost reductions, and
worker safety are emerging in other markets and are now driving
the technology's widespread adoption throughout our society in
areas such as transportation, manufacturing, oil and gas,
healthcare, power distribution, and agriculture, to name a few.
Management consultant Accenture estimates that industrial IoT
technologies could add $14.2 trillion to the global economy by
2030, including $7.1 trillion to the United States.
Looking ahead, fueling this growth will be new innovations
in advanced sensor and analytical processing technologies. With
billions of industrial sensors deployed today and growing,
exploiting the untapped value of the massive data sets
generated from these devices will be the next big leap in IoT's
technology evolution.
With Egburt, we are tackling this big data challenge
through a confluence of innovations in real-time signal
processing, data analytics, and machine learning with the aim
of transforming today's human-centric IoT models into semi-and
fully autonomous intelligent systems. This will include
automating the data to decision continuum, a tipping point in
IoT's evolution that will spark a wave of automation,
reinventing industrial processes and transforming the future
workforce.
Thank you. And I will look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Butler follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Well, thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Kuhns, you are now recognized for 5 minutes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM KUHNS

Mr. Kuhns. Thank you, Chairman Latta, and Ranking Member
Schakowsky, and the rest of the committee for inviting us to
share our perspective.
I am Bill Kuhns, President and Co-Founder of Vermont Energy
Control Systems in Vermont. We are a small company and started
based on an observation that may seem fairly mundane: most
things don't work the way they are supposed to. In fact, every
building we have been in we found out that the systems in that
building may have been designed well, but they don't work well.
And there is an enormous amount of energy, an enormous amount
of value that is lost from systems just not working the way
they are supposed to.
So part of our mission is to provide an open-source, non-
proprietary solution that allows people to instrument and
understand what is happening in the buildings and the systems
that they own.
In pursuit of that, I would like to start by echoing the
comments of Daniel Castro from the 2015 IoT event: Congress
must avoid heavy-handed regulations that can stifle innovation.
This is an area where innovation is really happening at a
breakneck pace. Just as with the early Internet, there is a lot
of chaos. The potential benefits are enormous, but it is not
clear exactly what is going to happen. It is important that we
allow the evolution of this technology to proceed with as few
barriers and impediments as possible.
As a small business owner, I am very much aware of the
challenges that small businesses face. According to the Bureau
of Labor Statistics, the percentage of people employed by small
businesses in the country has been in decline for decades, and
the rate of small business start-ups has been in decline for
more than 10 years. This is a problem in the IoT space because
small businesses are much more able to move quickly and be
agile and take advantage of opportunities.
Every regulation, however well-intentioned, adds to the
costs and risks of starting a business. Even more critically,
it distracts the entrepreneur from focusing on the purpose of
the business. You can't be innovating when you are filling out
regulatory paperwork. This might be an expense for a big
company, but it can be lethal for a small business.
I would like to give you just a simple example from my own
experience. This is more on the economic side than on the IoT
technology side. But this month we wanted to hire a part-time
college intern this summer from the University of Vermont. We
discovered that in Vermont, even though this would be our first
actual payroll employee we have to have workers' compensation
insurance. For a big company in our industry, that might add 1
or 2 percent to payroll. For us, it added more than 10 percent
to our payroll costs. And even more importantly, it took a day
and a half of my time to figure out how to comply with that
regulation.
As we launch our IoT products, we have plenty of technology
challenges and security challenges, other things we need to
focus on. It is important that regulatory compliance does not
add another layer of costs, delays, and uncertainty.
A second issue that I want to touch on briefly is radio
frequency spectrum. We are particularly interested in low
frequencies that penetrate building structure. And these
frequencies don't support high data rates. They are not useful
for cell phones and that sort of thing, but they work very well
through structures, through walls, and trees. In the U.S. there
is only a small band available, and those frequencies are
different from what is in use in the rest of the world. That
means that if you buy a sensor that is built in Europe it won't
work in the United States. And it means that ours won't work
there.
It would be helpful to free up additional low-frequency
spectrum for low-power devices. It would be crippling to sell
rights to specific frequency bands at auction, as has been done
in other auctions of the frequency spectrum. Bandwidth is a
finite public resource. Selling it to the highest bidder
effectively shuts out small businesses.
Finally, I would like to touch on security. There has been
some very good points made on security. And it is particularly
near and dear to our hearts.
There was a significant breach accomplished recently
through a compromised building management system installed by
one of our competitors. As a manufacturer in that space, that
got our attention. We are very sensitive to that issue. And
every connected device is a risk; if you can connect to it, so
can an intruder.
Physically, I live in a very safe area. I live on a dead-
end road in Vermont and it is wonderful. On the internet I live
in a high-crime district. We see literally hundreds of probes
and connection attempts every day. It is exactly like having
masked men coming around my house and trying to open the doors
and windows. We are doing all we can to make sure the doors and
windows are locked, but it is obvious to me there is no way we
can continue to have new and innovative products without also
introducing new vulnerabilities. We need to figure out a more
effective strategy for protective measures, deterrents, and law
enforcement in this area.
And with that, I am done. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kuhns follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much for your testimony
today.
And, Mr. Javdani, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Thank
you very much for being with us today.

STATEMENT OF CAMERON JAVDANI

Mr. Javdani. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Schakowsky.
I am delighted to appear before the committee today to
discuss the successes and challenges that Louroe Electronics
has experienced with IoT technologies in the security and
surveillance industry. We are proud to be an American
manufacturer of audio technologies for security systems, and
have products used in almost 60 countries today. Since our
founding 1979, our technology has evolved from standalone
analog devices to a current portfolio of integrated network-
connected devices and sensors.
The benefits of IoT technologies in security applications
are numerous. Primarily, networked devices allow security
officers to monitor larger geographic areas and take advantage
of economies of scale to reduce the operating costs of a
security system. This design allows for faster identification
of a security incident, faster response times to a security
incident, and the ability to send relevant information and
evidence to the appropriate authorities in near real time.
Technology growth within the security and surveillance
industry is largely focused on the analytic capability of a
system. Very few surveillance devices are monitored in real
time, which means that IoT devices are data sensors, and not
surveillance equipment as they are more conventionally thought
of.
The analysis of this data, which is an automated process,
will alert security officers and staff in the event of an
incident. Louroe technologies, including vocal aggression
detection and gunshot detection, look for certain acoustic
patterns that represent security threats. Used alongside other
networked security technologies, this type of system provides
for optimization of security resources, as it no longer becomes
necessary for staff to monitor all areas at all times.
As IoT technologies continue their adoption in the security
industry, there are certain risks that present themselves.
Unauthorized access to data, either stored on recorders or
being sent over a network, present challenges to be sure that
Americans' privacy expectations are met. Certain basic security
practices, especially in the consumer market, can be taken to
make sure that unauthorized access is restricted or does
entirely not take place. Most notably, it is recommended that
users of IoT devices, security or otherwise, add a password to
their devices or change the default username and password that
comes pre-loaded on an IoT device.
Without taking appropriate precautions, consumers put
themselves at risk of their privacy being violated. Online Web
sites and communities exist where non-password protected
cameras, or cameras that still use factory default login
credentials, are streamed live over the Internet for anyone to
see. Certain malware and viruses scan networks for IoT devices
that accept these default credentials, and then compromise
these devices for use in large scale denial of service attacks.
Despite these risks, the adoption of IoT devices in the
security industry continues to accelerate. For Louroe
Electronics there are two key areas of success I wish to point
out for the committee.
First, since late 2011 we have worked closely with the U.S.
Commercial Service within the Department of Commerce to export
our technology. Thanks to the work of trade administration
officials in American embassies, and especially the work of the
West Los Angeles Export Assistance Center, we have more than
doubled the number of countries we have exported to. In 2015,
we were honored to receive the President's E Award for Export
Achievement, the highest recognition a U.S. entity may receive
for export activity. This is an achievement that could not have
become reality without our partnership from the Commercial
Service.
Second, we have made advantageous use of free trade
agreements for international market access. For a small
business in America, the removal of trade barriers creates new
opportunities to reach new customers with more affordable
products. As the current administration has stated their
intention to review our trade policies, I urge the Congress to
ensure that any change to trade agreements preserves that
market access, and that supply chains for American small
businesses be maintained. Any change that restricts either will
reduce exports and increase product prices to the detriment of
American manufacturers. However, an opportunity exists to
update agreements to address IoT industries and technologies,
many of which did not exist when the agreements were enacted.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the invitation to appear today
before the committee. I look forward to answering your
questions and the committee's questions on IoT opportunities
and challenges. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Javdani follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. And, again, thank you for your testimony.
And, Dr. Bachman, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for
your statement.

STATEMENT OF MARK BACHMAN

Dr. Bachman. Chairman Latta, Ranking Member Schakowsky, and
committee members, thank you for inviting me today to share
some thoughts and insights on the opportunities and challenges
in the Internet of Things. I would especially like to thank
Representative Mimi Walters, who represents the University of
California Irvine in California's 45th Congressional District,
for support of UC Irvine.
For this testimony, I am representing two organizations,
the University of California Irvine and Integrate Devices. UC
Irvine is a world class premier research university, the Orange
County campus of the University of California system. UC Irvine
promotes IoT through research, education, outreach, and tech
transfer. Integra Devices is a spinout company from UC Irvine
that develops smart sensing modules for IoT, utilizing unique
intellectual property for advanced manufacturing, machine
learning, and energy harvesting.
My testimony describes my experiences and perspectives
regarding some challenges and solutions for IoT. I can only
briefly discuss these topics now, but I provide more
information in my written testimony that covers overview of
IoT, the role of the public university in leadership and
stimulation of the local IoT economy, and the spinning out of
my IoT start-up.
This testimony comes from my direct experience in these
topics. As a professor and IoT Evangelist, I spent many years
studying IoT, working with researchers and companies to
implement technology for IoT applications. As an entrepreneur,
I have brought technology out of the university to convert it
into commercially viable goods and services.
The Internet of Things promises to bring dramatic changes
to the way we do things in our world, bringing large quantities
of new data and insights about industrial processes and
operations, enabling us to do business with greater
productivity, efficiency, and safety than ever before. There
are expected to be 50 billion connected monitoring devices
deployed by 2025. And using sophisticated analysis of data from
thousands of monitoring units in the industrial and civil
infrastructure, we can better understand the complexities of
our operations and identify ways to improve the way we do
things.
Most of these improvements will have significant economic
benefit. The resulting combined economic impact of IoT is
predicted to be between $4 to 11 trillion by 2025. Industry and
manufacturing, transportation, and civil infrastructure
represent the largest markets. Home automation and consumer
products, while significant, represent the smallest of the IoT
markets.
Universities such as UC Irvine have the potential to be a
powerful catalyst in leading the effort towards next generation
IoT. Research and development in areas such as basic sciences,
information sciences, social sciences, and business lead
directly to insights, technologies, and methodologies that can
drive IoT applications, services, and products. In Orange
County, California, UC Irvine provides leadership for our IoT
ecosystem through research, training, public outreach, and the
stimulation of enterprise.
UC Irvine provides a common ground for companies,
Government, and the public to work together on IoT topics.
Several organizations on the UC Irvine campus are active in
promoting and stimulating the IoT economy in Orange County.
These include the California Institute for Telecommunications
and Information Technology, Calit2, and the UCI Applied
Innovation Institute. Calit2 works with industry and campus
researchers across disciplines to convert basic research
results into technology that is practical and of value to
industry. UCI Applied Innovation brings campus-based inventions
and entrepreneurship together with Orange County's vibrant
business community to support job creation and economic growth.
My own company, Integra Devices, is producing IoT products
based on technology that was developed at UC Irvine over the
last 15 years. We produce highly integrated, wireless smart-
sensing modules that can be used to monitor industrial and
infrastructure operations. Our sensing devices are fully self-
contained, requiring no additional hardware, can be placed on
machinery and infrastructure, and can analyze their activity in
real time, extracting the key features of the signal to send to
the cloud. Our devices can learn the patterns of machinery, and
within a few hours can identify the natural state of machinery
and report when it deviates from normal behavior, providing key
information for predictive maintenance and operations.
Many of our devices can run under zero power conditions,
meaning that they do not need to be cabled and they do not need
to have batteries replaced. This is highly advanced technology
that requires new manufacturing methods to build our devices.
The key manufacturing for our devices is done in the United
States.
Most of the research leading to these products was done at
UC Irvine. Some of our current development is funded by the
National Science Foundation. Integra Devices has benefitted
greatly from research performed at the University and continues
to partner with UC Irvine and other public institutions to
develop new IoT technologies and applications, and train the
next generation of IoT leaders.
Having worked in both public academia and the private
sector, I am convinced that a strong public-private partnership
will stimulate the next generation of technologies, business
practices, applications and services, and small companies for
IoT, ensuring that the United States retains leadership in IoT
over the coming years. I have worked with and presented to
colleagues, business leaders, Government agencies, and
entrepreneurs in the technology industry in Europe, Asia, and
the Americas. The significant degree of cooperation between our
public institutions and universities is the envy of the world
and widely regarded as one of our key advantages for bringing
innovative technologies, practices, and enterprises to the
market.
The Internet of Things is probably the most significant
tech market of the 21st Century, and is one that the United
States can lead, if we are committed to doing so.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Bachman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Kosak, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Thank you for
being with us.

STATEMENT OF PETER B. KOSAK

Mr. Kosak. Thank you. Good morning, everyone. My name is
Peter Kosak. And I am Executive Director of Urban Active
Solutions and Maven at General Motors.
I thank you, Chairman Latta, Ranking Member Schakowsky, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee for the opportunity
to speak to you today about the new initiatives that General
Motors has to address changing mobility needs of consumers.
At GM, disruptive technology developments are unlocking
access and efficiencies in transportation, resulting in new and
improved services. I highlight three today. The first is
embedded connectivity in vehicles. The second is app-based
access, and control for consumers. And third, and lastly, data
science is enabling efficiency in operating systems and
services.
Twenty years ago, recognizing the value and potential of
embedded connectivity, General Motors pioneered automotive
telematics with the creation of OnStar.
When I first learned about OnSTar back in 1995, I couldn't
imagine the potential of embedded connectivity, although I
certainly could understand the benefits of safety notifications
and a call center that could download directions and
destinations to my in-car navigation system. It has been
fascinating to watch subsequent connectivity developments,
especially in safety, such as GM working with doctors and first
responders to understand how crash telemetry data can prepare
first responders for crash events.
Leveraging the foundation of OnStar and other key
technologies, General Motors is extending its core business
into transportation as a service, where embedded connectivity,
app-based access, and data science are transformative. We have
created a new brand called Maven, an innovation leveraging GM's
leadership in automotive connectivity. Now in 17 cities, Maven
is a platform for on-demand mobility, offering multiple
vehicle-sharing products for consumers and businesses, such as
Maven City, Maven Home, and Maven Gig.
The Maven City and Maven Home car-sharing platforms, which
launched in February 2016, offer a wide range of vehicles that
are distributed where people live and work for shared-use. In
15 cities, members can rent vehicles by the hour, by the day,
week, or month. Insurance, fuel, and maintenance are included
in rental. The entire service, in the entire service your phone
is your key fob. It's an entirely keyless experience.
Maven removes the need to own and keep a car for those who
cannot own a car or choose not to own a car. And we have also
seen that the service serves as a mobility alternative or
option for current vehicle owners.
Seventy-five percent of Maven members are Millennials, a
hard-to-reach target segment for auto makers. Members have
driven over 350,000 hours nationally, 50,000 in DC, and 50,000
in Chicago, 28,000 hours in LA, launched last October.
Building on Maven Home and City, we launched an on-demand
leasing program for rideshare drivers in March 2016, which
evolved into what we now call Maven Gig. Maven Gig is an
enabler for the sharing economy. We provide Gig drivers with
access to vehicles on a weekly rental basis for as long as they
want to work for an app-based ridesharing or delivery company
like Lyft, Instacart, and Grubhub.
With Maven Gig, a driver can carry commuters in the morning
and the evening, make deliveries during mid-morning and
afternoon, and deliver lunches and dinners at mealtime, while
having access to a car or crossover for their personal use.
Since it's launch, Gig drivers have logged over 140 million
miles, providing rides for over 17 million customers. In mid-
February, we began deploying the Chevrolet Bolt Electric
Vehicle into San Francisco ridesharing applications, starting
with 25. We are now up to 80 in San Francisco and San Diego.
The efficient, flexible Chevy Bolt is uniquely capable for
ridesharing, offering 238 miles of all-electric range and DC
fast-charge capability. In less than four months, we have
logged over 550,000 miles, enabled by over 5,000 DC fast-charge
events, and carrying over 50,000 riders. Bolt EV drivers are
averaging about 130 miles a day, which is about four times that
of private vehicle owners. Ten percent of total days driven
among all drivers are over 240 miles, making it clear that
charging and range limits are not issues.
Bolt EVs are yielding unprecedented carbon-free miles per
vehicle while increasing public exposure to EVs, demonstrating
that on-demand ridesharing drivers will use EVs, and while
building a compelling business case for public charging.
At the same time, Maven is building new partnerships with
charging providers and electric utilities. Maven's Bolt EV
deployment provides operational learning and a sound foundation
for the next step: the creation of autonomous vehicle systems
based on EVs for ridesharing.
In fact, General Motors announced this morning the
production of our next generation of Bolt EV/AV test vehicles
at our Orion assembly plant in Michigan. While Maven Home,
City, and Gig are new, in-market ways for consumers to access
automobiles for personal use or as a means to generate income,
autonomous or self-driving technology promises opportunities to
make urban, chaotic urban environments safely manageable. Maven
can seamlessly integrate with mass transit as a coordinated
first/last-mile solution, and fill gaps between taxis and mass
transit systems via dynamic shuttles.
In summary, business model and technology innovations
promise to transform mobility, affording greater access and
improved quality of life for cities. Embedded connectivity,
app-based access, and data science will yield safer and more
robust transportation systems, with more modality and options.
GM is making investments in connectivity, IT, electrification,
and autonomous technologies to maintain its leadership position
as we all, collectively, drive towards this exciting future.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. I will
be happy to answer questions during testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kosak follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much for your testimony
this morning. And that will conclude our statements, opening
statements from our witnesses this morning.
And we will begin with the questions now from the members.
And I will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Dr. Marras, if I could start with my first question to you.
In your testimony you mentioned that you work with Honda and
have been recognized by industry experts and Forbes magazine
for reducing injuries by 70 percent over a 5-year period. Will
you speak to how IoT enabled you to address this issue and see
how, and also to see the results so quickly?
Dr. Marras. Yes. The IoT allows us to really leverage
massive amounts of information. And so we are able to really
streamline. We could do the testing of the various tasks that
were causing the problems; we could communicate with our
computers back at the lab; we could transmit that information
back to the people at Honda and they could correct these
situations very efficiently. So the IoT has just enabled us to
greatly accelerate and leverage the analysis procedures that we
typically do.
Thank you for your question.
Mr. Latta. If I just may follow up. When we were over at
the IoT event, you had different disks on your display showing
how monitors were set up to actually see how an individual--
could you maybe walk through that, especially with how workers'
compensation, how you were able to help them to look at those
workplace injuries that a worker might have?
Dr. Marras. Yes. So one of the, I think you are probably
talking about our push/pull models----
Mr. Latta. Right.
Dr. Marras [continuing]. That we have been developing. And
we have known for a long time that lifting is a risk. And we
have been able to convince industry to control the exposure to
lifting so they are not injuring workers.
But what is happening is now people are piling thousands of
pounds of load on carts and having to push them around and
don't understand much about those risks. So we have developed a
system where we could look at how the body responds as
potentially workers are pushing and pulling under different
conditions. And we are trying to look inside the body to
understand exactly how the disks are responding and figuring
out exactly when the worker is exposed to too much stress,
given that task.
And then we note that, the forces that are in hand, which
is something you can measure in industry, and that becomes the
limit. So we are using the Internet of Things to distribute
this information through apps and through the Web site all
around the State, and really all around the country, so people
can control their workplaces given this information.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much.
Dr. Marras. Thank you.
Mr. Latta. Ms. Kosak, if I could turn to you.
As our vehicles become more connected there is a greater
opportunity for the bad actors out there to potentially attack
a vehicle. Would you discuss what GM and the industry are doing
to ensure the vehicles are safe from cyber threats and other
attacks?
Mr. Kosak. Sure. You know, I think that really our work in
this area dates back to the inception of OnStar that I
mentioned in my opening statement. OnStar has been embedded
connectivity and the ability to get information out of the
vehicle and control the vehicle. It became an app-based service
as well in 2010 when we introduced RemoteLink.
So, we have a long history with working with embedded
connectivity. And I, I think that there are three things that
have evolved since we started. The first is that the team
responsible for that area has continued to grow, both in size
and in capability. And our area in Maven we now have three
individuals from our chief product security officer embedded
with our team, working with the IT and product teams to ensure
that, secondly, and maybe most importantly, cybersecurity is
designed into these systems.
So it is not worked into systems afterward. It really is
designed in from the outset, with very clear objectives and
requirements.
And then another important area, I think, is sharing
information. So, with the Auto ISAC where our chief products
security officer is a chairperson on that auto body which
shares best practices and learnings in this area. I think this
is one area everyone agrees is so important that you need to
share information. There are not competitive advantages to be
had that we need to share information when attacks occur and
they are thwarted, letting other auto makers know what kind of
attack there was and how it was thwarted.
So, I think the team growth, I think that designing in
cybersecurity protection and sharing information carefully, not
just within the auto industry but with the defense industry and
the aerospace industry where also, you know, there has been a
lot of great work done as well. I think these are the three,
three areas that make me confident that we are addressing what
is a fast-changing landscape.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much. And my time has
expired.
And the Chair will recognize the gentlelady from Illinois,
the ranking member of the subcommittee, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
Dr. Marras, I was very interested in your testimony. I have
spinal stenosis, and so at some point I may be a consumer of
what you have been studying and producing. But it sounded to me
like you were saying that the need for security of private
information is somehow a barrier to aggregating that
information. Did you say that?
Dr. Marras. The models that we have in our data to pinpoint
where the issues are, are predicated on the fact that we can
identify what abnormal tissue stressors are within the spine.
And so, in order to understand abnormal, you have to understand
normal. And everybody is different.
And so, one of the things that is unique to our work is we
are able to build massive databases of what, how the spine
responds.
Ms. Schakowsky. Right. But can't you just remove the
individual information?
Dr. Marras. Yes, we can. But and that is what we are trying
to do. But that is becoming quite a barrier.
For example, some of the studies we have done, it has taken
us 3 years to get by the IRB, just because of the tight
restrictions in the IRB regulations. So it is a lot more
difficult than it sounds, but it is not easy to compile this
type of information. And you would think it would be very easy
to just strip away the name and keep everything else, but it is
not. There are still a lot of barriers to doing that.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
So, Mr. Kosak, I introduced a bill last week called the HOT
CARS Act. And you talked about how life can be made easier and
better with IoT and how GM is doing that. It was one of the
most disturbing events I have ever had, because it was parents,
loving parents, responsible parents who, as human beings, made
a tragic mistake and forgot their children sleeping in the
backs of their cars. Eight hundred children since 1990 have
died from heat stroke in the back of cars.
And it seems to me with all the bells and whistles that are
on our automobiles right now that there has to be a way--and I
think GM is an innovator here--in making sure that that doesn't
happen, that these are preventable, and that we have the
technologies, or at least they are available, for us to develop
to make sure that this never, ever happens.
Can you comment on that?
Mr. Kosak. Well, I think the emotion in your voice is
justified. I mean, I can think of nothing more, you know, grave
or senseless than the issue that you are describing.
I think sensing issues, any issue and being creative, I
think that is what innovation is all about; it is about sensing
a problem and finding solutions. For that particular case,
General Motors has developed a technology that is on many
models now that will continue to roll out which senses at the
beginning of a trip when either of the rear doors is opened for
any reason, and then at the completion of that trip simply
reminds the driver to check the rear seat area to make sure
that there is nothing back there, most importantly a child.
So these kinds of reminders can be very important. And I
think these kinds of things are increasingly important because
people are leading such chaotic lifestyles and they are so
distracted. And I think that is the, that is the most heart-
wrenching part in the stories that, you know, you are
describing where people were just harried doing things,
probably, you know, running around doing things for their
children, and that is when things can happen.
Ms. Schakowsky. So, my legislation would require in all new
cars that there be this kind of technology. And, you know, my
car reminds me if I have left my keys in the car. And it seems
to me that something as important as a child in the car and
saving a life would be so incredibly important.
And I would just like to say to my chairman that I am
hoping that we can explore, explore that. You know, there are
not that many pieces of legislation that are a matter of life
and death and give us the opportunity to save lives, and so I
would hope that our committee can look at that so that this
would be standard in automobiles going forward.
And I yield back my time.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields back
the balance of her time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Mississippi,
the vice chairman of the subcommittee, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And what an incredible
group of witnesses and excitement that we sense and see where
we are going on this.
And so, Dr. Butler, welcome. We are glad to have you here.
And what year did you start Camgian?
Dr. Butler. Two thousand six.
Mr. Harper. OK, 2006. And we are now 2017. Did you envision
the progress that you would have made to this point when you
talk about where we are today with the IoT?
Dr. Butler. I didn't. I think we are making great strides
in the United States in advancing this technology. I think the
opportunity for the United States is significant, both
domestically in terms of operational savings and productivity,
but also as a business that we can propagate to the rest of the
world.
Mr. Harper. Let's talk a minute about what is an important
issue and ongoing almost crisis, and that is our aging
infrastructure that we have in this country. I know the
President was in, I believe, Ohio recently. And your company,
Camgian, along with Egburt, your technology that you have, tell
us a little bit more about how that is impacting, particularly
the Markland Lock and Dam on Ohio River and what you see as
this technology to help us with that aging infrastructure.
Dr. Butler. Sure. Our software has been built to provide
enterprise with monitoring applications. So, for example, it is
very flexible in terms of integrating advanced industrial
sensors and then also integrating the sensor processing and
analytics associated with that data. So, we can build very
scalable products that can extend out to this type of
infrastructure.
Now, when considering the aging infrastructure problem, one
of the problems that we have in the United States today, a lot
of these large, critical systems were built more than 50 years
ago with a 50-year lifespan. So what we are seeing now is that
the unscheduled maintenance of these systems is rapidly
increasing.
So, in addition to new innovations in terms of repairs and
refurbishment, concrete and steel, it is our thesis that data
can bring a lot to that market by making these systems
intelligent, by imbuing these systems with sensors and
communications and analytics technologies, can provide both
engineers and operations personnel real time, valuable insights
into the structure health and operational conditions of these
systems over time. And so they can use that information to make
better decisions about how to address these problems before
they become failures.
A system like the Markland Lock and Dam, for example, if
that system goes down it is millions of dollars of economic
impact to the local economy per day. So it is very important
that these systems maintain significant up time in their
operations.
Mr. Harper. And then this, and these sensors and this
information that is gathered realtime, it allows you to know
when there is perhaps a crisis, perhaps a problem that needs
immediate concern and helps them stay on a better maintenance
schedule, I assume?
Dr. Butler. That is correct. That is correct.
Mr. Harper. You know, you also stated that the industrial
Internet of Things applications certainly are driving some
amazing revolutionary gains in businesses. So what you are
doing there is through the Army Corps, U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers there at Markland. But talk about what you think we
are going to see or what we should look for as how this really
benefits businesses on what you're doing.
Dr. Butler. Sure. I think that same model, when it comes to
improving down time and reducing failures in mechanical
systems, it applies an extrapolates across a number of
industrial markets today. That includes areas like
manufacturing. It also includes areas like agriculture. It
includes areas like transportation, healthcare, energy for
example. Any of these industries that rely on equipment to
drive their business model, these types of efficiency gains are
enormous in terms of significantly reducing any down time in
those systems; and also, the aspect of security and safety with
the failure of these types of systems.
So the type of work that we are doing with the Corps of
Engineers today I think also applies across the industrial
industry or industrial market and sector in general, and not
only applies, obviously, to domestic problems that we are
addressing here in the United States, but also around the
globe.
Mr. Harper. So, when we are looking at this, particularly
how we make sure the Congress doesn't get in the way, what, do
you have any, any thoughts as to what we can do to help as we
develop the industrial IoT?
Dr. Butler. Yes. Good, good question. I----
Mr. Harper. This is your chance to give us advice.
Dr. Butler. Sure. I think, you know, Dr. Bachman said a
moment ago that this is the most significant technology trend
of the 21st Century. And I agree with him on that, on that
matter.
This could be an enormous job creator for the United States
in the sense that the value that can be extracted from
industrial IoT technologies is enormous across industries, as
we, as we have heard. So, as it relates to what the Federal
Government can do, I think really three things:
Number one is to lay out a national strategy for IoT that
is focused on becoming the leader in the world; number two,
serving as a catalyst to start this market. That has been done
previously with the Internet, with DoD and the ARPANET. I think
we need to do the same thing in the industrial IoT. And I think
smart infrastructure is a great place to start. Because if we
can build and deploy systems in that market, that will
extrapolate to other markets and help us grow, again, both
domestically and internationally.
And if you think about job creation, if I were to, as a
high-tech company executive, if I think about scaling my
business to jobs that that would create--our product
engineering jobs, jobs for electrical engineers, jobs for
mechanical engineers, jobs for industrial engineers, computer
sciences, service jobs--so there are lots of jobs that can be
created here. And we can service the world with these types of
technologies if we decide to take the lead in the market.
Mr. Harper. Dr. Butler, I hate to cut you off but I am way
over on my time.
Dr. Butler. Oh, sorry.
Mr. Harper. But thank you so much. Very informative. And
with that, I yield back.
Dr. Butler. Thank you.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentleman's time has
expired.
And the Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Michigan
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is an important hearing, a subject that is near and
dear to me. The Internet of Things is revolutionizing the way
we live our everyday lives by offering both companies and
consumers a wide array of benefits. We are especially, and as
you have seen in the discussion today, the benefits have
increased connectivity. We are seeing it in the transportation
sector in all the ways that we have been discussing this
morning.
In my home State of Michigan we are watching the auto
industry turn into the mobility industry. And this
transformation is being driven by the development of connected
and automated vehicles. So I am very pleased that the committee
is continuing to focus on this.
Before I ask my questions, which I won't have enough time
to do it, I want to support what my colleague from Illinois,
Jan Schakowsky, was talking about in the technology for the HOT
CAR bills. I am going to be co-sponsoring it with her. And
would say to all of you we even need to be looking at
technology further. That is one way. But wouldn't it even be
better if we talked to child seat makers about putting
technology in the child seat?
So, I want to commit to work with you, and already started
on that. So that is how, what we are talking about today, how
can innovation make a difference.
But let me quickly go to General Motors, Mr. Peter Kosak.
Your testimony talks about GM's investment in Maven, a
ridesharing service. It is my understanding that Maven Gig is
doing great work with ridesharing applications. How
transformative will Maven be? And where will we see the
greatest benefits ultimately down the road?
Mr. Kosak. Yes, that is a great question. I guess my answer
would touch on a number of issue and opportunity areas.
Maven is a platform, and as a sharing platform the
objective is to have a set of assets that are better utilized,
more efficiently utilized overall. And, you know, we are
thinking a lot about under served communities and serving
persons with disabilities, and a variety of different
situations where there isn't sufficient service today.
And you could even imagine, though, a rural environment
where you have harried parents, you know, frantic to get their
kids to after school activities, and the need to get elderly
to, you know, mid-morning doctors' appointments or out to do
errands, or serving persons with disabilities. And through the
Internet of Things and by providing ridesharing services, by
linking these things together you can get complementary sources
of demand, satisfied by a shared-use platform that then in the
end is economically viable, that can serve a number of
different cases that it would be difficult to justify a service
for alone but that now can be integrated.
And you could even imagine entrepreneurs who have a small
fleet of autonomous vehicles in their community serving all
these different use cases. So, I think that the ridesharing
platform that we have in the form of Maven is foundational to
provide for autonomous insertion and for the better utilization
of automotive assets against a whole variety of use cases, not
individually but in combination.
Mrs. Dingell. In your testimony you also discuss Maven
Gig's deployment of full electric Chevrolet Bolt vehicles in
San Francisco and San Diego for ridesharing applications. I am
concerned if many people buy EVs as we would like to see. And I
think that everybody would like to see it.
The Chevrolet Bolt EV is the first commercially available
mass market affordable electric car. How will your deployment
of the Bolt in ridesharing applications like Maven Gig help lay
the groundwork for both the deployment of self-driving, but
perhaps also increase down the road people's confidence in EVs?
Mr. Kosak. Yes, I mean I think the answer is very directly.
In this application in California, as I mentioned earlier, the
number of miles covered in these vehicles on average is four
times what personally owned EVs are covering. And so it is
really pushing the limit.
Really there is a chicken and egg problem right now with
electric vehicles and with charging infrastructure. No one
wants to put charging infrastructure place until people by EVs,
and people don't want to buy EVs until there is electrical
charging infrastructure in place. And with this deployment we
are pushing the boundary. We are going to charging station
installers and electric utilities. We are demonstrating the
level of demand that you can generate with a ridesharing
service. That is an incentive for them to put in place charging
infrastructure. And then I think privately owned vehicles will,
will sort of draft in behind that.
I also think it is a highly visible application of EVs. You
know, the drivers can't believe how much they are able to
drive. And they are able to get 160 miles of charge in just an
hour with a charger. So we have a lot of cases where people are
getting into the back of these cars during ridesharing and they
are saying, ``What is this?'' And it gets this dialog going
around just how capable and cool EVs can be.
So, I think by from both a visibility perspective and then
also from driving and infrastructure installation perspective
it is having a direct impact.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The lady's time has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, the
former chair of the subcommittee, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
having this hearing today.
Before I get started with my questions I just want to
acknowledge the participation of constituents from the
district, the good folks at Network Thermostat, who
participated in our Internet of Things Showcase downstairs.
And, Mr. Chairman, I also have to say I had occasion to be
up very early this morning and you have had staff who were on
the job getting things ready at a very early hour. So,
congratulations to you on motivating your highly efficient
staff to be so attentive.
Dr. Marras, I wasn't going to ask you this but now I have
been provoked by one of Ms. Schakowsky's questions on the issue
of data collection and data sharing. And this was a big part of
another bill that this, not this subcommittee but this
committee did, called Cures for the 21st Century. And this is a
way we deal with data and the interoperability of data. And you
have touched on that in your testimony. In fact, I really like
the fact that you laid out enumerating how can Congress help
with what you have identified as a problem.
So you spoke to it a little bit when you answered Ms.
Schakowsky's questions of difficulties you run up against with
the institutional review boards and data collection, but could
you just expound upon that a little bit?
Dr. Marras. Yes. Thank you for the question.
It is very, it is very difficult to get through the burden
of the layers and layers and layers and layers of protection
that are involved with patient data. Now, I fully agree we need
patient data. And I always thought it was a whole lot easier
than what it is to get through this to build these databases
that we really need to understand spine disorders.
But, like I said, it has taken us a matter of years to get
access to the data we need because of the way the laws are set
up.
Mr. Burgess. So, you are building a database of biometrics
and biomechanics that could be enormously useful for people who
are studying in this field, and a database that probably hasn't
existed before you put pen to paper to try to create it. And I
am sure there are other applications in other areas of
medicine. But it, it is difficult.
And I think we, you know, again when we worked on the Cures
bill we identified some of those difficulties. But it is so
massively important that the people who are able to accumulate
and categorize and the encyclopedia that you build off of
biomechanics is going to inform future physicians and
scientists in a way that is almost unimaginable now.
Dr. Marras. Exactly. And, you know, I agree totally with
the spirit of the law. But the way it is, the way it works and
to gain access to the data you need to build our databases is
just extremely burdensome. And as we all know, funding for
these types of studies is extremely tight. And one has to jump
through many, many, many, many hurdles in order to get access
to the data that we really need. It is not impossible, but it's
just----
Mr. Burgess. Right.
Dr. Marras [continuing]. Extremely difficult.
Mr. Burgess. I am glad that there are bright people such as
yourself that are working on this because the future
generations will thank you.
Mr. Kuhns, I just wanted to, first off, acknowledge in your
testimony, your written testimony, acknowledge the amount of
chaos that is in this environment. So that can be a positive
thing. And some of us live with more or less amounts of chaos
in their lives. And chaos can be a driving factor in
creativity.
One of the things I really liked about your testimony is
you referenced the 2015 hearing that we had on this, on this
same subject. And I just wanted to take a moment and quote the
last concluding thought from my opening statement that morning.
``In our examination of privacy and security issues, it is
important that we balance these concerns with the creativity
and innovation driving this market forward. Too much potential
for economic progress and consumer welfare is at stake to act
without a full appreciation for what this market can offer.''
Those words were true 2 years ago; they are true still
today. So I thank you for reminding me how, the important work
that we are doing.
And then, finally, Mr. Kosak, on the issue of the child in
the hot car. I do want to encourage you. When I first learned
about OnStar many, many years ago that was one of the first
things that crossed my mind: here is a technology that if it
could detect a life form in the car, whether it be a child or a
pet or an elderly person who was left in the car that now is
achieving a temperature that is incompatible with future
existence, that something ought to happen, and somebody ought
to be notified, and either the horn honk, or the windows come
down or the lights flash. So I have always felt that that is
something that is technologically within our grasp.
So, I am grateful that your scientists are working on it. I
think it is important. And I just don't recall a problem
occurring in the 1950s and '60s. Maybe it did and we just
weren't aware of it because it wasn't reported. Or maybe there
is something different about the technology we have in our
vehicles now that make our children more susceptible to this
type of accident.
But I am grateful that you are working on it. I think it is
an important concept, and one that really just begs for a
solution. And now to listen to your thoughts on that.
Mr. Kosak. Well, thank you very much for the comment. I
agree. I mean I think that is a good example where you can
demonstrate the power of connectivity and then communicating
important things.
We have been using, you know, passenger-side occupant
sensors for some time for not only sensing an airbag, sensing
an occupant to make sure that seatbelts are worn or to relate
to the airbag system itself to judge the size of the occupant
and all of that. So, I think that identifying these issues and
then using the power of technology to solve problems is
something that we are thinking about every day.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentleman's time has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California for
5 minutes.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Chairman and Ranking
Member, for having this hearing.
Mr. Javdani, as you mentioned in your testimony, Louroe
Electronics has partnered with the U.S. Commercial Service.
Louroe has been recognized by the U.S. Department of Commerce,
and you have also worked with American embassies to bring
American products to other countries. How has Government
investment affected Louroe Electronics' ability to grow?
Mr. Javdani. Thank you, Congressman. There are a number of
programs that we take advantage of with Government investment.
As you mentioned the work with the U.S. Commercial Service, we
have participated in a handful of trade missions to
international markets, noticeably to Latin America. And the
work that the Commercial Service provides to us in those
markets is introducing us to potentially interested customers.
These types of customers are at a very high level. I like
to say that I could cold call for 10 years and not get these
kinds of appointments. And through the influence our embassies
have internationally, we get an audience right away.
Secondly, we work with a group CMTC, California
Manufacturing Technology Consulting, to help us optimize our
production process, our planning process, our innovation
process. CMTC is an organization with funding from NIST and
also MEP, the Manufacturing Extension Partnership. Through our
work with them we have found ways to reduce the operating costs
of manufacturing, improve our forecasting methodology so that
we have fewer dollars tied up in both raw materials and
finished goods. And we use those dollars then to invest in R&D,
in pursuing new IoT-related technologies.
So, as Dr. Butler mentioned moments ago, when we look at
the new types of jobs being created, what Louroe Electronics is
finding is that our investments into R&D increases our need for
computer scientists or coders or the types of jobs that are
specific to IoT fields, as opposed to more traditional analog
electronics or other types of manufacturing.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you.
Gentlemen, when it comes to much of what is driving private
industry in the Internet of Things, does much of it have to do
with increasing productivity for the end user, and also
increased safety for the end user? Are those two driving
factors? Because when I was out there looking at many of the
products around the corner here with the displays that are
going on, that seemed to be two main themes, whether it is
vehicles or something with intelligence in it.
Mr. Javdani. I can briefly speak to that. What we find is
that most of the work that goes into an analysis or process can
be automated. So productivity can increase because the time
that would have been needed to conduct review of certain data
is now automated. So that frees up worker time for other, other
items.
Mr. Kosak. If I just--oh, sorry.
Mr. Cardenas. Go ahead. Yes.
Mr. Kosak. If I could just add to that, I think maybe the
ultimate example of that is autonomous vehicles where, you
know, they see better and they see more than human drivers. And
by networking them together you can create vastly safer systems
for personal mobility overall.
Mr. Cardenas. So, efficiency, increased productivity again
a common theme; right?
Mr. Kosak. Yes. Efficiency in group management and safety,
and just better sensing and response.
Mr. Cardenas. And, again, safety as well, some two major
themes.
And I have a tongue-in-cheek question. Is the Internet of
Things, does it tend to be a male-dominated environment,
gentlemen? What does the diversity look like?
Half the population of this country are women, and yet, at
the same time when it comes to technology and certain
environments, or what have you, we find that it seems to be
mostly men hanging out in that environment. What is the
industry doing that you are aware of, or what are you involved
in directly that is trying to make sure you are cognizant of
that?
And matter of fact, I saw something recently where a very
famous man, Warren Buffett, said, I have tremendous confidence
in the U.S. economy. And he was commenting about how his
sisters are just as smart as him, his sisters are just as
capable as him, but he was the guy in the family so he was the
one that got to rise to being this famous, incredible
entrepreneur. And yet, he was saying, you know, my sisters are
just as capable as me, but the environment nurtured me to be
the guy instead of my sisters. And then the main point that he
made, he said, I have tremendous confidence in the United
States economy, because look at what we have done with only
truly taking advantage of half of our workforce, half of our
resources.
In other words, he is pointing out the fact that if we
include women and we are cognizant of that, maybe we will be
even more successful, maybe we will be more innovative, maybe
we will advance quicker, faster, better.
Any comments?
Dr. Marras. I think it is beginning to change. I think it
goes back to our educational system. You know, I am, my primary
appointment is in an engineering college. And, you know, some
of the----
Mr. Cardenas. I am an engineer, too. And I remember in
those classes women, very smart on campus, just weren't in
class with me.
Dr. Marras. And there, especially those in biomedical
engineering, care more about people. You're starting to see
more and more of them. It is just a slow change.
Mr. Cardenas. Well, my time is up. But if you can share
sometime today about maybe some activities that are going on to
increase that awareness and make that difference.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey for
5 minutes.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good morning to the
panel. Thank you for your testimony.
Later this afternoon I am meeting with the Christopher and
Dana Reeve Foundation, located in Short Hills, New Jersey, in
the district I serve. So I am particularly interested in Dr.
Marras' testimony regarding your fine work at the Spine
Research Institute.
Dr. Butler, can you please explain how connected devices
and Internet connectivity capability have affected your
business?
Dr. Butler. It certainly has put us now in a position to
scale our business. I think it is a tremendous opportunity,
again, across multiple markets. So it allows us to scale in a
variety of different industries beyond some core industries
that, that we are focused on today.
I think if you look at the make-up of the workforce that we
have in our company today, again as I mentioned to Congressman
Harper earlier, we have product developers, electrical
engineers, mechanical engineers, industrial engineers, but we
also have software developers. We also have service people that
support the service side of our business and sales, marketing
and, of course, finance.
And I think that over time, as we scale our business we
will scale in all facets of that business. And so I think in
terms of creating more job opportunities in the United States,
if we are the leader in this industry and we are the provider
of these technologies and services to the global economy, we
will see job creation across that entire spectrum of our
workforce.
Mr. Lance. And have you seen increases in employment in
recent times?
Dr. Butler. Yes. And we are, we are hiring now. We plan to
hire a number of new engineers as it relates to percentage of
our total employee base by the end of this year. So we are, we
are growing on the back of the IoT industry at this point.
Mr. Lance. And regarding employment of engineers, is there
a flow from our graduate schools regarding engineers in this
country?
Dr. Butler. Yes. I think for us it is a combination of
both: we hire new college graduates and we also hire more
experienced engineers as well. A lot of times we look to hire
experienced engineers to take on new project management roles
and leadership roles in the organization. And then we bring in
new college graduates to work with those more experienced
engineers as part of our product development program. So I
think it is really a combination of both.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
Dr. Bachman, can you explain, please, how the collection of
data from installed devices can be used to optimize business
practices and operations?
Dr. Bachman. Yes, sir. Most of the operations we do, we
really don't know what is going on. We are assuming that our
machines are working the way they are supposed to work, and so
forth. If we can monitor them, then we know when things aren't
working the way they should.
And, so, at the very beginning of IoT the value was seen as
in predictive maintenance and making sure that things are
working the way they should. But it goes beyond that, because
when you have that data and you can correlate against other
things, things that you may not even think are relevant, like
the weather, for example, or where the trucks are on the
highway, you discover all kinds of patterns that we would
normally not understand. And you can leverage that information
to improve your operations, whether you are turning your lights
off 10 minutes sooner, or maybe you are changing which
warehouses you are going to be using.
It is the aggregation of many different types of data from
many different sources that really brings the true value of
IoT. So, when I talk to people, the easiest thing we understand
is, yes, I can see where my pipes are leaking. That is
valuable; right? That is a very obvious example.
But the way I describe it, it is like a chess game, you
have many, many different things going on. And if you have data
on all of that then you can optimize your chess game and you
can do ever greater value that way.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
And, Dr. Bachman, different people in different situations
often define privacy differently. Do you think that the market
is capable of addressing concerns related to privacy in the
Internet of Things market over time?
Dr. Bachman. This is an issue that is continually evolving,
so there is no silver bullet that you can point to today. So, I
think we have to recognize that, and recognize that this is
going to be continuously a challenge that we are continuously
solving.
I will have to say that it is not just Internet of Things.
So we get the benefit from the solutions of other industries,
such as mobile connectivity or apps and so forth that are also
addressed. And the biggest markets are in industry where
privacy is not so much of an issue but security is an issue.
And there is going to be a number of developments, of course,
that we are all looking at, end-to-end encryption and, you
know, better authentication and these types of things to
prevent malicious break-ins.
But, also, the business models are going to--at least at
the beginning people are taking steps where security is less of
a concern in the sense that they are analyzing data but they
are not controlling machinery, for example, at this point.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. My time has expired. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from West Virginia
for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. And, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I might
suggest, Mr. Chairman, that along this topic there was a great
book published last year, in April of 2016, Stephen Chase wrote
called ``The Third Wave.'' And it might be something we might
try to encourage all the members of our committee to take a
look at that to see, because he addressed this issue at least
over 2 years ago and finally got his book published last year.
But it is an excellent book about the possibilities that we
have in this, ``The Third Wave,'' if you all happen to have
read that.
Mr. Kuhns, I have got a question of you, for you. Do you
know whether or not the IoT provisions are being included
within certification for LEED buildings? Do you know whether or
not they have creeped into there to be one of those key
factors?
Mr. Kuhns. I don't know specifically with respect to LEED
buildings. One of the problems is that IoT is kind of a general
phrase that can be applied to almost any Internet-connected
device. So what we are particularly more interested in is
standards or best practices that relate to energy efficiency,
to systems actually working, regardless of the technology and
regardless of whether you label that as IoT.
Mr. McKinley. OK. I just, I just would like to see us move
into that.
Mr. Kuhns. Yes.
Mr. McKinley. I think it is an opportunity for people to
get more LEED certification and to use our technology, the
Internet of Things, to be able to do more higher efficiency
buildings.
Let me, just an overall concept of what I have heard all
five, six of you in your presentation. This proliferation of
Internet of Things, both in Chase's book and your own
technology and what you have seen and how it has grown over the
years, it seems like it opens the door for a virtual
smorgasbord of bad actors and malware being developed. Because
if, as the article said in USA Today this morning, if we can't
even protect our electric grid, how do we think with all these
smaller firms, how are we going to prevent someone from gaining
access to our personal lives, whether it is the telephone or
our cars or whatever that might be? What role can we do, should
we be playing to try to correct that?
Mr. Kuhns. So, let me just take it if I could. That is one
of the points that I tried to make in my initial testimony.
From where I sit, we can do as good a job as possible at
making sure that our devices are secure and that default
passwords are changed. In fact, we don't even use default
passwords at all for that exact reason. But what is missing is
if I am in my house and somebody is going around rattling the
door, I can call the police and say, ``Hey, there is a bad guy
trying to get in.''
In the Internet people are rattling my doorknob hundreds of
times per day and there is not really anyone I can call. I feel
like we need a national or maybe international more effective
law enforcement response. We need to have somebody looking at
bad guys and tracking them down.
I can give you a list of IP addresses in Ukraine that tried
to get into our system today, but there is nobody to give it
to. So, I see that as a, yes, we need both sides. We need to
have better door locks, but we need to have somebody tracking
down the bad guys and doing something about it.
Mr. McKinley. OK, thank you. And I hope the rest of you get
back to us. I would like to hear from your perspective because
if our utilities can't prevent it, I wonder about individual
firms that don't have that.
Mr. Kosak, back to you. Because I really thought Ms.
Schakowsky hit a homerun with her question. A second, follow-up
question I think would be just as fundamentally is if we
believe, if we think there is a predicate for using seatbelts,
why are we able to operate our vehicles without wearing a
seatbelt?
Mr. Kosak. Do you mean why isn't it----
Mr. McKinley. Why manufacturers not putting a triggering
mechanism in so that if it is so important why don't we go so
fundamentally as the car can't start unless someone has a
seatbelt on?
Mr. Kosak. Well I, you know, I can't answer the broader
societal question. I can say that we do a lot to strongly
encourage in my----
Mr. McKinley. A little bell comes on every--I know when my
wife doesn't put her seatbelt in the car a little beep goes on.
But if something is fundamental, if we say that is going to be
something we can save lives and save energy and for healthcare
if we would wear seatbelts, I am just curious why we have not
done that.
Mr. Kosak. Yes, I am not, I am not sure. But, again, the
reminders are pretty relentless. And to some, you know, pretty
irritating. But I think they have become more pervasive, you
know, with we have identified more direct ways to communicate
that are harder to ignore.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you. My time has expired.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
And the Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida for
5 minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. I appreciate it, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Marras, can you please explain how the use of
innovative technology in IoT has contributed to the work being
done at the Spinal Research Institute? And I would like to, if
you could tell me a little bit on how you have helped maybe
possibly veterans, you know, that have spinal chord injuries as
well with this technology.
Dr. Marras. Yes. So the IoT basically allows us to marry
information from wearable sensors that talk about how you move,
with information from data we could get, for example, of
veterans', like, prostheses and things like that and how they
hit the floor, with information about how they recruit their
muscles. And the IoT marries that information with our models.
And our models are distributed amongst many different sources,
so we could download anatomy from databases, we could download
architecture and reverse engineer a person's spine.
And it basically allows us to communicate in a very, very
efficient way which if you were doing this by hand would take
you, you know, months compared to what takes now seconds. As a
matter of fact, our models used to take months to build, and
now we can build a model of a person in seconds. And it helps
us understand what is unique about that person, how much tissue
loading is too much tissue loading, and what needs to be done
to help fix that.
And I should also say we don't focus on spinal chords, we
focus on spines.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK, very good. Thank you.
Dr. Bachman, can you please speak to how privacy concerns
are being addressed by industry, especially as we see the
number of IoT applications increasing rapidly?
Dr. Bachman. So, I think privacy, especially for consumer-
facing products is a big concern for everyone. And I think
what, what I am seeing is that there is no single standard way
to address that. And, in fact, most of the devices that I am
familiar with follow pretty much the mobile phone model. They
basically consider themselves a mobile phone without a front
face on it.
So there is no, there is no single solution other than what
is already being done for mobile devices. However, there is a
lot of good ideas that are being discussed, for example, things
like end-to-end encryption, things like better authentication.
I think we would benefit greatly from standards that sort of
lay out what is considered a safe device and what is not
considered a safe device.
Also, we would benefit greatly if we could have independent
watch dogs, for example, that indicate these products are
considered safe and these aren't; sort of an Energy Star type
of certification. I think that would really help, actually,
everyone, not only the consumers but also the industry because
when we have the trust of the consumer then we can sell our
products to them. But if people feel like we are stealing their
information, then they are not going to buy our products. So,
some sort of independent certification or eye on this would
actually help us a lot.
The other thing is I think one last thing I want to mention
because this is something that we don't have any requirement to
do, but if we were to build an IoT device, we have no
requirement to disclose what data we are collecting. And I
think it would be very helpful if there was such a requirement.
Because when you buy a product, even if it is completely secure
and no one can hack in, you don't know how much data it is
collecting, when it is collecting, and what it is sending to
the owner that, to the company that is selling you that. They
may be selling your information to other people.
At least in the apps we are used to having to sign an end
user license agreement, and in devices we don't have to do
that. So I think it would be useful to have some sort of
requirement of disclosure, even if it's a voluntary with a
star, you know, with a certificate or something like that
associated with it.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK, thank you very much.
Dr. Butler, is there anything we can do as policy makers to
promote the growth of industrial IoT? Dr. Butler.
Dr. Butler. Yes, I think there are a few things. I think,
number one, continue to work with organizations like the IIC
and the OIC, the consortium, that are today looking at, looking
at how to grow the industrial IoT space. I think, as I
mentioned earlier today, I think adoption would be great. I
think the opportunity for adoption within the Federal space
today is significant. And I think if we look back historically
on how the internet came to pass and its growth, the Federal
Government was instrumental in that in terms of developing the
ARPANET and the NSF funding that went along with that to serve
as a catalyst. So, I think adoption in certain areas.
And then I also think funding research and developments in
the key areas to provide competitive advantage. And I think a
light regulatory touch to promote innovation.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. Thank you.
Anyone else, I have got, well, got--no, I am over. I am
over, Mr. Chairman. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Latta. OK. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Oklahoma for 5
minutes.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to the
whole panel for being here today.
Although I don't consider myself a tech-savvy individual, I
do realize that technology is in a lot of cases making our
lives easier and saving lives at the same time. We are talking
about the new technology of detecting when we leave a child in
a car seat.
I can tell you, my wife and I, we have five kids, and they
age from right now 13 to 6. But when we had just had our twins,
we jumped out at church and walked into the church and
immediately realized we left our 4-year-old daughter in the car
seat. I mean, it was less than probably 2 minutes and,
fortunately, it wasn't hot that day, it was this beautiful fall
day, but it can happen. It can happen just like that. And any
parent that has had young kids knows that that can happen
quickly. And that is where technology comes in.
And so we appreciate all you all being here.
Dr. Marr-uss--is that how you say it?
Dr. Marras. Mare-iss.
Mr. Mullin. Mare-iss. Dr. Marras, thank you for being here.
I understand the technology to which you are looking into right
now is to protect backs, spinal injuries. A question that I
have, I come from, you know, a very athletic background and
fought professionally for a few years. And, ironically, I am
limping today. I have no idea what I did to my back. But it can
happen tomorrow.
My wife who her and I are going to be celebrating our 20th
anniversary tomorrow--I got to throw that in there by the way,
Chairman, I have to throw that--you know, 20 years is a big
task----
Mr. Latta. Oh, our anniversary is tomorrow. It is 31.
Mr. Mullin. Oh, 31, is it? I am not going to say my wife
can make 31 years with me. I couldn't have made two.
But she is very athletic. And she was working out the other
day and literally just bent over to grab a weight and hurt her
back for the first time ever. The technology that you are
having I know can help, you know, diagnose to some degree of
what is causing that and the movements that cause it.
Specifically what I wanted to talk about, though, is moving
into the realm of professional sports, but moving into the
realm of even the smaller kids, is it possible that this band
that you are having, I guess that wears on your wrist, is that
where you are moving to; is that right?
Dr. Marras. Not exactly. It is on the spine.
Mr. Mullin. On the spine.
Dr. Marras. Yes.
Mr. Mullin. Is it possible for you to build it to detect it
in athletes and programs and knowing the pressure, the pressure
points? Because maybe we can change some of the techniques that
we are showing that can prevent a lot of this.
Dr. Marras. As a former college athlete I am very sensitive
to your question. And I have experienced all kinds of problems
myself. The thing that is unique about the spine is you don't
know when damage is occurring. Typically in the spine, when you
have serious problems it occurs in the disk. And the disk is
very atypical because there are not very many what is called
nerve endings in the disk. You really can't feel what is going
on until it is too late.
And so with our technology, by bringing people into our
laboratory and putting smart sensors on them and building
models of how they are responding to this, we could pinpoint
how much is too much exposure to whatever, including sports. As
a matter of fact, we have had some experience doing this with
golfers. And when you think about golfing, you are holding a
club that weighs just a few ounces, yet the loads on the spine
can be tremendous. We have to get to that level of detail and
look inside the body before we understand how much is too much.
And that is what we try and offer.
Mr. Mullin. So is this, is this more looking towards the
period of rest that, say, hey, after you do this so long maybe
you should rest a certain time?
Dr. Marras. Yes, it could be that. But we prefer to look at
it as maybe you shouldn't be using that technique that is
damaging the spine. And there might be better ways to go about
doing you work or doing your sports.
Mr. Mullin. With the technology that you are having, is
someone capable of wearing it while they play the sport? And I
am not saying necessarily golf because that is a sport I don't
even begin to try. There is limits to what I am able to do.
Dr. Marras. Yes, so, you know, we are talking about really
a variety of technologies here. And some of them, yes, can be
worn on the field. Other ones you would have to simulate the
game in our laboratory. But at the end of the day we need to
compare it against what are normal loads in the spine and what
are abnormal loads in the spine. And that is how we understand
when you are doing damage.
Mr. Mullin. Well, thank you for the technology you are
looking into. I think it is going to pay huge dividends and on
a lot of professional athletes moving down the road. So, thank
you so much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Latta. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Costello. Thank you.
I just, Dr. Marras, wanted to follow up on some of the
dialog you had with Mr. Bilirakis about how the predictability
tool would impact healthcare costs. And I understand that is
your thing, spines. Perhaps you could share how that
application might be applied in the healthcare realm with other
types of surgery.
And do you ultimately think that it will mean reduced
healthcare costs or avoided healthcare costs? I would be
curious for you to just speak on that to the extent that you
would like.
Dr. Marras. Well, thank you for that question. It is a
great question.
If you look at healthcare costs associated in the spines,
we spend more money treating people for spine disorders than we
spend treating people for cancer. So, we are talking about
enormous numbers. And if you look at medicine applied to the
spine, it is more of an art as opposed to a quantitative
science.
And what we are trying to bring to the table is a way to
quantify what physicians are facing. We are not trying to do
medicine; we are trying to give them the tools to make it more
quantitative and more precise. Because the way it works now
when you have a spine disorder is, you know, your back hurts.
You go see your doctor. They are not really sure what is going
on. You go see, get an MRI. And the MRI might cost you 1,500
bucks, and it has got about a 10 to 15 percent chance of
telling you what is wrong.
And so then they will send you to physical therapy. And if
that doesn't work, then they will send you to, you know, get
injections. And at the end of the trail are surgeries. But it
is trial and error. And that gets very, very expensive.
What we are bringing to the table is the ability to
quantify what precisely is wrong with that person. And only
change what you need to change. And in that way we think it is
going to be very, very cost effective and allow people to get
the kind of, go directly to the kind of treatment that they
want as opposed to this long slog of try this, try that, as it
is exacerbating over time.
Mr. Costello. Right. And I found your testimony very
compelling.
Do you have any sense of how you, from an analytical
perspective, how much you may be able to reduce the number of
types of procedures or testing that will be avoided as a result
of the application that you could provide? And what about other
types of surgeries or ailments that there might be something
more preventative or more preemptive that could be done as a
consequence of the type of application that you have and the
type of technology that is available?
Dr. Marras. Well, our technology allows us to actually do
virtual surgeries on people. We could build a model of a
particular patient's spine, along with all their nooks and
crannies, and all the individual components of their problem,
and figure out exactly what surgery that person needs. Because
right now surgeries are, you know, throughout the country
probably about effective less than 50 percent of the time. And
that gets very expensive.
Mr. Costello. How are insurance companies responding to
this?
Dr. Marras. Well, we are----
Mr. Costello. Or not responding to this.
Dr. Marras. Yes. They are tightening up on what they are
allowing because there has been a lot of abuse of surgery over
the years. A lot of times people go right to the surgery as
opposed to seeing exactly what is wrong with the person. And
they tend to, for a lot of surgeons, they do more surgery than
what is necessary.
Mr. Costello. Dr. Bachman. Thank you. Dr. Bachman, zero
power technology, National Science Foundation funding. The
question that I have is you speak to your involvement with NSF
and its support, and its role in supporting IoT--couple
acronyms there--and are you aware of the need or any
opportunity to update or expand Federal grant funding language
as a consequence of the emerging role of IoT?
Dr. Bachman. Yes, sir. We are funded by the NSF to develop
zero power sensing. That means you can create a sensor, put it
somewhere, and not have to create the batteries or not have to
hook up to a cable, which is extremely valuable for a lot of
remote sensing applications. That kind of technology is not
something you buy off the shelf. It is a very advanced
technology, so it requires sort of fundamental work. And that
is where organizations like the National Science Foundation are
very helpful.
I do think it is helpful that they do frame what they are
funding in the sense of a market such as IoT because it helps
guide the research to be a little bit more focused on the
application. And that has been helpful for me, because
otherwise we may just develop something that can't be turned
into an actual product. And we actually want to turn these into
products to make things better.
So I do, I do like the fact that we frame the--and
certainly NSF has helped me do that, frame what they are
funding in terms of market applications. Although I would hate
to lose the spirit of, you know, free thought and, you know,
truly basic research that they support as well.
Mr. Costello. Thank you. And as my questions, if you have
any follow-up, anything else comes into mind or any other
gentlemen on the panel that want to offer any comments on those
questions, I would certainly encourage you to do so in writing.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields back.
And the Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Illinois.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just wanted to
enter unanimous consent to enter into the record a statement
from the Electronic Privacy Information Center.
Mr. Latta. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Latta. And seeing no other members here to ask
questions, I want to thank all of our witnesses today for
participating. You know, when you all were across the hall at
the Internet of Things Showcase, there is great interest and
there is excitement there, and I think people really see the
future right now today. And when we look at the estimate there
could be 50 billion devices interconnected out there by 2025,
we know where we are heading.
And so I really appreciate your testimony today.
And pursuant to committee rules, I remind members that they
have ten business days to submit additional questions for the
record. And I ask that the witnesses submit their responses
within ten business days upon receipt of the questions.
And before I adjourn the subcommittee, I just want to again
thank the committee staffs for all the hard work that they did
in preparing for the Internet of Things Showcase because,
again, it was a great success, and I appreciate it.
And without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned. Thank
you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:27 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
