- POWERING AMERICA: DEFINING RELIABILITY IN A TRANSFORMING ELECTRICITY INDUSTRY

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

POWERING AMERICA: DEFINING RELIABILITY IN A TRANSFORMING ELECTRICITY
INDUSTRY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 14 & OCTOBER 3, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-56

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

27-275 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            GENE GREEN, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                   Massachusetts
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             TONY CARDENAS, California
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           RAUL RUIZ, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan7
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia

Subcommittee on Energy

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               SCOTT H. PETERS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             GENE GREEN, Texas
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                       Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota               officio)
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------

SEPTEMBER 14, 2017

Page
Hon. Pete Olson, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, prepared statement......................................     2
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, prepared statement........................    31
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, prepared statement.....................................    44

Witnesses

Neil Chatterjee, Chairman, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission..     3
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Answers to submitted questions...............................    46
Patricia Hoffman, Acting Assistant Secretary, Office of
Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability, Department of
Energy.........................................................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Additional information for the record........................    42
Answers to submitted questions...............................    62
Gerry W. Cauley, President and Chief Executive Officer, North
American Electric Reliability Corporation......................    18
Prepared statement...........................................    20
Answers to submitted questions...............................    77

OCTOBER 3, 2017
Witnesses

Marty Durbin, Executive Vice President and Chief Strategy
Officer, American Petroleum Institute..........................    89
Prepared statement...........................................    91
Paul Bailey, Chief Executive Officer, American Coalition for
Clean Coal Electricity.........................................   113
Prepared statement...........................................   115
Maria G. Korsnick, Chief Executive Officer, Nuclear Energy
Institute......................................................   126
Prepared statement...........................................   128
Thomas C. Kiernan, Chief Executive Officer, American Wind Energy
Association....................................................   134
Prepared statement...........................................   136
Steve Wright, General Manager, Chelan County Public Utility
District No. 1, on Behalf of the National Hydropower
Association....................................................   150
Prepared statement...........................................   152
Answers to submitted questions...............................   292
Christopher Mansour, Vice President, Federal Affairs, Solar
Energy Industries Association..................................   185
Prepared statement...........................................   187
Answers to submitted questions...............................   296
Kelly Speakes-Backman, Chief Executive Officer, Energy Storage
Association....................................................   203
Prepared statement...........................................   205
John Moore, Senior Attorney and Director of the Sustainable FERC
Project, National Resources Defense Council....................   221
Prepared statement...........................................   223

Submitted Material

Statement by Susan F. Tierney, Senior Advisor, Analysis Group,
September 12, 2017, submitted by Mr. Olson.....................   272

POWERING AMERICA: DEFINING RELIABILITY IN A TRANSFORMING ELECTRICITY
INDUSTRY, PART 1

----------

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 14, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Pete Olson (vice
chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Olson, Barton, Shimkus,
Murphy, Latta, McKinley, Kinzinger, Griffith, Johnson, Long,
Bucshon, Flores, Cramer, Walberg, Walden (ex officio), Rush,
McNerney, Green, Doyle, Castor, Tonko, Loebsack, Butterfield,
and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Ray Baum, Staff Director; Elena Brennan,
Legislative Clerk, Energy/Environment; Karen Christian, General
Counsel; Wyatt Ellertson, Research Associate, Energy/
Environment; Adam Fromm, Director of Outreach and Coalitions;
Tom Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy/Environment; Jordan
Haverly, Policy Coordinator, Environment; A.T. Johnston, Senior
Policy Advisor, Energy; Mary Martin, Deputy Chief Counsel,
Energy/Environment; Alex Miller, Video Production Aide and
Press Assistant; Brandon Mooney, Deputy Chief Energy Advisor;
Annelise Rickert, Counsel, Energy; Dan Schneider, Press
Secretary; Jason Stanek, Senior Counsel, Energy; Madeline Vey,
Policy Coordinator, Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection;
Andy Zach, Senior Professional Staff Member, Environment;
Priscilla Barbour, Minority Energy Fellow; Rick Kessler,
Minority Senior Advisor and Staff Director, Energy/Environment;
John Marshall, Minority Policy Coordinator; Alexander Ratner,
Minority Policy Analyst; Andrew Souvall, Minority Director of
Communications, Member Services, and Outreach; and Tuley
Wright, Minority Energy and Environment Policy Advisor.
Mr. Olson. The hearing will come to order.
Good morning and welcome. We find ourselves this morning
with a bit of a challenge on the House floor. Votes may start
within 5 minutes, multiple roll call votes, may be up to 1\1/2\
hours voting on the House floor.
I had a great opening statement written by my Texas
constituent Annelise. I will not give it but ask unanimous
consent to put that in the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Olson follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Pete Olson

Today's hearing is part one in the committee's efforts to
address reliability of the Nation's electricity system. Today
we have the opportunity to hear from the regulators in charge
of the reliable delivery of electricity to millions of
Americans.
I want to start by sending my thoughts and prayers to the
family of former Senator Pete Domenici. He was a dedicated
public servant and a titan on energy policy. He will be missed.
I also want to take a minute to acknowledge all those
affected across the United States by both Hurricane Harvey--
like the people of my district--and Hurricane Irma. These
natural disasters have left the electric industry with one of
the largest and most complex power restoration efforts in
United States history.
To that end, thank you, Acting Assistant Secretary Hoffman,
here today, for working with my staff in the days after
Hurricane Harvey to give us an update on gasoline supply in
Texas. My district is trying to get back on its feet, and it
will take a united Government to help. Given how much energy
Texas contributes to the American economy, I hope you will
continue to work on post-Harvey issues in the weeks and months
ahead.
Electricity is a fundamental and essential part of our
everyday lives. A system failure impacts our health, wealth,
and national security. These impacts were felt firsthand in the
wake of Hurricanes Harvey and Irma.
The electricity sector is experiencing significant change--
driven by fuel costs, decreases in electricity demand, advances
in technology, and evolving consumer preferences. These changes
present new challenges and opportunities.
Our Nation's electricity is supplied by a diverse mix of
fuel sources- natural gas, coal, nuclear, wind, hydropower,
solar, and other technologies. Each of these have attributes
that help system operators protect reliability. Harvey and Irma
highlight the importance of a reliable grid that is not too
dependent on one source of energy.
It also showed the importance of being prepared. This
committee was instrumental in passing H.R. 3050, the Enhancing
State Energy Security Planning and Emergency Preparedness Act.
Our bipartisan bill gives States the flexibility they need to
address local energy challenges. H.R. 3050 reauthorizes the
Department of Energy's State Energy Program. It strengthens our
energy emergency planning and preparedness efforts. States need
all the tools in the tool box to address fuel supply,
infrastructure resilience, energy security, and emergency
preparedness.
The second part of this important hearing, which will be
held at a later date, will include a panel of witnesses
representing different kinds of resources and technologies.
These witnesses will provide helpful insight into differences
on our grid, but also how sources of energy are working
together.
I want to extend a warm welcome to our panel of witnesses.
This is the Energy Subcommittee's first Government panel this
congress. Chairman Chatterjee, we are happy to have you join
us. We are breathing a sigh of relief now that FERC has quorum.
I want you back at your desk ASAP. I also want to thank you,
Mr. Cauley and Assistant Secretary Hoffman, who are joining us
despite all the work being done at NERC and DOE this week. On
behalf of the committee, we truly appreciate you being here.

Mr. Olson. Mr. Rush, would you like to speak, or put your
statement for the record?
Mr. Rush. For the record.
OK. Guys, moving forward, we have three witnesses here. We
have Mr. Chatterjee, Ms. Hoffman, and Mr. Cauley.
You guys have 5 minutes for opening statements.
Mr. Chatterjee, the head of FERC. You have 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF NEIL CHATTERJEE, CHAIRMAN, FEDERAL ENERGY
REGULATORY COMMISSION; PATRICIA HOFFMAN, ACTING ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, OFFICE OF ELECTRICITY DELIVERY AND ENERGY
RELIABILITY, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY; AND GERRY W. CAULEY,
PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, NORTH AMERICAN ELECTRIC
RELIABILITY CORPORATION

STATEMENT OF NEIL CHATTERJEE

Mr. Chatterjee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Rush, members of the subcommittee, for the opportunity to be
before you today. Before I begin my remarks, I just want to
very briefly reflect on the passing of Senator Domenici who
passed away yesterday, former chairman of the Senate Energy
Committee, who was a leader in this space. And he will be
remembered.
I would like to start by taking a moment to acknowledge all
of those impacted by Hurricanes Harvey and Irma. The loss of
life and widespread devastation wrought by the storms has been
absolutely heartbreaking to see. I know I speak on behalf of
those in the room and for Americans across the country when I
say that our thoughts and prayers are with those affected at
this difficult time. We know the road ahead will not be easy,
but we will be with you every step of the way.
It was good to see Congress act swiftly to begin providing
some of the resources that are needed to those relying on it.
We at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission are ready to do
our part as well.
It is times like these that also remind us how important
the reliability and resiliency of the electric grid is in our
day-to-day lives. Rebuilding from these storms is going to take
time. But I have been inspired by the way that the brave men
and women of the utility industry have already stepped forward
to help.
Crews from all over the country are assisting in this
effort. In addition, FERC and NERC have issued a joint
statement to encourage mutual assistance and assure companies
that they won't be penalized for helping restore service. FERC
also granted an extension on filing deadlines so that people
and companies could focus on what is most important: recovery.
And finally, in response to the loss of refineries due to
the storms, the Commission issued an emergency pipeline waiver
to accelerate the delivery of much-needed fuel and to help
ensure the continued flow of gasoline to the Northeast. We will
continue to keep all those affected by Hurricanes Harvey and
Irma in our prayers as they work to rebuild their homes and
lives.
While this is a transformational and exciting period for
the electric power industry, we must be mindful that
developments not threaten the robustness or security of the
electric grid. FERC supports the reliability and the resiliency
of the grid in several ways. Congress entrusted FERC with the
responsibility to approve and enforce mandatory reliability
standards for the grid in 2005. FERC relies on NERC to develop
and propose new or modified reliability standards for FERC's
review. These standards include both physical and cybersecurity
standards.
Much of this is covered in my written testimony. So, in the
interest of time, I am going to speed ahead and just say that a
reliable and resilient grid requires the development of needed
energy infrastructure. FERC supports that development through
its statutory responsibility to authorize the construction of
certain energy infrastructure, such as interstate natural gas
pipelines, liquefied natural gas terminals, and non-Federal
hydropower generation. While the lack of a quorum has rendered
the Commission unable to act on applications for such projects
for much of this year, I am pleased to report that FERC is now
addressing the backlog and will continue to make steady
progress in the coming weeks and months. I am proud to report
that, since the restoration of the quorum, we have put out 62
orders and will continue to do that.
Certainly, FERC's efforts in all of these areas covered in
my written testimony will continue to involve cross-sector,
interagency, and public-private coordination. Working with our
Federal partners, State colleagues, relevant industries, and
other stakeholders, FERC will continue to seek ways to ensure
the reliability and resiliency of the electric grid.
I am committed to working with the subcommittee to continue
these efforts, and I would like to reiterate my appreciation to
the chair and ranking member for holding this critical hearing.
Thank you for allowing me the opportunity to be with you today.
I apologize for the abbreviated remarks, and I would be happy
to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Chatterjee follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Olson. Thank you, Chairman Chatterjee.
The Chair now calls upon Ms. Patricia Hoffman. She is the
Acting Under Secretary for Science, the Acting Assistant
Secretary of the Office of Electricity at the Department of
Energy.
You have 5 minutes, ma'am.

STATEMENT OF PATRICIA HOFFMAN

Ms. Hoffman. Chairman Upton, Vice Chairman Olson, Ranking
Member Rush, and distinguished members of the subcommittee, I
appreciate the opportunity to discuss with you electricity
reliability issues in a rapidly transforming electricity
industry. The U.S. electric sector is in the midst of sweeping
changes. Looking ahead, I see little reason to expect that this
process will slow down or that we will reach new equilibrium
any time soon. Accordingly, I think the fundamental challenge
is now to understand this process and manage it so that our
Nation's electric infrastructure remains reliable, affordable,
and resilient.
Before I discuss any further details, I would like to echo
the comments by Chairman Chatterjee and that our thoughts and
prayers are there for those that are affected. Our organization
also provides energy-related expertise to FEMA and the
administration as part of our emergency response activities. We
have been actively engaged in the response, recovery, and
rebuilding efforts from Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma.
The actions that the departments have taken are in support of a
whole-of-Government response to these disasters and includes
deploying 26 people to State emergency operation centers,
Regional and National Response Coordination Centers. We have
authorized up to 5.3 million barrels of oil for exchange from
the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. We have supported State and
regional fuel waivers under the jurisdiction of EPA and hosted
coordination calls with DOE and emergency response personnel in
the electric sector, the oil and natural gas sector, and State
energy offices.
As Secretary Perry has noted on numerous occasions, America
is blessed to have the incredible energy systems and resources
we have today. The millions of dedicated men and women who work
in the electric industry and are providing response activities
to restore power, to move fuels, and to repair infrastructure
are doing a tremendous job and should be recognized for their
dedication and service.
Over the last several months, DOE, led by my office, has
explored numerous issues central to protecting the long-term
reliability and resiliency of the electric grid. We are seeking
to inform policymakers of the facts and trends in the electric
sector and provide a common focal point of discussion for all
affected stakeholders.
In addition, we do research at our national laboratories
with our industry partners. We have focused on new technologies
for operating, planning, and monitoring and protecting the
grid. The Department announced on Tuesday up to $50 million to
national laboratory-led teams focused on resilience and
cybersecurity.
In order to keep my comments short, I just want to say, in
conclusion, Secretary Perry and our DOE team look forward to a
thoughtful conversation focused on reliability, affordability,
and resilience in the electric system. The implications are
profound, and we have one electric grid. And we are more
dependent on it than ever for our economic well-being and
national security. The grid must function, and it must function
well in that it must meet a number of competing technical and
economic requirements.
And, for me, managing this change means we must think about
the grid holistically in a single interactive set of policies;
we must monitor the grid's characteristics and performance; we
need to develop a more systematic way of looking ahead; and,
finally, we must manage change with new processes and practices
for collaboration that requires coordination between the
Federal and private-sector partners.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hoffman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Olson. Thank you, Ms. Hoffman.
The Chair now calls upon Mr. Gerry Cauley. He is the
president and CEO of the North American Electric Reliability
Corporation.
You have 5 minutes, sir.

STATEMENT OF GERRY W. CAULEY

Mr. Cauley. Thank you, Vice Chairman Olson, and Ranking
Member Rush, and the members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
conducting this timely hearing as we face a period of rapid
change in the electricity industry. Driven by an abundance of
natural gas, public policy, advances in technology, market
forces, and customer preferences, this transition is altering
our understanding of base load power and how generating
resources are dispatched.
As the Electric Reliability Organization, NERC is focused
on the emerging challenges presented by the Nation's rapidly
changing resource mix. With appropriate policies, careful
planning, and strong actions, I am confident the electricity
sector will continue to accommodate these changes and enhance
reliability and resilience. Even with the changes already under
way, the bulk power system remains highly reliable and
resilient and shows improved performance each year. This record
demonstrates the strong commitment to reliability by all
stakeholders. But reliability requires constant vigilance now
more than ever.
Let me take a moment to describe NERC's role in identifying
emerging reliability risks before they become bigger problems.
Each year, we conduct a long-term reliability assessment that
looks at the reliability of a system 10 years out. Annually, we
also provide a state-of-reliability report that looks at the
grid performance over the previous year. We conduct special
assessments focused on challenges, such as the integration of
renewables and distributed energy resources and the increased
reliance on natural gas infrastructure.
We analyze system events, such as the unexpected loss of
power from solar farms in California during the Blue Cut fire
in August of 2016.
Over the past 6 years, the 50 largest events impacting the
grid were caused by severe weather, leaving NERC to focus on
resilience as a priority going forward. Through our studies, we
are able to provide risk-informed recommendations to
continuously improve reliability and resilience.
Next, I would like to turn to how the change in resource
mix will affect reliability. The grid is highly interconnected
and depends on having the right combination of resources and
transmission. It is important to maintain a continuous supply
of essential reliability services in the right locations on the
system. As just a few examples, these include inertia,
frequency response, voltage control, stability, and ramping to
meet changes in demand and variability of renewable resources.
Conventional base load units with relatively high availability
rates and onsite fuel have historically provided these
essential reliability services. When these units retire, new
resources coming on to the system must replace these essential
reliability services that are being lost. As more resources
move behind the meter, it is also increasingly important for
the system operators to have visibility into those resources.
As our power supply becomes increasingly dependent on natural
gas, we must ensure this just-in-time fuel is as reliable and
secure as the power plants that need the fuel to operate.
Many issues and recommendations identified by NERC are
reflected in DOE's staff report on electricity markets and
reliability. Both NERC and the DOE study agree on the need to
maintain essential reliability services, promote resilience,
coordinate gas/electric issues, and collaborate with Canada and
Mexico on reliability.
More specifically, I would like to highlight several
recommendations of my own. FERC, States, and markets should
review the economic and market factors driving base load
generation into early retirements and provide tangible
incentives for maintaining a diverse and resilient resource
mix. All new resources should have the capability to support
essential reliability services. Markets should explicitly value
and price capacity, essential reliability services, and
enhanced resilience through fuel diversity. Policymakers should
evaluate alternatives for ensuring adequate capacity of gas
pipelines and storage to meet electricity production needs
during extreme conditions and ensure that gas infrastructure is
as secure from cybersecurity and physical security threats as
the grid that it supplies.
Markets should incent and, as needed, require all
resources, including demand response, ensure those resources
will perform in both normal and extreme conditions.
And finally, policymakers should seek alternatives to
streamline siting and permitting of transmission.
To address the challenges and benefits of a more diverse
resource mix, industry stakeholders and policymakers must
understand and plan for the risks of our rapidly changing
resource fleet. NERC plays a critical role as an objective and
independent expert organization, and I appreciate the
opportunity to share our thoughts and expertise with you here
today.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cauley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Olson. Thank you, Mr. Cauley.
The Chair now calls upon the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Chairman, I will just submit my statement
for the record because my understanding is that there are going
to be votes. And I will just submit it for the record. I will
ask unanimous consent.
Mr. Olson. Without objection, so ordered.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding today's hearing to
explore how we define electric reliability in today's world.
This is the first of two hearings that we will be holding on
electric reliability as part of our bipartisan hearings on the
electric sector. I appreciate the way the chairmen and the
Republican committee staff have worked with us and our staff to
move this series forward in a very constructive way.
I want to start by welcoming Chairman Chatterjee: we
appreciate your willingness to come before us so soon after
taking the reins at FERC. I also appreciate the flexibility of
Mr. Cauley and Ms. Hoffman in making themselves available
today. I'm particularly pleased to have Ms. Hoffman, not just
because of her long service and deep knowledge, but also
because her presence represents the first time in eight months
that the Trump Administration has provided this subcommittee
with a witness. That is unique and unfortunate, and I hope that
Ms. Hoffman's presence today marks a change for the better.
I firmly believe that it is time to start looking at
reliability in new and different ways. If there is one thing we
have learned in the past two weeks -a period that has left
nearly 8 million without power-it is that climate change is
having devastating effects on our communities and we must
modernize our electricity system to make it more resilient. A
recent study of FEMA disaster declaration records shows that
over the last 20 years four times as many counties were hit by
disaster-scale hurricanes, storms and floods than during the
two decades before that period.
While the regulatory standards for what constitutes
reliability seem not to have changed much in the past few
decades, the technology by which we can achieve reliability
certainly has transformed dramatically. In the past, things
like redundant transmission lines may have been the only way to
guarantee reliability, but that's hardly the case today.
We can now make our system more reliable and more resilient
by incorporating technologies to manage demand and by
generating and storing power closer to where it is consumed,
through use of batteries and distributed generation resources
including renewables like rooftop solar. These assets can be
connected by microgrids and isolated from the transmission and
main distribution system.
While climate change is producing stronger storms more
frequently that can damage every part of the grid, in most
storms it is the distribution system that is the most
vulnerable part of the grid, and not the larger transmission
system or generating assets. In a grid characterized by large,
centralized power production, if the distribution lines are
down, it doesn't matter how many transmission lines we have
because the power can't get to the consumer. While we are
awaiting an assessment of the impact of Hurricanes Irma and
Harvey, I know that in my area, Superstorm Sandy showed us that
centralized power, carried by lines over great distances, does
not guarantee reliability or a resilient grid. After its
experience with Sandy, New Jersey's largest utility said,
``reliability remains fundamental but is no longer enough now
that extreme storms have become increasingly common.'' This is
an important distinction that is playing out in the wake of
Hurricanes Harvey and Irma.
To encourage the innovation we need to make our grid more
reliable and resilient, we also need to reexamine the way we
calculate rates and how utilities make money. In many ways,
traditional rate setting encourages utilities to make money
just by building new transmission lines. Those new lines could
also have the effect of locking in a market for older, fossil
fuel generation that accelerates climate change while crowding
out cleaner and less expensive options for generating power and
ensuring reliability. Utilities should be able to make money,
but I'm concerned that the old rate-making model may encourage
utilities to continue building too many of yesterday's capital
facilities that do not maximize reliability and resiliency when
better options are available today.
As our committee discusses the grid, we should carefully
reexamine the old approaches to reliability, resiliency and
ratemaking to seriously consider whether our long-term
interests are better served by charting a new course.
Again, thank you for holding this hearing, and I look
forward to hearing from our distinguished witnesses.

Mr. Olson. And I thank you all for your testimony.
And now we begin the question-and-answer portion of this
hearing.
I will begin with a question and recognize myself for 5
minutes.
Hurricane Harvey hit my home State twice, but we never lost
power at my home in Sugar Land. Some people are still without
power in Texas, Louisiana. A lot of people in Florida don't
have power because of Hurricane Irma. Without power, there is
much greater damage: mold, even death, as we saw in Florida.
My first question is for you, Ms. Hoffman. I know that DOE
has been very busy assisting with Hurricane Harvey and
Hurricane Irma recovery efforts. We applaud that. But can you
talk a second about the programs DOE has in its place not only
to recover but to also prepare for storm events in the future?
Ms. Hoffman. Yes, Vice Chairman. Thank you very much for
the question. The Department has been actively engaged with
utilities through our R&D program to look at advanced
technologies that we have helped support the industry, test out
on the grid, such as automated switching, rerouting of power,
the ability for utilities to do outage management, to really
take a look at and be proactive in the response characteristics
for identifying where the outages are. If you remember,
customers usually have to call the utility to let them know
their power is out. Now the utilities have been able to
automate a lot of those systems.
In addition, we have been working with the States and the
regions to really exercise and understand--each hurricane is
different. The damage is significant. And we have been helping
the States prepare for this.
Mr. Olson. Well, thank you.
What has been the role of the ESCC, the electricity
subsector coordinating council, during hurricane preparations
and response?
Ms. Hoffman. The Electric Sector Coordinating Council has
had a significant role. It is the focal point of coordination
between the Federal Government and CEOs, the leaders in the
electric utility industry. This allows for continuity of
message and activities, so that we are all on the same page of
what the priorities are and what the activities and the needs
are by industry to the highest level of the Federal Government,
as well as industry, in supporting a coordinated, but most
importantly an effective, restoration process.
Mr. Olson. And back home, the people say it is working very
well. Glad to hear it is working well on your side.
My final question, Ms. Hoffman, is, a few months ago, we
passed a bill out of this committee, H.R. 3050, that helps
improve State energy assurance planning. How does an energy
assurance plan help a State deal with extreme weather events,
like Harvey, Irma, and more hurricanes?
Ms. Hoffman. So energy assurance planning is an important
activity that the States undertake to really take a hard look
at scenarios of potential events that could impact their State
but also look at how this affects the energy resources. So it
allows us to look at contingency, and it really thinks about,
how do we build in resilience in partnership with the States?
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
My last question is for you, Chairman Chatterjee. In order
to have a reliable electricity system, we must protect our grid
from cybersecurity threats. For example, I understand you
participate in the grid exercises. How do these types of
exercises make the electricity system more reliable? And what
else are you doing in terms of cybersecurity?
Mr. Chatterjee. Thank you for the question, Vice Chairman.
The Commission and I myself take cybersecurity and protecting
our grid from cyber attacks very seriously. FERC is focused on
ensuring reliability in the face of some of the cyber
challenges that we have. We also have an Office of Energy
Infrastructure Security that is trying to stay ahead of
potential threats to the grid and participate in some of these
activities. There is no question that threats to our system of
electricity generation distribution, whether from hurricanes or
from cyber attacks, are of the utmost concern to the
Commission, and I will continue to work with you all and my
colleagues to ensure the safety of our grid.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. That is all my questions.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from Illinois, the
ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Rush, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to ask all three of you the first question. In your
professional opinion, do you anticipate that climate change
will continue to play a significant role in threatening the
Nation's energy infrastructure due to more frequently occurring
superstorms, hurricanes, and other natural disasters, including
heat waves, droughts, fires, and floods? Each one of you, I
would like for you to respond, beginning with you, Mr.
Chatterjee.
Mr. Chatterjee. I think it is important, as we confront
these storms and the impacts that they have had on our grid,
that we ensure that, as our grid transforms for the future,
that we ensure that we can bounce back from these types of
events and have a really reliable and resilient grid.
As the vice chairman mentioned, when the power goes out,
people really suffer. I was on an ESCC call with Secretary
Perry in which he talked about the fact, after a couple of
days, you are hot, you are tired, you are wet, and if you don't
have power, you start to get upset. And it is important that,
in response to these weather events and challenges, that we
have a reliable and resilient grid. And I think the role of the
Commission will be to look that, as we are in this
transformational period, that we ensure that the reliability,
the world class, second-to-none reliability that our country
has enjoyed can be maintained going forward.
Mr. Rush. Ms. Hoffman.
Ms. Hoffman. I would echo the chairman's comments, that I
believe it is the duty and responsibility of the electric
industry to be forward leaning and to think about different
scenarios and events that will happen, build it off of the
knowledge base we have experienced, and look about how do we
build in resilience moving forward; what can we do to our
infrastructure to continue to support an effective restoration
process, to getting the lights on as quickly as possible?
Mr. Cauley. So, understanding climate change is outside of
my expertise or my organization's expertise, but we do see, in
recent years, in my time as 8 years as CEO, it seems as we are
seeing an increase in the magnitude and severity of events,
flooding, and storms. And it is something, as the other two
panelists mentioned, I think we have to think about in the
design of our systems and our preparations to think about, how
do we prepare for more extremes than we have seen historically?
Mr. Rush. Each of you, do you feel as though there is a
sense of urgency that is apparent in the Congress or in both
administrations or in the administration, be it Republican or
Democrat? Is there a sense of urgency about greater reliability
in the event of severe weather challenges?
Mr. Chatterjee. I laid out in my opening remarks some of
the steps that the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission took
immediately to respond to the devastation that was wrought by
Hurricanes Harvey and Irma. And I can say that we most
certainly view the reliability and resilience of our grid with
the utmost sense of urgency.
Ms. Hoffman. With two Cat 4 hurricanes impacting the
mainland of the United States, there is definitely a sense of
urgency. Secretary Perry, former Governor of Texas, recognizes
the devastation to life and the economic development and human
safety. So it is definitely forefront on our radar.
Mr. Cauley. I sense that there has been a strong focus on
resilience of the grid through both of the most recent
administrations. And we are working hard on that.
And the reason is, in my opening remarks, I mentioned the
50 most significant events we have seen in the U.S. in the last
5 years are all weather related. So it says we can invest more
in hardening and protecting our system.
Florida Power & Light, in Irma, had recently invested $3
billion on hardening using concrete poles, steel poles,
elevating substations, and the equipment that was hardened
performed significantly better than the equipment that had not
been hardened yet. So it was a good demonstration.
Mr. Rush. I have just a short period of time now. I want to
ask Chairman Chatterjee and Mr. Cauley, according to the
cybersecurity firm Symantec Corporation, there has been an
uptick in activity by a group of hackers code-named Dragonfly
2.0 within our domestic energy networks after years of
seemingly being inactive. Are FERC and NERC monitoring this
activity? And are you both confident that you have the tools to
address this issue in order to prevent this group from
sabotaging our electric infrastructure?
Mr. Chatterjee. Thank you for the question, Congressman. We
are aware of the Symantec report and have been coordinating
closely with other Federal agencies, as well as the NERC ISAC,
and industry to assess and address this matter as appropriate.
If it would be helpful to members of the subcommittee, we could
seek to coordinate with other agencies to provide additional
information in a nonpublic setting.
Mr. Cauley. Dragonfly has been around for 3 or 4 years. We
have been aware of it and communicating with the industry. This
new reincarnation of Dragonfly 2 is recent. And it has
characteristics that would make it operative within control
systems, within substations, and so on. So it is of interest.
The instances that we have seen have not gotten into those
systems. They were picked up through traffic between the
utility systems and information going offshore. So it has not
done any harm. It has not infiltrated the systems yet. But it
is there, and it is active.
Mr. Rush. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from Texas, the vice
chairman, Joe Barton.
Mr. Barton.
I ask all Members, please adhere to the 5-minute time.
Please, please, please. We have got so many people and
questions that we are running out of time.
Chairman Barton, you are up.
Mr. Barton. Because of what you just said, Mr. Chairman, I
am going to ask one question, and then I will yield to anybody
on my side.
Many, many States are adopting renewable portfolio
standards, and some of them are fairly aggressive. They want to
have at least 50 percent--and there might be even a few States
that are above that--of their electricity generation with
renewables. My question, I guess, would be to Mr. Cauley, who
is head of NERC, is it possible to meet the same reliability
standards if you go to a generation system that is
predominantly renewable?
Mr. Cauley. I think, from what we are seeing, it is
technically feasible, but there are a lot of reliability
challenges. I gave the example of August a year ago, in
California, there was a wildfire that caused a transmission
wire to trip. When 1,200 megawatts of solar panels saw that,
they thought it was the system collapsing, so they all shut
down at the worst time. And so there has to be coordination.
Wind and solar do not inherently come with the controls to
provide frequency response, voltage response. They just want to
put out megawatts; they want to put out power. But,
technically, we have been working with the vendors to show them
some of those weaknesses and things that need to be done.
Mr. Barton. In the short term, the answer is no; it is not
possible. But in the long term, with some battery research and
other things, it is, perhaps, possible?
Mr. Cauley. Well, I think the technology is there today. It
just requires a lot of coordination.
Mr. Barton. I would yield to Mr. Shimkus.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Joe.
And because it is on the same line, this is to Mr.
Chatterjee.
We had the qualifying facilities, the PURPA hearing last
week or 2 weeks ago. So just a couple questions that kind of
segue right into what Joe was saying. One is: Some of the
electricity markets talked about how that there may be an
opportunity to curtail the QFs to make sure they continue to
keep the reliability of the grid. You have any comments object
that?
Mr. Chatterjee. I want to be careful, Congressman, as we
have------
Mr. Shimkus. I don't want you to be careful.
Mr. Chatterjee. As you know, Congress enacted PURPA in
1978. I think we have heard from numerous stakeholders that
there is an interest in reviewing potential reforms.
Significant changes to PURPA would require congressional
action. There are steps that FERC can take with respect to
PURPA implementation on minor issues. And we held a technical
conference on this. But I think we------
Mr. Shimkus. Let me just go at it this way: You understand
that there is a concern that maybe some of these projects are
located for the benefit of the investors over the grid
reliability?
Mr. Chatterjee. It is certainly something that we are
looking at.
Mr. Shimkus. And let me follow up with this: The one-mile
debate, hopefully you listened or saw part of the testimony----
--
Mr. Chatterjee. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. Where some of these qualifying
facilities were able to break down the parcels to game the
system. Is that part of your review and discussion?
Mr. Chatterjee. It absolutely is. And it is something that
we would review to see whether that is something that the
Commission could handle within its purview, potentially not
require a statutory change from Congress.
Mr. Shimkus. Great. Thank you.
And I yield back to Chairman Barton.
Mr. Barton. I would be happy to yield to any other Member.
If not, Mr. Chairman, I yield back to you.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair calls upon the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Pallone from New Jersey, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Chairman, I would like to yield my time to
the gentlewoman from Florida.
Ms. Castor. Well, I thank the ranking member, Mr. Pallone,
very much.
And thank you to our witnesses for being here today.
I want to thank the utility workers all across the country
who have flooded into Florida--and I know they did into Texas--
to help get the power back on after millions and millions of my
neighbors in Florida lost power. So my hats off to them on
behalf of the citizens of the State of Florida. They still have
some work to do, but they are making good progress.
But I think these extreme weather events, these two
hurricanes, in addition to the other events we have seen just
in the past few years, require a modern, dramatic response to
what is happening with the cost of the changing climate. These
disasters are very expensive. And it is time to make a dramatic
investment in a modern grid, something that is more resilient,
something that serves the need of our citizens in a better way.
We have the brightest minds here in America, and we need to put
them to work, and we need to put the technology to work,
whether that is burying lines that we haven't invested in
before, a greater distributed energy grid, building in the
renewables over time. I agree they are not the answer in the
short term. But in the long term, these distributed grids,
building in renewable energy, is going to help us reduce the
cost of the changing climate.
We have to do more on-demand management. That has been a
battle in the past, and there are some challenges. But we have
got to do this. The business models, in many States, simply do
not match the challenges ahead of us. And I hear that the
Department of Energy wants to be proactive on this. But I don't
know how we do that when we have seen such tremendous proposed
cuts from the Trump administration in resilience, in research.
We have got to rethink that. And I am calling on all of my
colleagues who understand the challenges ahead. We can't simply
cut our way and think we are going to be able to address these
costs and these challenges ahead.
Ms. Hoffman, certainly these cuts, proposed cuts, to
research and development and resiliency are going to put us
further behind. How do we keep up in an era where we need to be
investing more in a modern grid to ensure we don't have the
power outages, and we are addressing the costs of the changing
climate?
Ms. Hoffman. Thank you, very much, for the question.
The administration is focused in its fiscal year 2018
budget on early-stage research. And we really are concentrating
on maximizing the effectiveness of work at the Department of
Energy. We did provide a budget to Congress for fiscal year
2018, and I know it is under deliberations for the House and
Senate. And we look forward to what Congress provides back for
what the Department will implement as part of our fiscal year
2018 appropriations.
Ms. Castor. You are right. And it is back on the Congress
in a lot of ways. And I hope that they are listening and
understand the huge cost if we do not address this. Look at
what we are facing already in emergency aid packages, flood
insurance, rising property insurance, property taxes because
local governments have to raise taxes to harden their water/
wastewater infrastructure and everything they are doing, just
the loss of life that we are seeing.
So my message this morning, on the heels of these
disasters, is let's do more working together, everyone in the
utility industry, the scientists we have out there, and take
this on. This is a real call to action. And I share Mr. Rush's
sense of urgency, as he put it.
So, thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from North Dakota,
Mr. Cramer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman.
And thank you, witnesses, for your service and for being
with us today.
I am going to ask of the Chairman first, Chairman
Chatterjee, as the policy leaders here, we need to respond to
establish a path for base load generation, especially coal.
North Dakota is a big coal-producing State. It is mine mouth.
It is low cost. It is efficient. And I worry about the early
shutdown, the forced shutdown, frankly, of base load
generation, especially with plants that have useful life left
in them. And it really doesn't do anything, in my view, to
protect America's future energy position while also increasing
the cost of electricity for consumers.
And, of course, again, speaking to my State, most of these
plants belong to vertically integrated utilities, which I think
has a special concern about this, where the consumers pay for
the facilities whether they are running or they are not
running. I think this gets lost a lot of times.
Can you elaborate, from a FERC perspective a little bit, on
any strategies that you could deploy that would help adequately
compensate base load generation?
Mr. Chatterjee. Thank you for the question, Senator--sorry,
Freudian slip.
Mr. Cramer. It happens a lot lately.
Mr. Chatterjee. It has a nice ring to it.
Thank you for the question. Obviously, being from Kentucky
and having grown up in Kentucky, I have seen firsthand the
importance of coal-fired generation and what coal-fired
generation means for the delivery of not just affordable but
reliable electricity. And, certainly, growing up seeing that, I
have an appreciation for the role that coal-fired generation
plays in our marketplace.
In terms of what strategies or path forward, the Commission
is fuel-neutral. And we will look to ensure that, as our grid
undergoes this transformation, that we ensure that we evaluate
the attributes of fuel sources to see what values they provide
and see if there is a demonstrated need for reliability,
whether or not those things can be compensated.
I believe the Democratic nominee for the vacancy on the
Commission testified to this last week. And he said that, while
currently, per the DOE report, he believed that there were not
threats to reliability, even he admitted that we had to closely
monitor this and watch this. And I think I would echo those
remarks. We are going to closely watch and monitor whether, in
fact, transitions in the grid do lead to vulnerabilities and
threats to reliability and resilience, and whether, in fact, we
would need to take steps to ensure that that need is met.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you for that.
Along the same lines, as you know, a lot of States, they
have taken some steps to try to work around market solutions to
preserve these plants and their benefits. But, in most cases,
these efforts have been challenged. Understandably, they have
been contested on the basis that they undermine your authority
or FERC's authority. How can we deal with this? How should we
deal with this? Or is this just going to be litigation or
regulation by litigation? Is there a way to deal with the
States?
Mr. Chatterjee. Certainly, it is within the State's
purview, and I believe in States' rights. And States, it is
their prerogative to determine their sources of generation and
their generation mix. When it affects interstate commerce and
potentially does have threats to reliability, I think FERC has
the authority to weigh in there. I think that it will be
something that we will look at closely and carefully, build a
record, adhere to the science and engineering and technology of
the grid, and make those careful determinations.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you, and congratulations, by the way.
In my remaining minute, Ms. Hoffman, I want to talk about
the role of coal going forward, again, especially with new
technologies, the R&D that is being developed for cleaner coal,
of fuel emissions, carbon capture, sequestration, utilization,
all of those technologies that are very promising but, at this
point, not quite to marketability, while at the same time--I
guess my question is, how can DOE, both through its R&D and in
its advocacy, find ways to build that bridge using the existing
tools or maybe expanding on them, especially considering we
have tax reform coming up? Do you see any way for DOE and
Congress to work to build a bridge to that ultimate future of
cleaner coal?
Ms. Hoffman. So, Congressman, I would love to continue to
work with you in exploring additional ideas. Through our
research program, we will continue to invest in advancement in
coal technology, utilization of coal, looking at job growth and
looking at opportunities to continue to support the coal
industry.
Other things that we would like to be able to recognize is
the value that coal brings, as the study brought out, and can
it be compensated for the services it provides, frequency
support, frequency response, fuel diversity.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you. And good report. I appreciate it.
Thanks all of you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from California, Mr.
McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. I thank the chairman.
And I thank the witnesses.
I just want to bring to Mr. Cramer's attention: North
Dakota has the biggest wind potential resource of any State in
the country. So don't discount alternative energy in North
Dakota.
I want to follow up a little bit on Ms. Castor. Yes, we
need to build more resiliency into our electric grid. We need
to acknowledge climate change because that is one of the
drivers. But it is not the only driver: cyber issues, physical
threats, other drivers. And as cochair of the bipartisan Grid
Innovation Caucus with Mr. Latta, a Republican, our mission is
to move forward in that to get the Congress excited about grid
innovation and resiliency. So let's keep that line of
communication open.
Ms. Hoffman, I want to start out with a question about the
disaster. When disasters strike, like the hurricanes that we
just saw, there are utilities sharing resources. But what I
want to know, are there barriers to the sharing of resources
between utilities that we could address here?
Ms. Hoffman. Thank you, Congressman, for the question. I
think that the biggest barrier is allowing the resources to get
to the location of where they need to be as quickly as
possible.
Mr. McNerney. Physical barriers?
Ms. Hoffman. Physical movement.
Other barriers and other things that we are trying to do is
accelerate the assessment time period, which goes down to
information sharing as part of the public-private partnership
so that we understand exactly what the damage is so we can
effectively move resources to respond.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Again, Ms. Hoffman, cyber attacks are becoming greater
threats, including State-sponsored attacks, such as the
potential connection between Dragonfly and Russia, on attacks
on our electric grid. So we must continue to focus on
cybersecurity to build our grid cyber resiliency. So, in
addition to FERC's Order 829 related to supply chain
management, are there additional steps that DOE is or should be
taking with regard to supply chain management to the bulk power
system?
Ms. Hoffman. Congressman, absolutely. It is one of the
areas that we all should be focusing on is supply chain
management. What the Department is doing is partnering with the
supply-chain sector that supports the electric industry,
helping them look at vulnerabilities, look at mitigation
solutions, but also look at ways to get ahead of the game and
really identifying ways to monitor any sort of intrusions that
come on the system, but also be able to look for abnormal
behaviors.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Good. And we are looking at some
legislation that might actually enhance your capabilities in
that regard.
Also, there are several traditional reliability and
resiliency framework tools, including CAIDI, SAIDI, and SAIFI,
if you know what those are, and the interruption cost estimate
calculator, is there room for improvement on those tools?
Should they be upgraded regularly?
Ms. Hoffman. Yes, Congressman. We always should take a look
at any tools for new technologies and capabilities to advance
the utilization. It will help us, in the long term, define,
what does resiliency mean, and what are the cost-effective
investments that we should focus on? So all those tools are
valuable in establishing a baseline but also helping identify
priorities.
Mr. McNerney. In the interest of courtesy, I will yield
back. But I am going to submit questions for the record.
Mr. Olson. I thank my friend.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from the
Commonwealth of Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, very much, Mr. Chairman.
In the interest of time, I will submit some questions that
I had for the record that I had for some folks. And I will try
to abbreviate my questions as much as I can.
Chairman Chatterjee, you have said that the existing coal
and nuclear fleet need to be properly compensated to recognize
the value they provide the system. Regardless if one agrees or
not, it is clear that some States do agree and are taking
action within the jurisdiction to compensate generation
resources for attributes that are not being properly recognized
in the wholesale markets.
Given the current backlog of issues at FERC, how high of a
priority do you see FERC placing on the issue of proper
compensation in wholesale markets? And as a part of that, let
me just say, because of time, I would love to get an extended
answer, but for purposes of today's hearing, so that folks at
home know, high, medium, or low?
Mr. Chatterjee. We can walk and chew gum at the same time.
I would say high.
Mr. Griffith. High. OK. I appreciate that very much.
Ms. Hoffman, the recently released DOE staff report found
that the uncertainties surrounding New Source Review
requirements has led to a significant lack of investment in
plant and efficiency upgrades. And I look to the question I
just asked where we have acknowledged that coal and nuclear
fleets are important for grid reliability across the country.
And so we have that lack of investment in plant and efficiency
upgrades and that the New Source Review program has impeded or
resulted in the cancellation of projects which would maintain
and improve reliability, efficiency, and the safety of existing
energy capacity--and a lot of times that is coal, but it is
other things as well. That is why I have authored two bills to
modernize and streamline the New Source Review Program. Can you
provide a brief overview, again, looking at another date for a
longer answer perhaps, but can you provide what DOE plans that
there are to ensure that this burdensome permitting program
does not further impact grid reliability? In other words, I am
working on the legislative end. What are you doing on the
administrative end?
Ms. Hoffman. Thank you, Congressman. We are working
diligently to streamline the review and permitting process that
is in the jurisdiction of the Department of Energy. We are
looking, on the transmission side, pre-application process. I
would be more than glad to have an in-depth conversation on all
the list of activities that we are working on.
[Additional information submitted by Ms. Hoffman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. And I do appreciate that, anything you
provide to our office. I do apologize that, because of
hurricanes earlier in the week and now our compressed voting
schedule today, that I can't get a lengthier answer.
And, Mr. Chairman, those being the two most vital of my
questions--others were important, but those were the two most
important--I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back.
Seeing no further Members wishing to ask questions, I would
like to thank all the witnesses for being here today. And I
want to personally apologize for exposing you all to a good
old-fashioned Texas goat rope because of the floor votes. I
appreciate your patience.
Pursuant to committee rules, I remind Members that they
have 10 business days to submit additional questions for the
record. I ask that witnesses submit the response within 10
business days upon receipt of those questions.
Without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:47 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

As you are aware, this hearing was originally scheduled for
the beginning of this week but was postponed due to the
destruction caused by hurricane Irma. I would like all of those
effected by hurricane Irma to know that we are thinking about
them and we are doing what we can to hasten the recovery
efforts, especially as it pertains to restoring power to the
region. Both hurricane Irma and hurricane Harvey have
highlighted concerns and challenges that this committee is
working to address and which we will be talking about this
morning.
As we continue our ``Powering America'' hearing series
today, we will be examining the U.S. electricity system through
the important lens of reliability. If there is one thing that
we can all agree upon, it is the fact that this country must
have an electricity system that provides reliable power to
every corner of the country. Everyone in this room understands
that electricity is a crucial component in the lives of all
Americans and serves as the backbone of the U.S. economy. For
these reasons, this committee has always paid special attention
to the issue of reliability, which can be seen through our
extensive record of hearings and legislation related to the
electricity sector.
As noted in previous ``Powering America'' hearings, the
United States electricity system is going through a significant
period of transformation which is being driven by several
factors ranging from a changing generation fuel mix to the
deployment of new energy technologies located at the edge of
the grid.
Clearly, the transforming grid is creating exciting new
opportunities and benefits for consumers across the country,
which is demonstrated by low electricity prices and the
deployment of new consumer-focused energy technologies.
However, along with the benefits that accompany an evolving
grid, there are of course some associated challenges that are
causing many stakeholders to rethink how we should go about
regulating and operating a 21st century electricity system.
Chief among these challenges is improving how we address and
ensure grid reliability.
Given the importance and far reaching impact of the grid,
multiple entities and stakeholders are working together to make
sure that electricity is generated and delivered reliably.
Joining us today, we have three entities--the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission, the Department of Energy, and the North
American Electric Reliability Corporation--who each play a
crucial role in overseeing our electricity system. I look
forward to hearing from them. More specifically, I am
particularly interested in hearing how these entities are
implementing market rules and standards to ensure not only a
reliable grid today but to make sure that we have a reliable
grid 10 or 20 years from now.
I should also mention that at a later date, we will be
hearing from a separate panel of witnesses representing the
various types of power producing technologies that generate the
Nation's electricity supply. These witnesses will help us
understand how various generation resources are working
together, under the direction of grid operators, to generate
adequate power and to offer essential grid reliability
services, such as frequency regulation and voltage support.
As Americans, we have always been incredibly fortunate to
have access to reliable electricity at all times of the day and
in every region of the country. To maintain this reliable
electricity system going forward, we must continue to promote
adequate system planning, smart energy policies, and robust
technology standards, while still providing electricity-sector
participants with the flexibility they need to bring about
innovation and sustain low electricity prices. With this goal
as a backdrop, I look forward to the remainder of this hearing
and would like to thank our witnesses for their patience and
flexibility with rescheduling this hearing.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

POWERING AMERICA: DEFINING RELIABILITY IN A TRANSFORMING ELECTRICITY
INDUSTRY, PART 2

----------

TUESDAY, OCTOBER 3, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:07 p.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Fred Upton
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Upton, Olson, Shimkus,
Latta, Harper, McKinley, Kinzinger, Griffith, Flores, Mullin,
Cramer, Walberg, Walden (ex officio), Rush, McNerney, Peters,
Green, Castor, Sarbanes, Tonko, Loebsack, Schrader, Kennedy,
and Butterfield.
Staff present: Ray Baum, Staff Director; Allie Bury,
Legislative Clerk, Energy/Environment; Kelly Collins, Staff
Assistant; Zack Dareshori, Staff Assistant; Wyatt Ellertson,
Research Associate, Energy/Environment; Theresa Gambo, Human
Resources and Office Administrator; Tom Hassenboehler, Chief
Counsel, Energy/Environment; Jordan Haverly, Policy
Coordinator, Environment; A.T. Johnston, Senior Policy Advisor,
Energy; Mary Martin, Deputy Chief Counsel, Energy/Environment;
Drew McDowell, Executive Assistant; Alex Miller, Video
Production Aide and Press Assistant; Brandon Mooney, Deputy
Chief Energy Advisor; Mark Ratner, Policy Coordinator; Peter
Spencer, Professional Staff Member, Energy; Jason Stanek,
Senior Counsel, Energy; Madeline Vey, Policy Coordinator,
Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection; Evan Viau,
Legislative Clerk; Hamlin Wade, Special Advisor for External
Affairs; Everett Winnick, Director of Information Technology;
Andy Zach, Senior Professional Staff Member, Environment;
Michelle Ash, Minority Chief Counsel, Digital Commerce and
Consumer Protection; Jeff Carroll, Minority Staff Director;
Lisa Goldman, Minority Counsel; Dino Papanastasiou, Minority
GAO Detailee; Caroline Paris-Behr, Minority Policy Analyst; and
Tim Robinson, Minority Chief Counsel.
Mr. Upton. Good afternoon, everyone. This is Part II of
``Powering America: Defining Reliability in a Transforming
Electricity Industry.``
And so we have already done our opening statements. We did
them a couple days ago, so we are going to turn to you. I just
want to welcome all of you for joining us here today, and
thanks again for your flexibility in rescheduling this very,
very important hearing.
Today, we are going to reconvene with Part II of the Energy
Subcommittee's hearing entitled ``Powering America: Defining
Reliability in a Transforming Electricity Industry.``
The second panel of witnesses will provide their insight
into how the different attributes of generation resources help
system operators protect the reliability of the electricity
grid. Especially in light of Friday's announcement this hearing
is particularly timely. We are anxious to hear your thoughts.
As you know, your statements have been made part of the
record in their entirety and so, if you would take no longer
than 5 minutes each, and then we will do questions from the
subcommittee.
Mr. Durbin, we will start with you, the executive VP and
chief strategy officer of API, American Petroleum Institute.
Welcome.

STATEMENTS OF MARTY DURBIN, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
STRATEGY OFFICER, AMERICAN PETROLEUM INSTITUTE; PAUL BAILEY,
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, AMERICAN COALITION FOR CLEAN COAL
ELECTRICITY; MARIA G. KORSNICK, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
NUCLEAR ENERGY INSTITUTE; THOMAS C. KIERNAN, CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, AMERICAN WIND ENERGY ASSOCIATION; STEVE WRIGHT,
GENERAL MANAGER, CHELAN COUNTY PUBLIC UTILITY DISTRICT NO. 1,
ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL HYDROPOWER ASSOCIATION; CHRISTOPHER
MANSOUR, VICE PRESIDENT, FEDERAL AFFAIRS, SOLAR ENERGY
INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION; KELLY SPEAKES-BACKMAN, CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, ENERGY STORAGE ASSOCIATION; AND JOHN MOORE, SENIOR
ATTORNEY AND DIRECTOR OF THE SUSTAINABLE FERC PROJECT, NATURAL
RESOURCES DEFENSE COUNCIL

STATEMENT OF MARTY DURBIN

Mr. Durbin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the
subcommittee, and thanks for the opportunity to testify today
on the reliability of our electric grid.
Increased use of natural gas in electric power generation
has not only enhanced the reliability of the overall system,
it's also provided significant environmental and consumer
benefits.
The abundance, affordability, low emissions profile, and
flexibility of natural gas and natural gas-fired generating
units make it a fuel choice.
There is no question, however, that the bulk power system
will continue to rely on multiple fuels including natural gas,
nuclear, coal, hydro, wind, solar, et cetera.
For those who believe diversity--fuel diversity is
important for grid reliability, the good news is that the
Nation's electric power generation portfolio is far more
diverse today than it was a decade ago, largely due to the
increased use of affordable reliable natural gas.
Government forecasts show that that diversity will be
maintained for years to come. However, it's important to
remember that fuel diversity in and of itself does not equal
reliability.
Reliability is derived from a diversity of attributes and
generation, not just the diversity of fuel sources. PJM's March
2017 report, ``Evolving Resource Mix and System Reliability,``
notes ``more diverse fuel portfolios are not necessarily more
reliable.``
That said, in every meaningful way, the inherent
attributes of natural gas fuel generation including
dispatchability, security of fuel supply, shorter start times,
frequency response, quicker ramp rates, and lower minimum load
level, to name a few, make the electric grid more reliable and
resilient.
It's important, however, that market rules remain fuel
neutral by assigning value to performance-based attributes that
contribute to the reliability and resilience of the grid,
rather than any particular fuel or technology.
Looking ahead, as the committee examines how best to ensure
the long-term reliability and resilience----
Mr. Upton. Mr. Durbin, even though I can hear you fine, can
you just move the mic a little bit closer to you?
Mr. Durbin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Upton. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Durbin. As the committee examines how best to ensure
the long-term reliability and resilience, five factors are
essential.
First, as I said a moment ago, natural gas generation
enhances the flexibility of the electric grid by providing
flexible and fast ramping, which can cycle off and on in a
short period.
This helps maintain stability and reliability of the grid
as it accommodates an increase in variable renewable energy
resources.
Second, Government and private-sector experts are in
agreement that natural gas will remain an abundant and
affordable fuel for decades to come.
Third, because natural gas-fired power plants are one of
the most cost effective forms of generation to build and
operation, wholesale electricity costs have been significantly
reduced.
As an example, since 2008 average annual wholesale power
prices in PJM have decreased by almost 50 percent.
Fourth, the increased use of natural gas and power
generation continues to drive emissions reductions. In 2016,
carbon dioxide emissions for electricity generation were at
nearly 30-year lows and EIA attributes 60 percent of the power-
related CO2 emissions reductions since 2005 to a greater use of
natural gas.
Finally, the geographic diversity of the natural gas
system, where it is produced, and how it is transported makes
it a reliable and resilient fuel source.
Market forces and public policy are driving the ongoing
shift in our Nation's power generation mix. Natural gas
generation is an important and growing part of that mix.
Collectively, the environmental advantages, reliability,
and affordability of natural gas and natural gas generation
have allowed it to earn its market share in the power
generation space because it provides and will continue to
provide reliable low-cost fuel for electricity generation and
cost savings to consumers.
The natural gas industry stands ready to work with all
stakeholders to ensure our Nation's electric grid is reliable,
safe, and resilient. We were pleased to join more than a dozen
other energy trade associations in a letter to this committee
supporting competitive market rules that promote a diverse
portfolio through fuel-neutral policies.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today and I look
forward to these questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Durbin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Mr. Bailey, president and CEO of American Coalition for
Clean Coal Electricity, welcome. Nice to see you.

STATEMENT OF PAUL BAILEY

Mr. Bailey. Chairman Upton, members of the subcommittee, we
want to commend you for holding the hearing today and for
allowing us the opportunity to testify.
ACCCE represents America's fleet of coal fuel power plants.
Through the first half of this year, the fleet supplied 30
percent of the Nation's electricity needs.
In 2010, the coal fleet represented more than 300,000
megawatts of electric generating capacity. Unfortunately, more
than 100,000 megawatts of coal fuel generating capacity have
either retired or announced plans to retire.
These retirements represent one-third of the fleet that
existed just 7 years ago. A secure electric grid is vital to
the Nation's well-being. This means the electric grid must be
both reliable and resilient.
The coal fleet provides many attributes that help ensure
both reliability and resilience. These attributes include fuel
security and many other essential reliability services.
It is important to keep in mind that reliability and
resilience are not the same thing. Reliability refers to
resource adequacy and the security of the bulk power system to
withstand sudden disturbances, according the NERC.
Reliability is a well-defined term with agreed upon metrics
and attributes. For example, my written testimony lists more
than a dozen reliability attributes. The coal fleet scores well
against these attributes. Some of the other resources
represented on this panel also score well on reliability
attributes.
On the other hand, there are no agreed upon resilience
criteria or metrics. Resilience means maintaining a reliable
grid in the event of a high-impact low-frequency events or, put
another way, low probability disturbances that have
catastrophic consequences such as a polar vortex.
Fuel security is critical to both reliability and
resilience. Over the past 5 years, the coal fleet has
maintained an average on-site stockpile of 73 days of sub-
bituminous coals and 82 days of bituminous coal.
Several recent reports, including those by the National
Academy of Sciences and PJM, cite the importance of the coal
fleet's on-site fuel supply that contributes to grid
reliability and resilience.
Despite its contribution to reliability and resilience, the
coal fleet faces a number of challenges. These include
environmental expenditures, low natural gas prices, mandates
and incentives for renewables, out-of-market subsidies and
market rules that do not properly value the attributes of the
coal fleet.
Market rules are important because almost two-thirds of the
coal fleet serves also electricity markets. Last week, DOE took
an important step by proposing a rule that directs FERC to
adopt certain electricity market reforms.
The rule would require RTOs and ISOs to adopt market rules
to ensure that fuel security, reliability, and resilience
attributes such as those provided by the coal fleet are fully
valued.
Although we are still evaluating the proposal, it
represents a major step towards achieving at least some reforms
in wholesale electricity markets.
However, to achieve DOE's goal and prevent more premature
coal retirements, these reforms must be adopted quickly. FERC
must provide strong leadership and act expeditiously and grid
operators must adopt these and other reforms as soon as
possible.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bailey follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Next, we are joined by Ms. Maria Korsnick, president and
CEO of NEI. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF MARIA G. KORSNICK

Ms. Korsnick. Thank you very much.
For many decades, the Americas' fleet of nuclear reactors
have served this Nation by providing clean base load power and
support for local infrastructure.
Today, those same plants, which support over 475,000 jobs
across America, are being threatened by energy markets which do
not value nuclear's attributes.
This practical and public policy issue must no longer be
ignored. I thank Chairman Upton and Ranking Member Rush for
holding this hearing. We need an open and honest conversation
about what should be done to maintain these important assets.
Last week the U.S. Department of Energy, under the
leadership of Secretary Perry, issued a directive ordering FERC
to take swift action to address U.S. electrical grid
resiliency.
This action is a result of DOE's recent report highlighting
the impact that market and regulatory policies are having on
base load power plants including our Nation's nuclear reactors.
Additionally, the IHS Markit issued a report valuing
diversity at $114 billion a year. It's essential this committee
encourages FERC and the RTOs to work together to create the
market rules for the diverse portfolio that we need.
Unfortunately, current market designs fail to compensate
the unique and beneficial attributes of nuclear generation and
here is what I mean.
First, nuclear produces reliable base load power while not
emitting harmful air pollutants or carbon dioxide. It produces
large quantities of electricity around the clock safely and
reliably, operating over 90 percent of the time for the past 15
years. That's higher than any other generation source.
And we provide ancillary services such as voltage,
frequency, and reactive power support to the grid. Our reactors
are secure hardened facilities which have the fuel to run for
18 to 24 months, avoiding reliance on just-in-time fuel
delivery.
This is essential when natural disasters and catastrophic
events occur and we help create the fuel and technology
diversity that is a bedrock characteristic of a reliable,
resilient electric sector which helps create affordable and
stable rates for consumers.
Let's talk about some real examples. During the 2014 polar
vortex, nuclear generators performed than all other forms of
generation, operating with an average capacity factor of 95
percent.
More recently, despite Hurricane Harvey's devastating
impact on the region, the two south Texas nuclear plants
continued operating at 100 percent power during the storm,
providing much-needed electricity to police stations,
hospitals, and shelters.
And Hurricane Irma ravaged Florida, the St. Lucie Nuclear
Plant on Florida's east coast, operated a reactor at 100
percent power to provide what remained of the grid much-needed
power for critical services.
The DOE study did a good job laying out the challenges
facing the electricity system and among these are
unprecedentedly low natural gas prices, low electricity demand
growth, and increased use of variable renewable energy due to
regulation and mandates at the State and Federal levels, which
are creating unintended consequences for all electricity
generators but particularly base load plants.
Although DOE found that the markets have met short-term
reliability needs at low cost, DOE determined that FERC must
reform the markets to address system resilience and long-term
grid stability.
Comprehensive reform must resolve two pressing problems.
The markets are not functioning well when prices are negative.
Reactors are, in fact, forced to pay grid operators to take
their power.
And second, market designs fail to compensate nuclear
generation with a unique set of attributes that I've discussed.
These attributes play an important role in creating affordable
electricity for our consumers.
As we've awaited Federal action, State solutions have
preserved seven reactors and saved thousands of jobs in New
York and Illinois and are helping bridge us towards a secure
energy future.
I cannot overstate the need for FERC and the RTOs to
expeditiously implement solutions. Since 2013, three nuclear
reactors have prematurely retired due to market conditions and
another eight reactors are scheduled to prematurely retire for
market or policy reasons.
Now, some of these plants will shut down more than a decade
before their operating licenses expire, and when a nuclear
plant shuts down, the Nation irrevocably loses a reliable
source of continuous generation and electricity prices and air
emissions both increase.
I did not paint a rosy picture today but I painted an
accurate one. America's nuclear fleet and all the value it
brings to our Nation is in clear and present danger without
your action.
As China and Russia aggressively attempt to replace our
Nation as the world's leader in nuclear technology, it's now
more imperative than ever that this committee take action.
I applaud your leadership in holding this series of
hearings and I look forward to working together to find ways to
fix the current market flaws and to ensure America's nuclear
fleet not only survives but thrives as part of our Nation's
diverse and reliable system.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Korsnick follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Next, we are joined by Mr. Tom Kiernan, CEO of American
Wind Energy Association.
Tom, welcome back.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS C. KIERNAN

Mr. Kiernan. Thank you very much.
Chairman Upton, Ranking Member Rush, and other
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you very much
for the opportunity to testify on behalf of the diverse
membership of the American Wind Energy Association.
AWEA represents the entire supply chain of the wind
industry, from family-owned construction companies in
Minneapolis, to some of the country's largest utilities, to
Fortune 500 companies that are increasingly buying our product,
wind energy.
The wind industry welcomes the focus on reliability and
resilience and we have consistently supported more rigorous
reliability standards at FERC and NERC.
Now, this should not be surprising, given our advanced
technology, that some of you may not be aware of, now enable
wind to provide many if not most of the essential reliability
services needed for the grid.
As NERC has noted, reliability and resilience of the grid
are good and increasing and that wind energy contributes to
providing these reliability services and resilience of the
grid.
Wind is not only capable of delivering these services but
also has demonstrated a strong track record of doing so and I'd
like to share six brief examples, if I may.
First, during the 2014 polar vortex, wind energy was
resilience to cold weather and helped keep the lights on while
13,000 megawatts of coal and 1,400 megawatts of nuclear were
forced offline in PJM alone despite having onsite fuel.
Second, and similarly, during the 2011 Texas cold snap,
wind energy received accolades from the grid operators while
over 3,000 megawatts of coal went offline, despite onsite fuel.
Third, and more recently, most wind plants along the Texas
coast continued producing energy as Hurricane Harvey came
ashore and were producing as long as the grid was up.
In contrast, two coal units were forced offline and stayed
offline due to flooded onsite fuel.
Fourth, grid operators in Texas and Colorado now regularly
dispatch the output of wind plants up and down to provide
frequency response and balance electricity's supply and demand
with a degree of speed and accuracy that exceeds most
conventional power plants.
Fifth, during several summer droughts coal and nuclear
plants have been curtailed due to inadequate cooling water,
again, despite having onsite fuel.
And lastly, Iowa and Kansas now produce more than 30
percent of their electricity from wind, South Dakota and
Oklahoma more than 25 percent, and this last year down in
Texas, the main operator produced over 15 percent of their
electricity from wind, and reliability is at an all-time high,
with wind providing some of the essential reliability services
such as reactive power and frequency response.
I would now like to offer four recommendations for
electricity policy makers. In summary, first, rely on
competitive markets; second, focus on reliability services, not
generation sources; third, do not be distracted by perceived
problems; and fourth, promote transmission infrastructure. I
will go quickly through each.
First, rely on competitive markets--competitive markets
enable a cost-effective division of labor among energy sources.
Each energy source will deliver the reliability services it can
provide best and at the lowest cost, resulting in a cost-
effective delivery of a stable grid.
Secondly, focus on reliability services, not generation
sources. Grid operators should seek to identify and compensate
for reliability services and not some fuel characteristics such
as whether a resource as onsite fuel.
In other words, focus on the services that the power system
needs like flexibility, disturbance ride-through capability,
frequency in voltage support, and actual energy production in
times of high demand and not the fuel type of the generator.
FERC RTOs and NERC are well equipped to define the services
needed.
Third, do not be distracted by perceived problems. I've
seen frequent mention of the supposed harmful effects of
negative pricing.
As the DOE notes in their recently released grid study,
negative crisis ``have had almost no impact on annual average
day-ahead or real-time wholesale electricity prices,`` and are
also often caused by fossil or nuclear power plants.
And fourth, promote transmission infrastructure
development. Building a more robust transmission system is the
single most effective tool for improving resiliency.
A strong integrated power grid would provide the same vast
benefits as our interstate highway system has in allowing the
most competitive businesses to deliver their low-cost products
to consumers.
So, in sum, we support the objectives of maintaining
reliability and resilience and urge that they be promoted
through free and open markets with a focus on reliability
services, not generation sources, and a program to promote
transmission infrastructure development.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kiernan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Next we are joined by Steve Wright, GM for Chelan Public
Utility District on behalf of the National Hydropower
Association.
Welcome to you, sir.

STATEMENT OF STEVE WRIGHT

Mr. Wright. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, thank you for the
invitation to appear to today. My name is Steve Wright and I'm
the general manager at Chelan County, Washington Public Utility
District.
Chelan has roughly 2,000 megawatts of hydropower. I'm also
representing the National Hydropower Association.
From 2000 to 2013, I was the administrator and chief
executive officer of the Bonneville Power Administration,
serving under three presidents.
My duty today is to describe the value that hydropower
provides supporting reliable service to our Nation's electric
consumers.
This should be one of the easier assignments given to any
congressional witness, given the vast array of reliability,
cost, and air emission benefits hydropower provides.
It's important to understand that maintaining reliability
involves many complex products and services. These include
energy, peak capacity, regulation or frequency response,
spinning and non-spinning reserve, voltage control, black start
capability and inertia, and particularly important in a world
increasingly reliant on variable energy resources, there is a
need for flexible capacity.
Many generating resources can provide multiple
characteristics necessary for reliability. But hydropower is
best positioned to provide them across the board.
In life we usually have to face a trade-off between quality
and cost. Not so with respect to hydropower. Hydropower is
generally the least-cost resource available in the marketplace.
Hydropower also produces zero air emissions and represents
a least-cost path to meeting both our reliability and emissions
national objectives.
The key challenge for hydropower in the coming decade is
the lack of policy attention it has received. Hydropower is,
for the most part, taken for granted in the marketplace.
This results in significant potential missed opportunities
for both refurbishment and new construction. There is a need
for a massive reinvestment in what is an aging fleet.
Most hydropower capacity in this country was built from
1930 to 1975. For the most part, the engineering on these
projects was excellent and the projects are outliving design
life.
We are, however, already entering a period where there is a
need to refurbish tens of thousands of megawatts of hydropower
capacity.
The decision whether to invest in hydropower refurbishment
can be described simply. The cost of refurbishment is compared
against other alternatives, taking into consideration prices
for energy, capacity, and environmental attributes.
In today's market, energy prices are currently quite low,
in part due to the Federal tax policy. Capacity markets are not
providing prices commensurate with what's necessary for
refurbishment or, in some cases, even maintenance of existing
plants.
This is in part due to the difficulty of establishing
markets and regulatory regimes for issues such as resource
adequacy that address the specific services and actions
necessary to maintain reliability.
And the environmental attribute markets are not providing
pricing commensurate with aggressive goals or emissions
reductions.
New hydropower resources and even many refurbishment
projects face a challenging investment environment, given
today's pricing. And while low prices sound good for consumers,
it would not be if it leads to shortage, price volatility, and
reliability problems.
Unfortunately, I lived through the West Coast energy crisis
when we experienced fundamental imbalance between supply and
demand. Our policy should be developed to assure there is
adequate supply to achieve high reliability and reduce the risk
of extreme price excursions.
NHA's Jeff Leahey provided testimony before the Senate
Energy Committee that identified Federal policy that needs to
evolve in the following ways to support hydropower.
We need relicensing reform. The, roughly, 10 years required
for relicensing does not compare favorably against the
permitting requirements for other generating resources. It
needs similar tax treatment to other zero-emission-generating
resources and we need further support for research and
development.
And I would add to that list support for adequate capacity
prices to encourage cost-effective investment. The fundamental
problem addressed last week by the Department of Energy is
despite best efforts in various regions, markets to this point
have not been structured to provide adequate compensation for
the various services necessary to assure long-term resource
adequacy, reliability, and resiliency.
Underlying Federal or State tax and other incentive
policies tend to make robust market design even more difficult.
The capacity reliability challenge will vary by region, though.
For example, in the West, with our plethora of variable
energy resources, our biggest challenge is providing flexible
capacity.
Because it is complex, it will be difficult to address in
an expedited process or with a focus as limited as the concept
of base load resources. But at the same time, the problem of
price formation being inadequate to address reliability needs
is real.
Policies that assure adequate resource supply for
reliability deserve the attention of policy makers.
So in conclusion, hydropower is the Nation's premier
generation source for reliability, cost, and emissions
perspective.
Due to its quiet long history and relative success, it has
been taken for granted in Federal public policy debates. Given
what is at stake, hydropower deserves more focus.
Thank you for the time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wright follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Mr. Mansour--Christopher Mansour, VP, Federal affairs, for
Solar Energy Industries Association.
Welcome. You need to hit that button.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER MANSOUR

Mr. Mansour. There we go. And members of the committee, I
am Christopher Mansour, vice president for Federal affairs at
the Solar Energy Industries Association. Thank you for inviting
me to appear here before you today.
Before I begin, just let me say that our president and CEO,
Abby Hopper, regrets being unable to attend the committee
today. She's at the U.S. International Trade Commission that's
right now having its remedy hearing for the solar trade case.
Further information on this trade case and the threat it poses
to our industry is available in my written testimony.
I am testifying today on behalf of SEIA's almost 1,000
member companies and the 260,000 Americans employed in the U.S.
solar industry. Solar is a strong driver for the American
economy.
In fact, one out of every 15 new jobs created in the United
States in 2016 was a solar job. While California leads the way
in solar jobs, States like Nevada, Florida, Arizona, Texas, and
North Carolina each employ over 7,000 solar workers.
2016 was also a record year for solar deployment in the
country. We added 15 gigawatts of solar capacity, double the
amount installed in 2015. Solar capacity in the United States
now exceeds 47 gigawatts. Solar firms invested nearly $23
billion in the United States in 2016.
Solar was also the number-one source of new generating
capacity in the United States in the last year. In the first
quarter of 2016, our country hit an important milestone of
installing solar panels on 1 million American homes.
Our industry will double that number to 2 million by 2018
and double it again to 4 million homes by the end of 2022.
Solar is a growing part of our electricity mix, delivering
1.4 percent of the Nation's total electrical usage. This is
expected to grow to 4 percent by 2020.
Solar has been and will continue to be deployed in a manner
that adds to the viability and security of the grid.
Regarding the Department of Energy's recent staff study on
grid reliability, we appreciate the willingness of the
secretary and his team--Secretary of Energy, Mr. Perry, and his
team--to listen to our concerns with and our suggestions for
the report.
We believe that many of comments were reflected in the
final product. In particular, we agree with one of the findings
in the report that stated, quote, ``While concerns exist about
the impact of widespread deployment of renewable energy on the
retirement of coal and nuclear power plants, the data do not
suggest a correlation,`` closed quote.
Last week, the secretary sent the FERC a proposed rule to
address grid resiliency through cost-based payment mechanisms
for certain coal and nuclear power plants.
The secretary cites the need to, quote, ``protect American
people from the threat of energy outages that could result in
the loss of traditional base load capacity,`` and specifically
identifies the ability to provide voltage support, frequency
services, operating reserves, and reactive powers benefits that
such generation resources bring to the grid.
SEIA agrees with the secretary that FERC should continue
its important work on price formation. We also agree with the
assertion that generators--all generators--should be fully
compensated for the energy, capacity, and ancillary services
that they provide to the grid.
Where we do not agree with the secretary is that this
rushed rulemaking is the right way to achieve those ends. FERC
can and should define any reliability services or products that
are missing from the marketplace in a technology-neutral
manner.
Healthy competition will yield the most innovative
solutions at the lowest prices for consumers while protecting
ratepayers from having to shoulder unreasonable and unnecessary
additional costs for little benefit.
In my written testimony, you'll find evidence of solar's
contributions to grid reliability under both normal operating
conditions and during unusual events.
During the recent solar eclipse, grid operators accurately
predicted diminished solar output and adjusted generation
sources accordingly with no subsequent blackouts or brownouts.
Solar also withstood the past month's multiple hurricanes.
Based on what our member companies have told us, very few
panels--solar panels were actually damaged during these storms.
Moreover, studies by NREL and others cited in my written
testimony consistently demonstrate that not only can our
regional grids accommodate high penetration of solar and other
renewable sources but that solar projects have the ability to
provide important services to the grid such as regulation,
voltage support, and frequency response during various
operating modes.
In closing, we support Federal energy policies that promote
reliability, security, and fuel diversity. Increased
investments in transmission will bring greater reliability and
access to more diverse sources of generation.
We look to FERC to ensure that well-functioning wholesale
electric--electricity markets thrive. In parts of the country
without RTOs and ISOs, FERC must guarantee open access and
nondiscriminatory treatment for independent renewable
generators.
Finally, incentivizing significant investments in energy
storage deployment on the transmission and distribution grids
will increase grid reliability and promote another important
resource to systems' operators.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mansour follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Next, we are joined by Kelly Speakes-Backman, CEO of Energy
Storage Association.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF KELLY SPEAKES-BACKMAN

Ms. Speakes-Backman. Chairman Upton, Ranking Member Rush,
on behalf of ESA, thank you very much for your time today. I
would like to begin my remarks by level setting our
understanding of the terms reliability, resilience, and
flexibility.
Our electric system today is bound to a simple reality of
physics. Supply must match demand at every moment everywhere.
If it doesn't, then the result is equipment damage, service
disruption, or blackouts.
So what we call reliability is really the ability to
maintain that match of supply and demand during normal
operations, even if they are variable or unpredictable.
What we mean by resilience is the ability to maintain
service or restore supply during and after a disruptive
external event. Flexibility is critical to both reliability and
resilience to ensure uninterrupted power is delivered to
consumers whenever and wherever they need it.
Energy storage technologies enable energy to be generated
at one time and saved for another time. It is pretty simple as
that. The concept enables an enormous amount of capabilities
for the grid, be it supplying backup power, reducing peak
system demands, relieving stressed grid infrastructure,
enabling higher penetrations of variable generation sources, or
maintaining the optimal function of inflexible generation
sources.
These capabilities ensure that supply and demand reliably
match during normal operations and make that balance resilient
to a greater range of threats.
When most people hear the words energy storage they think
of batteries, and for good reason. Batteries are everywhere.
They're in our phones. They're in our computers, appliances,
our cars, and, increasingly, in our electric grid.
There are a variety of storage technologies including
mechanical and thermal, and each has its own performance
characteristics and best-suited applications. But all do the
same simple job of storing energy, effectively decoupling
time--the element of time from supply and demand.
For today, I'm focussing on batteries. There is 800
megawatts of battery storage installed nationwide in--at grid
megawatt scale in 21 States.
Storage technologies, primarily lithium ion, are declining
rapidly in cost, dropping by 50 percent every 3 to 4 years and
projected to continue at this rate.
Driven by these cost declines, the U.S. is forecasted to
quadruple its installed storage capacity in just 5 years,
representing $3 billion in annual sales.
But more importantly, these sharp cost declines also mean
that storage will get larger and perform at longer durations,
increasing their range of applications.
Storage is uniquely flexible compared to all other grid
resources. Number one, it promotes the reliability and
resilience at all levels of the grid and onsite locations.
It could be owned by utilities, third party providers, or
consumers for a variety of services and cost-saving
applications--the only grid resource that can be used both as
supply when discharging and demand when charging.
It's capable of near instantaneous response and precise
control, ramping to full charge or discharge in milliseconds.
It's capable of near--sorry--a single installation can perform
multiple functions, even interchangeably over time, and it can
be deployed quickly at megawatt scale within six months.
I provided several examples in my testimony that you can
ask me questions about or what have you. But they include
maintaining power quality, onsite power, backup power of solar
plus storage during the recent hurricanes, locational grid
support, demand response with chillers and water heaters, black
start capability to enable other generators to return to normal
operations, response to short-run grid fluctuations, avoiding
outages from system imbalances, transmission and distribution
system support during multiyear upgrades, contributions to
resource adequacy meeting peak demands, and quick deployment
for broader plant failures.
Now, we have a lot of values that we can bring to the grid
and with all of these capabilities you would think that storage
would be much more prevalent in the market today.
But I will tell you, I think it's still hindered from full
deployment. Policy and regulations today focus on what we want
from technologies rather than performance.
Because of this, they can't keep pace with the innovation
and the changing role of the consumer. We see four general
themes to improving the performance characteristics of grid
reliability and resilience, which can be competitively and
cost-effectively met by storage. More details of these
recommendations can be found in my written testimony.
And in closing, I'll just say that energy storage is here,
and it's growing fast. We support market-driven pursuit to
improve reliability and resilience.
And I thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Speakes-Backman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Last, we are joined by Mr. John Moore, Sustainable FERC
Project, Energy & Transportation Program from the NRDC.
Nice to see you.

STATEMENT OF JOHN MOORE

Mr. Moore. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman Upton, Ranking
Member Rush, and members of the subcommittee. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify here today.
One thing I think I can say after listening to everyone
else on the panel is that we all agree that reliability and
resiliency is critical as our grid continues to transform and
that we need to have the ability to maintain a secure system
and then quickly recover whenever extreme weather, physical
attacks, or cyberterrorism attack on the grid.
I think, though, that if Hurricanes Irma and Harvey proved
anything, it is that no resource actually is perfectly
resilient or reliable, and actually some resources have more
vulnerabilities than we might think.
In point of fact, several nuclear units suffered during
Irma and Harvey and didn't return to service until days
afterwards. We've already heard from Mr. Kiernan.
Saturated coal piles forced the power plant to switch over
to natural gas, and then distribution and transmission systems
also can create havoc with reliability and resilience as we've
seen in Puerto Rico and parts of Florida as the grids were
knocked offline.
The key question--and now I'm going to turn to the DOE
study because that's the topic of the day--the key question is
whether massive subsidies of the type that the DOE proposes
to--proposes for the grid would have made any of these power
plants more reliable or resilient and better able to withstand
natural forces.
No. It actually might have made the problem worse by
undermining markets and freezing out other equally reliable and
less costly resources.
We can achieve the same level of reliability at a lower
cost by first defining reliability services and then deciding--
and then designing markets around those needs. I think you have
already heard a couple of witnesses testify to that fact.
Now, to our specific concerns about the Department of
Energy's proposal, it would send billions of dollars each year
to outdated technologies without any evidence that these
payments are necessary.
It would supplant FERC's competitive electricity markets
with an anticompetitive command and control system that decides
what plants open and close by direction of the Federal
Government.
You know, I wonder what's happened here to States' rights
to choose their own resource--to make their own resource
adequacy decisions.
Illinois, for example, restructured in 1997 and made the
decision to link to FERC's market design. Now the Department of
Energy is telling them too bad, we are going to make your
customers pay billions of dollars more for something that they
don't want or need. That, to me, is resource adequacy
masquerading as resiliency.
Third, I am very concerned that this would politicize an
independent agency in a way never before seen. FERC's
independent system of competitive markets to channel customer
dollars towards the cheapest generators able to meet customer
needs would be replaced with a more arbitrary system marked by
market crashes and peaks that could change with every
administration.
In this reliability the goal of DOE's proposal could be
compromised as politics, not technical assessments, would
govern payment for grid services.
So in conclusion, if we want a truly resilient electric
grid, moving to a low-carbon future will help us get there by
reducing the risk of extreme weather and other disruptive
events fueled by climate change.
Focus on grid reliability in resiliency services and next-
generation market designs coupled with smartly planned
transmission needed to deliver high levels of clean renewable
energy to market, and protect States' rights to make their
energy choices.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Moore follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you all, and now we will move to
questions.
I want to be relatively quick on these first two. So last
week--Friday--DOE issued a notice of proposed rulemaking to
FERC with a 60-day timeline. FERC then re-docketed the notice
of proposed ruling with a 20-day deadline for initial comments.
I would note that a typical FERC proposed rulemaking has a 180-
day deadline.
If you were king, what would that number be for this order
that came out Friday? And Mr. Durbin, we will start with you,
just to----
Mr. Durbin. Well, we joined several of the groups here and
others around town making a motion to FERC asking for a 90-day.
Mr. Upton. Ninety-day. Mr. Bailey?
Mr. Bailey. Being king, I don't have a number for you, Mr.
Chairman. I honestly don't.
What we have said is that this needs to be done very, very
quickly. That's all I can say to you.
Mr. Upton. Of course. I probably should have said queen or
king for the day. Sorry.
Ms. Korsnick. That's OK. I am good with king.
Mr. Upton. OK. All right.
Ms. Korsnick. I think the most important thing is that we
allow for the appropriate conversation to play out, and at the
same token, as we said, there is a sense of urgency.
So I think somewhere in the neighborhood of 60 to 90 days
is appropriate.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Kiernan?
Mr. Kiernan. We support the 90-day approach, as Mr. Durbin
mentioned. I'll also just emphasize this needs to be
thoughtfully considered.
Obviously, the wholesale power markets--extraordinarily
important and complex, and there needs to be a good healthy
thoughtful deliberative process so that we end up with a
competitive market that works.
We worry about some rush to judgment that might support one
fuel source or another. That is not the right approach.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Wright?
Mr. Wright. NHA doesn't have an official position on number
of days. But I think it's pretty clear, I hope, from my
testimony that trying to figure out how you get to reliability
requires you to provide all those different services that are
necessary and that is a complex conversation.
And then in addition to that, it's a regionally based
conversation because we have different issues in different
parts of----
Mr. Upton. You're sounding like a politician.
Mr. Mansour?
Mr. Mansour. Mr. Chairman, actually, with the notice that
we filed along with some of the other groups here, it was 90
days for the initial comment period plus another 45 for
responses.
So and actually, 90 days is probably not sufficient in any
case. This is an extremely large undertaking. It's a huge
change in the way markets would work and FERC should take their
time and they should hold a technical conference on this. They
should allow for a maximum amount of public comment and input
from a range of stakeholders.
Ms. Speakes-Backman. I will--well, first, to answer your
question I would say--directly I would say 90 days is--would be
sufficient for us to be able to rush through and answer.
But I will also--I would also like to add that especially
based on the DOE staff report, we believe that resilience
should really encompass much more than just fuel supply and
so--and resilience is a--is a large issue and a large problem
that we need to consider.
It's a lot more complicated than simply the fuel supply,
and for that reason we think there needs to be more time given
to this.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Moore?
Mr. Moore. Sure. It probably doesn't surprise you to--for
me to say that if I were king I'd probably put it in the trash
can because I don't think it meets minimum standards of due
process in the Administrative Procedure Act, along with the
fact that other RTOs like PJM and ISO New England where many of
these plants are located are working diligently on this now, in
all seriousness.
Mr. Upton. The DOE staff report found that FERC should
expedite its efforts regarding its price formation efforts.
Additionally, DOE has recently filed a notice of proposed
rulemaking with FERC, as we know, directing FERC to accurately
price generation resources necessary to maintain reliability
and resiliency.
Yes or no, do you support FERC implementing DOE's filed
NLPR as written? Some of you talked about that in your
testimony but some of you did not.
Mr. Durbin. If it is yes or no, the answer is no. I, again,
think that this was the--what they asked for on Friday was
totally inconsistent with what--with the study they put out in
August.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Bailey?
Mr. Bailey. Yes, sir. With a huge caveat, we are still
looking at it. If the two answers are yes or no, I would--I
would say yes.
Mr. Upton. Ms. Korsnick?
Ms. Korsnick. We think it's a good baseline but we think
additional conversations need to be had through the rulemaking
process.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Kiernan?
Mr. Kiernan. No, we do not, and I would just add an
example. The technological advances of wind energy show that
you want to allow the markets to compete and evolve and not
pick one fuel source over another.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Wright?
Mr. Wright. No on the process. Yes on the substance of it's
a good idea to address price formation.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Mansour.
Mr. Mansour. It would have to be no on the process and no
on the NOPR itself. Let the markets run.
Mr. Upton. Ms. Speakes?
Ms. Speakes-Backman. No as written.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Moore?
Mr. Moore. I think majority wins. No.
Mr. Upton. OK. My time is expired.
I yield to the ranking member of the subcommittee, my
friend, Mr. Rush.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Moore, in your written testimony, you state that the
Nation's power grid to continue to transform towards a low-
carbon future that will improve reliability and resilience by
helping to prevent and reduce outages caused by the increase in
extreme weather and other disruptions--events.
You also say that efforts to ensure reliability and
resilience during extreme weather should focus largely on the
distribution system rather than on any particular type of
generation system.
Can you briefly discuss some of the issues learned this
historic hurricane season regarding reliability and resilience
issues?
Also, can you explain why policymakers should be looking at
low-carbon resources and focus on distribution rather than
sources of generation?
Mr. Moore. Certainly. First of all, distribution system
failures represent far and away the highest number of outages
that cause blackouts in the country.
There is no--absolutely positively no question about that,
and that if you can't deliver power from any resource to the
customer it's just as good as no power at all. So that's number
one.
And number two, as I implied, reducing the carbon--reducing
carbon pollution reduces the risk of the high-intensity types
of events that we have seen like the hurricanes last year.
Mr. Rush. Ms. Speakes-Backman, yesterday Bloomberg reported
that Sonnen, a generation--a German, rather, energy storage
company is planning to install 15 micro grids in Puerto Rico in
order to provide electricity to emergency relief centers.
Additionally, it is reported that Tesla, Incorporated will
be sending hundreds of its overall power wall battery systems,
and Sonoma, Puerto Rico's largest rooftop solar provider, plans
to install batteries to complement its system. We have been
told that it will take months to fully restore the island's
electricity grid.
But in the meantime, can you discuss how we might utilize
these small CO micro grids systems which can be installed
quickly to restore power to a few buildings at a time that will
help power hospitals, fire stations, relief shelters, and other
emergency shelters during these most difficult times?
Ms. Speakes-Backman. Thank you, sir, for the question, and
I believe, sir, that you have the answer. You gave it in your
question and I appreciate that.
Solar plus storage and storage plus many resources, as a
matter of fact, depending on the location, especially if you've
got distributed energy resources, can be a holdover, if you
will, while you rebuild the grid to a more resilient phase.
And so this is why we have been cooperating and
collaborating with SEIA. Just recently, on Friday and then on
Monday, both SEIA and the Energy Storage Association announced
a joint effort to request members supply and donate their
resources, donate their expertise, and donate their dollars to
support the efforts in Puerto Rico, to build micro grids of
solar and storage to get us through this difficult time.
Mr. Rush. Do you think that the Department of Energy is--
could do more in terms of helping to encourage and assist in
these micro grid efforts?
Ms. Speakes-Backman. Sir, I think that the Department of
Energy has continued to serve as an excellent resource for us
in research and in working to commercialize batteries for
storage.
I think, certainly, there are always things that we can do
more to help--to help understand the applications that can be
made and help to extend the duration periods of storage.
Mr. Rush. So do you also feel as though these micro grid
systems are something that we should seriously consider in
terms of the future?
Ms. Speakes-Backman. Absolutely. It meets many of the
requirements that were laid out in the DOE staff report for
resilience beyond fuel--beyond fuel supply.
So the ability not only to withstand external forces,
whether they be weather or other external forces of calamitous
events but also with respect to bringing the grid back on and
to work within small communities to become islands of refuge,
if you will, to be able to supply consumers with the
refrigeration for their medicines, for their food, to be able
to charge your batteries for your phone and your appliances and
your computer to communicate with loved ones.
It's a very important aspect of reliability and resilience
both.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Upton. Thank you.
The Chair would recognize for 5 minutes the gentleman from
West Virginia, Mr. McKinley.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Speakes, let me
just start with you. Thank you for making the definition of
reliability. I think so many on the panel have played around
with that word.
They use it to fit their definition. Yours was very
specific and I appreciate that. Others used it for their own
purpose in their definition.
Mr. Wright, I got to you. My concern is shared with you and
that is if we--and as we proceed with the tax reform, one of
the concerns is that the tax credit for hydroelectricity at 1.8
cents--I think it goes up to nearly three quarters of a million
dollars per plant to be able to subsidize that--I am concerned
that that type of tax credit could be lost with that.
So we are going to be spending some time on research and
make sure that we have those reliability on that. So thank you
for bringing that as your point, because I've seen several in
West Virginia located there.
Third is on gas reliability. I am, obviously, sitting in
the center of the Utica-Marcellus. We are big proponents of it.
There are three power plants that are considered in West
Virginia to be open.
But my concern has been, and we have been talking again
about this tax credit, is how we can do more research into
making sure that the gas is the reliable source that Ms.
Speakes was talking about because we have had too many outages
with gas.
We want it to be--I can see the tremendous future using gas
as a source. But when we see that we have had nearly--from 2014
to the first quarter of this year, there were 4,000 outages
with gas because of the lack of supply--4,000 times that
they've had to shut down, not the least of which came out
through the polar vortex.
But I think we can--with research and the R&D we can
salvage a lot more of that and bring it more in line. Because
in my frame of mind, where I am coming from, nuclear is the
most dependable, and I would say gas--excuse me, coal would be
the next and then we would get into some of the others--fall
down through that.
I want to bring gas up to a much more dependable source.
But we have got to do the research to make sure that we can get
that so that we don't have these outages.
And the last I want to turn to is Mr. Bailey. We had--Gerry
Cauley was here, the CEO of NERC, and he testified here before
one of our hearings that, quote, ``Markets should review the
economic and market factors driving base load generation into
early retirement.``
Now, that, I think, is the crux of much of this. Are we
moving too fast into this arena when we've--about national
security when we don't have power?
We can all talk about--we have all got our talking points
about what happened during the polar vortex and we saw the
numbers of plants shut down. Twenty-two percent of PJM shut
down that.
So back on what NERC has been challenged--what FERC has
been challenged to do following along what NERC has talked
about, is this--if we are going to be serious in Congress about
fuel security, don't you think this concept that has been
proposed by DOE and over to FERC--is that a reasonable approach
that they should be taking?
Mr. Bailey. Mr. McKinley, so right now we are facing the
prospect or likelihood of another 40,000 megawatts of coal
retirements over the near horizon.
We have had 60,000 in the past. We face another 40,000. We
agree with DOE that the markets are distorted. Now, there are a
couple things that could be done and they are not mutually
exclusive.
One, you could take the approach of DOE to address merchant
generation. That's about 60,000-something megawatts as a coal
fleet that would be affected--we are guessing right now--an
educated guess--that could benefit from this.
There is a large part of the coal fleet that's not covered
that serves wholesale electricity markets. It's not merchant
generation.
So we have, in effect--I am trying to simplify this--we
have a DOE rule that helps merchant coal and nuclear. There are
other market reforms that could be undertaken to help those
other fuel-secure coal-fired generating units.
The problem we have and the reason DOE set an aggressive
schedule--and I'll come back to my non-answer to Chairman Upton
earlier--is that we have talked to a couple of the grid
operators that have the most coal-fired generation in their
regions and we simply asked them how long it would take them to
undertake market reforms--for market reforms that would help
base load generation.
One of them told us 2 years. The other one told us 3 years.
The one who told us 2 years said no, the guy who said 3 years
is probably right.
So we do need to have a sense of urgency about this. Ms.
Korsnick spoke to it, and I would say the same thing also.
Mr. McKinley. Yield back.
Mr. Olson [presiding]. Gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from Saratoga
Springs, New York, Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you to the witnesses also for the insightful
testimony this afternoon.
Mr. Moore, your testimony noted that electrical
distribution systems are responsible for over 90 percent of
total electric power interruptions.
You're sharing the panel with a number of generation
resources. Rather than picking winners and losers in
generation, can more be done to harden distribution and
transmission infrastructure?
Mr. Moore. I think you--yes, I think utilities, especially
in New York in the wake of Sandy and starting in Florida a few
years ago started to do exactly that kind of hardening and
those are the kinds of utility-focused actions that can be done
outside of market design.
PJM actually developed some generation-specific, I would
call them, hardening or resilience standards after the polar
vortex that weren't embedded in the markets though had some
common sense ideas like making sure your burners worked in the
coal--for the gas plants and things like that--winter
preparation.
So those are the kinds of things that I think customers on
the ground would actually, you know, see fast and immediate
benefits and would--actually could be done at relatively low
cost. I think we can't forget the consumer in all this.
What we want to make sure is that we are not gold-plating
the system in different ways. But we--I think some--I think
utilities do recognize that our distribution system needs, you
know, continuous improvement.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And Mr. Kiernan and Mr. Mansour, do you agree that there
are reliability benefits that can be gained through additional
transmission estimates?
Mr. Kiernan. I think that's a great question. Yes,
transmission absolutely will improve reliability on the grid,
resilience on the grid and, frankly, I think supports, you
know, virtually all of our sources of electricity.
So it just makes sense to figure out ways to enhance and
strengthen and extend our transmission grid for the benefits of
the grid and to benefit, frankly, for us to be able to compete
in providing low-cost reliable resilient electricity.
Mr. Mansour. We agree, Mr. Tonko. Absolutely. The more
transmission--reliable transmission that you have in place
gives you a range of possibilities to reel in power from
various different sources and uses the diversity of fuel that
we already have on the grid to the greatest extent possible.
And to answer to your other question on the distribution
grid, we feel distributed generation from solar on rooftops is,
obviously, a very positive benefit and provides a lot of that
hardening, and when you marry it with storage either in a
person's home or in their hardware store or in their Wal-Mart,
it certainly does increase the ability of the distribution grid
to maintain that kind of services.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. The R Street Institute's response to
last week's DOE notice of proposed rulemaking seems to agree
with that sentiment. They say, and I quote, ``A resiliency
initiative should prioritize mitigating transmission and
distribution damage and accelerating restoration.``
Mr. Moore, R Street also suggests that DOE's proposal seeks
to take emergency action on, at best, a low to medium level
resiliency issue. Do you agree?
Mr. Moore. I think that it is nowhere near the crisis that
some parties have portrayed it to be. So yes, I generally agree
that there are other things we can do like that transmission
integration that would go a lot further towards improving the
resiliency grid.
Mr. Tonko. Is DOE's proposed rule likely to raise cost to
consumers without commensurate resiliency benefits?
Mr. Moore. Sure, so far as I can tell, because it's very
hard to predict the full extent of the costs, but our initial
calculations say that at least $15 billion a year just from the
operating and maintenance costs reflected in the units that
could be covered by the rule.
That doesn't include the higher rates of return and--return
on equity, excuse me--and other things and the additional
higher market prices that we would have.
So I think a lot of work is going to be gone--is going to
be put into figuring exactly how bad this would be for the
consumer.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And much of the discussion today has
focused on reliability and resiliency. But I want to bring up
another important consideration.
I believe that a modernized grid must also be flexible.
Flexibility allows for rapid response and smooth integration of
variable resources.
So Mr. Durbin and Ms. Speakes-Backman, can you explain why
we should not be overlooking flexibility and how does gas
generation and storage's flexibility reinforce grid reliability
and resiliency?
Mr. Durbin. Mr. Tonko, if I could, I think--because I laid
it out in the written testimony as well--it's one of the
higher-valued attributes that natural gas brings to the table
here and the flexibility to be able to provide that, that quick
ramping flexibility, being able to follow a load, being able--
you know, as variable sources come in, on and off of the grid,
you know, a natural gas plant can be up and running in minutes
rather than in hours or days.
So, again, I think you can't overlook the need for
flexibility as the grid is now integrating additional types of
generation sources and technology.
Mr. Tonko. Ms. Speakes-Backman, please.
Ms. Speakes-Backman. Yes. On the--on the side of
resilience, certainly, there is frequency response. There is
micro grid islanding. There is black start service so that the
centralized generation can come up.
And storage operates from zero to 100 percent in
milliseconds and so it's able not only to provide resilience in
the--in times of major outages but it's also able to ride
through regular normal operations of frequency regulation.
The important thing to note, though, is there is multiple
attributes to resiliency. So I could list those out--they are
in my testimony--but it's important that they all be accounted
for, not just one part of resiliency because, for example,
let's say we do have all the 90-day--90-day fuel source on
hand.
If transmission and distribution is unavailable that's not
helpful. You can't get the power to people, and so you need a
more distributed resource in that time.
The whole point, frankly, of resiliency is to plan for the
unexpected. And so you have to have multiple solutions
available and online and ready to react regardless of what you
think the solution--what you think the problem is going to be.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, thank you for generous time.
Mr. Olson. Gentleman's time is expired.
The Chair now calls upon the chairman of the full
committee, Mr. Walden, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walden. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to welcome our panelists. Mr. Wright, good to see
you again in this capacity.
Last week, I explored the panel of witness--I asked them
whether the wholesale power markets were working to respond to
and engage changes in consumer behavior driven by new
technologies and other lower cost generation options.
And the answer from most of the panel was to embrace
competitive markets and to ensure that the markets do not have
a technology bias.
So this week, I want to ask the same question of this
distinguished panel. I understand the DOE issued an order on
Friday on reliability and resiliency that is certainly helping
to get the conversation started and one which we will be
actively overseeing.
But I also understand how complicated these issues are and
we shouldn't consider any one issue in a vacuum. There are
market forces, economics at play as well as consumer
preferences, new technology, jobs, subsidies, regulations
affecting environmental externalities and carbon and regionally
preferred resources.
So is reliability the only attribute not getting properly
valued in these markets and, hypothetically--let me underscore,
hypothetically, if we were able to design the wholesale
electricity markets fresh from a blank sheet of paper, what
would you recommend?
Who would like to start that? And then I just want to go
down the panel. It's the only question I have for you today.
Who wants to tackle that first? I am going to get to all of you
so----
Mr. Durbin. Mr. Walden, I'll go ahead and start.
Mr. Walden. Thank you.
Mr. Durbin. Again, with a clean sheet of paper, I think we
still need to look at what is it that's brought the value of
the grid we have today.
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Durbin. I think we do have a very--an effective and
efficient grid certainly in need of improvement. But I think we
can't lose sight of the fact that we certainly look in the
last, you know, 8 to 10 years--some of the benefits that we are
really seeing, certainly, from the consumer price perspective.
So consumer benefits or the flexibility of attributes that
we just talked about before, that's being driven by market
forces. You know, I understand that, you know, natural gas----
Mr. Walden. We also have State regulation coming in. You've
got subsidies involved in the markets. I am not saying that any
of that's bad but----
Mr. Durbin. No question. No, I am not----
Mr. Walden [continuing]. Things are changing.
Mr. Durbin. I am not denying that there are--there are
other forces that I think those are some areas we need--we need
to look at and see are they distorting, you know, the market.
But I think, you know, certainly from a natural gas
perspective the fact that we've had market forces allow natural
gas----
Mr. Walden. Right. Enormous change.
Mr. Durbin [continuing]. To play a much bigger part, and
wholesale prices dropped by 50 percent in PJM. So I think more
than anything else that's got to be the focus to allow for
market-driven fuel neutral policies, going forward.
Mr. Walden. All right. I've only got 2 minutes for all of
you to respond, so to the extent you can. And if you have other
thoughts past this, please get them to me.
Yes, sir.
Mr. Kiernan. I'll jump in. Tom Kiernan, American Wind
Energy--the process I would suggest, first, trust the experts--
FERC and NERC and the RTOs--to establish the specific
reliability and resilient services as opposed to other bodies
or DOE saying, here's the fuel source we prefer.
Let the experts pick the exact services and then allow us
to compete for it, and the reason being, obviously,
technologies are moving forward. Each of our technologies are
advancing, and wind a number of years ago might not have been
able to compete well for some technology, but right now, I
think, we are the best----
Mr. Walden. Very competitive.
Mr. Kiernan [continuing]. At disturbance ride-through
capability because of our power electronics. And you want the
market to be rewarded for those innovations and advancements.
So trust the experts and allow competition.
Mr. Walden. Good. And I know when Mr. Wright was in a
previous position we talked about the ebbs and flows of wind
energy in the Northwest, where a thousand megawatts within an
hour could come and go, and so then how do you balance that out
and make the grid work.
So we heard last week battery storage didn't count in one
RTO because it didn't have a flywheel. I mean, so we've got
some legacy regulation to deal with.
Mr. Wright, do you have a comment on how we might do this--
--
Mr. Wright. Specifically, to your question, first of all, I
want to strongly endorse technology neutral. I think that is
the key.
And then the question is what are the attributes that we
want out of our power system. If we want reliability then we
would go through the characteristics that are necessary--the
services and products that are necessary in order to produce
reliability and then let's make sure that we are providing
value associated with that.
If we want environmental attributes out of our power system
then we should be clear about what are those environmental
attributes that we want out of it and then make sure that we
have incentives associated with that.
That clarity around the outcome that we want would be the
most useful thing that we could do in terms of better defining
what will produce the outcome that consumers want.
Ms. Speakes-Backman. Hi. I would just like to underscore
what Mr. Wright said in that if we focus on the performance
rather than the technology I think we can get there a little
bit faster.
The FERC is--has a couple of rulemakings that are working
toward looking at resilience. States are doing some work but
I'll tell you, there is a big--there is a big difference
between when we talk about the difference between reliability
and resilience.
Because at the State level, as a former regulator I can
tell you we had lots of cost-effectiveness training and cost-
effectiveness tests to ensure reliability but not on the
resilience. There were always the out clauses for those major
storms.
Well, these major storms are happening more--more often and
with more severity. And the tools aren't necessarily there at
the State level to be able to value that.
Mr. Walden. Yes, sir.
Mr. Moore. Sure. Yes, technology neutral, performance
focused--I think FERC has done a very good job of recognizing
regional variations and so that needs to continue to occur.
Clearly, I think energy markets have to--have to move
beyond just fuel-based pricing and what we are doing now, I
think, you know, focus more on congestion pricing as a bigger
component of this and move away from a one-size-fits-all
capacity market design.
I am really concerned about the money we are putting into
capacity markets. Do we need to put all that money into that
market? Can we do something else?
And last, just aggregate--smaller resources need to be able
to participate in the market now. We have many more resources.
It doesn't do anyone any good if they've got a nest thermostat
or a smart meter if they can't access the markets shaping the
price for the day.
Mr. Walden. All right. I know I am way over my time, but
this is an important topic, obviously, for the committee. The
chairman, the vice chairman, the staff have done a great job, I
think, teeing up these issues as we look at the future of the
electricity grid. And so we very much value your input.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The chairman of the full committee is never out
of time. You always yield back. [Laughter.]
Chairman calls----
Mr. Walden. I've come a long way since I was Mr. Wright's
driver, but we will explain that later.
Mr. Olson. The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from
Iowa, Mr. Loebsack, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I am very proud of my State for a lot of reasons, but Mr.
Kiernan knows particularly wind, but I'll get to that in a
second.
You know, actually Iowa is quite varied in terms of the
sources of power that we have. We saw built not that long ago a
natural gas plant. We, of course, have a lot of coal. We are
exploding on the solar front.
I think we have tremendous potential for hydropower,
especially in small streams and small rivers if we can get
there at some point. I think they have tremendous potential.
But, clearly, I am very proud of Iowa's wind energy story
and its place as a national leader in wind energy production.
And Mr. Kiernan knows it very well--he mentioned Iowa and
Kansas a little bit earlier. My wife and I actually took a
little bit of time away, about a week in August, and we drove
up through northwest Iowa.
I can see some of the old lattice-style turbines. They are
not very pretty, actually, compared to the newer ones. But and
then we went to South Dakota and North Dakota and just saw the
tremendous growth in wind energy up in those two States as
well.
I have been fighting for a strong wind energy sector in my
State since I've been in Congress. I think it's--not, again, to
take away from the other sources of energy but, you know, it's
cost effective.
It's been--it's been a good cost-effective source of energy
in Iowa and creates great jobs, continues to--we continue to
work for job growth in this sector. I just think it's real
important.
We are upwards of 36, 37 percent of our electricity in Iowa
generated by wind. Again, we are growing in these other--in
solar in particular as well.
Well, I really only have one or two questions at most, and
for Mr. Kiernan, when it comes to reliability, we have seen
this tremendous growth in Iowa.
Have there been particular problems in Iowa when it comes
to reliability and other States as well where we have seen this
tremendous growth in wind energy?
Mr. Kiernan. Well, thank you for the question. But first,
also thank you for your leadership. You've been an
extraordinary champion out there for all different sources but
very much for wind and we appreciate that.
Mr. Loebsack. By the way, I forgot--we have a nuclear power
plant at Palo too. I forgot about that.
Ms. Korsnick.: Thank you for that honorable mention.
Mr. Loebsack. Sorry about that. It's not my district
anymore. That's why I overlooked it. I apologize.
Mr. Kiernan. But as we are 36 and well on the way to 40
percent in Iowa, there have not been any reliability concerns.
And as I mentioned earlier with our newer technology that a lot
of folks may not be aware of, we are able to provide most of
the essential reliability services. So we have not had a
problem on that front at all and I think the grid operators
speak to that on a regular basis and I believe Mr. Cauley from
NERC last week spoke to that as well. So wind is a very
reliable part of a resilient grid and we are quite proud of
that.
Mr. Loebsack. And that was my next question about the grid
operators, and there hasn't been any particular issues at this
point?
Mr. Kiernan. Not that I am aware of, and actually grid
operators, whether it's PJM, SPP, but also DOE's NREL have done
studies showing that--NREL came out with a study that we could
do well over 50 percent renewable without any issues.
PJM had 35 percent wind energy in one study and then
extended it up to 80 percent in another study. So all these
studies are showing that we keep blowing past these artificial
ceilings people think for wind or wind and solar.
We are just--because of the innovation of America, we are
just blowing past any perceived barriers and doing it reliably
and, frankly, cost effectively for consumers.
As you mentioned, in Iowa and other States, the costs have
been flat or coming down as we have added cost-effective wind
energy on the grid.
Mr. Loebsack. Great. That's all I have. Thank you very
much, and I will yield back the remainder of my time. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Olson. Gentleman yields back. The Chair now calls upon
the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for you all
being here.
So I am listening and the question is why are we here--
what's brought us to this time. Everyrone has mentioned
reliability, resilience, flexibility as a key component.
But we have also had a tremendously changing market from
not just historically of regional monopolies in States. Mr.
Moore, you mentioned Illinois. We went to competition.
But we also had a FERC that really allowed a changing of
the transmission and the buying and selling across State lines
without a change in the actual statutory language by the
Federal Power Act.
Everybody would agree with that, right? I mean, we had a
hearing last year with--talking about this and the Federal
Power Act was so kind of vague it just--and some people were
applauding that because it allowed this transformation that
really did not have the guidelines of a legislative input.
And so now we have new entrants into the market, some--and
they get more competitive but some were incentivized by public
policy also, and we are trying to struggle with this new entity
that we have and I think public policy folks--we just have to
decide how do we keep focused as some of the commentaries were,
what is our goals and our objectives in the future.
But I don't think--I don't think we should dismiss and in
essence maybe penalize a major generation that helped get us
here.
When I first became a Member of Congress we had three main
generation capacities. We had coal, we had nuclear, and we had
hydro. Natural gas was too high and wind and solar wasn't--
wasn't there yet. Wasn't in the competitive world.
So now, again, I think our biggest challenge is making a
definition without--everybody knows where I stand. A major
nuclear power State. We do have some wind. We have big coal
generation.
But I find even in this discussion between the DOE's
language, PJM's language, NERC language is a difference in what
I used to understand is the term of base load, because my base
load debate came out of regional monopolies serving at set area
and what was the demand and who could provide that.
Now base load has some different definitions based upon who
you're asking. So whether that's stacked generation or--so I am
going to do what Chairman Walden did, go down the table real
quick.
What is your definition of base load or is there a
definition of base load and should there be a definition of
base load?
Mr. Durbin.
Mr. Durbin. I would suggest that the traditional definition
of base load is no longer relevant. I think base load--you
know, the traditional base load plants that we have there are--
continue and will continue to provide an important source to
the electric grid.
But I think the grid has now moved to a place because we
have now got such advances in technology, that we have got
these more flexible, you know, sources there. We have got--got
the, you know, both from a performance, cost, and, you know----
Mr. Shimkus. Let's go quickly. So I want to get down. So--
--
Mr. Durbin. So my answer is I don't think the traditional
definition--it no longer--we have got to stay focused on the
attributes that are necessary to make the grid reliable.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Bailey?
Mr. Bailey. You know, the material I've read recently says,
you know, the term base load is outmoded. Maybe the term is.
Maybe it isn't.
To me, the discussion now is, you know, about reliability,
resilience, flexibility, that sort of thing. So I've personally
sort of moved away from it. But it's a good----
Mr. Shimkus. Let me just--we won't ever get through
everybody so let me just say----
Ms. Korsnick. I am ready. I am ready.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. In a regional transmission
organization they had--they still have a base load that they
have to, in essence, the demand that they have to meet. Is that
true?
Ms. Korsnick. That's true.
Mr. Shimkus. An RTO?
Ms. Korsnick. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And do we or should--and that was from--Maria
answered that--and should we--is there--part of the elephant in
the room is do you incentivize those who can provide big
percentages of a base load in an RTO? Maria.
Ms. Korsnick. Well, I go back to your first question on
what's base load and let's say, you know, you can be there 7
days a week, 24 hours a day. Somebody needs to be there all the
time and I think there is a, you know, a value for that base
load power.
Mr. Shimkus. That's part of the discussion and debate and I
am over my time. I've probably put more questions than I
probably should have in the whole mix but that's what the
hearing is for.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from California, Mr.
McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the gentleman from Texas, and I
want to thank the witnesses.
You know, it's interesting the different perspectives that
you all are bringing to this. But I think one thing that was in
common was that you all felt like the real solution is in true
valuation of the different sources of power.
And I am wondering how would we go about achieving a true
valuation. I know we'd want to have metrics defining resiliency
that would work.
Mr. Moore, could you take a crack at that?
Mr. Moore. Sure. FERC has already, you know, started down
this road by creating technology-neutral markets for frequency
response, inertia services, voltage support, and things like
that--the whole range of ancillary services.
So there is already a track record. I think the work to be
done is on what additional reliability or resiliency metrics we
might need to do.
So I think there is a lot--there is more work to be done. I
know that we are already transforming the grid in some places
more than other in this country, you know, and doing fairly
well.
So I think as new resources come into the market like
energy storage, let's look at if there are barriers, as we have
already heard, that might exist in some markets.
I can just say that I have not heard one RTO, for example,
say that we need a base load unit to meet reliability and
resiliency needs of the future.
Mr. McNerney. So it does require some Federal involvement
then to get there?
Mr. Moore. I think--I think FERC and the RTOs are looking
at this, yes.
Mr. McNerney. So if that were to come about, would the
increased penetration of intermittent renewables cause
reliability problems?
You can go ahead, Mr. Kiernan.
Mr. Kiernan. If I can jump in. No. I mean, we have got wind
and solar that are reliably being added to the grid. We do
think base load is kind of an older concept but I will say some
grid operators refer to wind as the new base load.
Base load is often--it used to be referred to as the lowest
cost out there and, frankly, in many parts of the regions or
the country, on an unsubsidized basis wind is the lowest cost
source of new generation. So that's a way a number of folks are
thinking about wind. It's just affordable.
Mr. Mansour. I would just use the example of California.
Yesterday at noon, California got 45 percent of its electricity
from renewable sources.
Now, that includes solar, wind, who are intermittent, but
then some others who are not like geothermal and some others.
But California, as you know, serves the sixth largest GDP in
the world.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I mean, that's the thing. The Nation
has different characteristics and I think all of the different
sorts of generation will be more preferable in different
regions.
So, I mean, there is tremendous new technologies and
entrepreneurs that are entering the market. I hear about them
all the time on the Grid Innovation Caucus. Mr. Latta and I are
cochairs of that caucus, by the way.
How will this impact the reliability of resilience and
flexibility--this new technology and the new entrepreneurs that
we are hearing from?
Mr. Moore? You're kind of the neutral--you're the only one
that's really neutral here today.
Mr. Moore. I'm trying to be as neutral as possible.
Mr. McNerney. As possible.
Mr. Moore. No, I think that innovation really is a driving
force here, as you said, and that, you know, FERC's standard is
just and reasonable rates without undue discrimination.
As someone has already said, it's a pretty general
principle but it's been foundational and really important and
it gives FERC and the RTOs the flexibility to change market
rules to strike down barriers to new entry and that--and if
they do so in a way that those resources and those new services
can meet grid needs more affordably and cheaply, then so be it.
That's what's beautiful about the FERC market design.
Mr. McNerney. Would it be a good idea for Federal policies
to encourage deployment of the new technologies.
Mr. Moore. I think--I think we strongly encourage research
and development in that area along with next-generation market
designs.
I think NREL and the labs have done terrific work on
exactly that kind of work in the past and I think to maintain
our Nation's, you know, leading role in the next-generation
modernized grid we need to keep the foot on the accelerator on
those initiatives.
Mr. McNerney. One of the technologies that I'd like to see
a little more is carbon sequestration.
Mr. Bailey, could you address where we are, what the future
looks like in terms of carbon sequestration?
Mr. Bailey. Trying to think of a simple answer to this. You
know, carbon capture sequestration is still under development.
It is--it is still very important. The U.S. will probably need
it at some point in time. The rest of the world, certainly, is
going to need it longer term.
Obviously, we are going to continue work on fossil fuels.
The last time I looked at the figures on carbon capture and
sequestration was 2 or 3 years ago, and everyone knows that it
is prohibitively expensive. We hope it will not be.
A new coal unit, for example, would be somewhere in the
range of $2 billion, and adding carbon sequestration and
storage to one, this is--this is probably badly out of date but
it'll give you sort of a scale of magnitude--it was about
another billion.
Now, that suggested we had a lot more work to do on carbon
capture and sequestration.
Mr. McNerney. Yes. I just want to finish by saying to my
Republican colleagues please embrace carbon sequestration for
your own good--for your own districts' goods.
With that I yield back.
Mr. Olson. Gentleman yields back.
The Chair now sees the gentleman from Michigan showed up.
The Chair calls upon Mr. Walberg for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. It's called--thank you, Mr. Chairman--it's
called Michigan sequestration here.
Thanks to the panel for being here. It's important to
continuation of the issue we look at for energy.
Mr. Wright, you may or may not know, but we have a fairly
major pumped hydro storage facility in Michigan--in western
Michigan, connected to CMS Energy from my district.
Interesting process for me to comprehend. How are pumped
hydro storage facilities helping integrate intermittent forms
of renewable energy into the grid?
Mr. Wright. Mr. Walberg, I am familiar with that. I am
actually a graduate of Central Michigan University and
Farmington Hills Harrison High School. So from your area.
Mr. Walberg. Hey.
Mr. Wright. The pump storage makes huge contribution
because what we are trying to do--there is really radical
change happening to the operation of the electric power system
today and we shouldn't underestimate the impacts of that
change.
We can deal with those impacts if we have time, money, and
foresight, and one of the ways that we deal with that is
through finding ways to be able to take energy from times when
it is being produced and it doesn't produce highest value for
consumers and move it into periods when it does.
Pumped storage creates that capability to be able to move
the energy in a time when it creates highest value.
Mr. Walberg. I've been interested to watch that as I've
learned more about that and absolutely correct, it is a way of
in my mind, of producing something that would be produced
naturally at many places with hydropower but using it in a way
that makes sense to add to that as well and be creative in its
usage. So thank you.
Ms. Korsnick, can you explain how onsite fuel contributes
to the reliability of the electric grid?
Ms. Korsnick. Yes, certainly. For a nuclear plant, for
example, we put all the fuel that we need for 18 to 24 months
in the--in the reactor core. So we are not depending on any
sort of fuel delivery.
And so you can just imagine through what we just mentioned,
on some of the recent hurricanes or any sort of catastrophic
event you're assured that your fuel is there ready to go.
In the case of a nuclear reactor it's already in that core
ready to produce the much-needed power any time that it's
needed.
Mr. Walberg. I think hardened is a good word that we need
to remember relative to nuclear power. Nothing is hardened
against everything, I suppose, but it's significantly hardened
when we think about nuclear and I think of our plant, DTE Fermi
plant sitting on Lake Erie. Fortunately, no tsunamis do we
expect there.
But the hardening that's gone on is encouraging, plus, as
you've talked about, the ability to store the necessary fuel to
have the power.
Go and talk to us about nuclear power support of voltage
control. How does it do that and, significantly, what do we see
there?
Ms. Korsnick. Certainly. I can actually reflect on my times
as an operator in the control room at a nuclear plant and, you
know, you'd get a call from the----
Mr. Walberg. I wondered why you were glowing. [Laughter.]
Bad joke. Bad joke.
Ms. Korsnick. You'd get a call from the transmission
operator, and just based on the fact that the power plant
produces the power that it does, you have the ability to adjust
voltage in support of the grid and you also can adjust what's
called reactive power in support of the grid.
And so, you know, this is as a result of the size of the
power plant and one of the attributes, quite frankly, that
nuclear brings to the grid is these ancillary services.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair calls upon the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
both the chairman and the ranking member for holding the
hearing today.
Grid reliability and resiliency is something we often take
for granted. With Secretary Perry's directive to FERC for a
proposed rulemaking for a grid resiliency pricing rule, this
issue deserves a lot of discussion. And when Secretary Perry
was Governor of Texas that's when we expanded our wind power
dramatically and it's part of our grid in ERCOT.
I am afraid the latest move may artificially tip the scale
and that's something, I think when he comes before our
committee we need to talk about.
The secretary has issued a directive to combat what he
calls immediate dangers. In the North American Electric
Reliability Corp. report from earlier this year made no claim
of a grid in crisis from the retirement of coal power plants.
The CEO of NERC testified in June that the state of
reliability in North America remains strong and the trend line
shows continuing improvement year upon year.
In its 2017 report, NERC did highlight that transition to
gas and renewable generation requires new strategy to ensure
voltage control, power ramping capabilities, and frequency
support.
Storage capabilities are key as those new fuel sources
expand their share of the power generation. I want to ask the
panel in terms of these newer fuel sources of gas, solar, and
wind: What changes have we seen in terms of storage
capabilities in the last few years, and where is the industry
going, and how does this address the issue of reliability and
resiliency when it comes to fuel sources?
We will start at this end, if you could--as brief as you
can.
Mr. Durbin. Thank you. Thank you for the question.
Mr. Green. I am not a Senator. They only give me 5 minutes.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Durbin. From the natural gas standpoint, one of the
strengths that it brings is the robust nature of the entire
system. So you've got geographic diversity as far as where we
are producing and how it's transported around the country--
300,000 miles of pipe.
You know, storage facilities all around the country so you
package all that together with the--with the--and then
delivering it to the--you know, to the end user--to the
generator. You've got a powerful portfolio that they can then
pull from to provide that reliability.
Mr. Green. Anybody else? Yes.
Mr. Kiernan. Just from wind's perspective, I mean, we
welcome storage on the grid. Obviously, it brings some services
that are helpful to the grid.
But to be clear, wind energy does not need storage per se
because the grid itself in a way is one large storage system in
which the grid operators are compensating one for another. You
know, if wind is a little low, they kick in more gas, et
cetera. So we welcome storage but it's not needed to add more
wind.
Ms. Speakes-Backman. I will just add and echo that, that
energy storage on the grid it likes all resources from solar
and wind and hydropower to natural gas, coal, nuclear. It spans
the entire spectrum of energy.
It addresses short term in fluctuations and it addresses
long-term issues of transitioning of the grid. For example, the
ability to put storage in a specific location to offset peak
periods during the times of transmission and distribution
upgrades or to even offset the costs of those upgrades.
And so I would say that while storage can enable more
generation from variable resources, it also supports the grid
in those so-called base load resources as well.
Mr. Green. Mr. Durbin, one of the criticisms of gas-fired
electrical generators, especially in the Northeast, that they
often have trouble getting deliveries of the commodity during
cold months and due to pipeline bottlenecks and being put in
line behind gas providers for pipeline capacity.
Are there fixes to the existing market rules that would
increase your liability when it comes to natural gas or do you
see an infrastructure problem?
Someday we may get a pipeline across New York to serve the
Northeast. But I think Congress may need to get into that
business--that States can't just stop someone from going
across.
But anyway, is there something we can do with that problem?
Mr. Durbin. Yes. First of all, I completely agree with you
about New York and happy to help in any way we can.
But I think when you're talking about the Northeast it is
both. Yes, there is a constriction--there is not enough
infrastructure in place. I mean, need more pipelines to serve
the demand in the Northeast region. There is a reason why they
pay more than 50 percent more for electricity than any other
region of the country.
Having said that, there are market fixes that can be made
and you have generators who, in large part, you know, have
interruptible contracts, you know, for their gas. The fact is
nobody--even during the polar vortex, no one who had a firm
contract for gas didn't get their gas. Everyone got their gas.
And so, you know, any outages we referred to was more--it
was contractual outages because they didn't have--you know,
they had interruptible contracts. But I do think that there are
things that could be done to allow for generators to enter
into.
Sometimes they are not allowed to enter into those types of
contracts. The answer is yes, there are solutions.
Mr. Green. And I know I am out of time.
But, Mr. Chairman, let me just mention, when we had
Hurricane Harvey coming in, a lot of our problems were there
but the nuclear power plant southwest of Houston stayed and--
stayed and continued producing electricity.
So, I mean, that's why we need all the above and have a
market that has many different sources.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Olson. Gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Kinzinger, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kinzinger. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to
thank everybody for being here and thank you for your time. The
hearing is particularly timely.
This question I am going to actually ask to Ms. Korsnick.
As I mentioned, the hearing is timely because DOE filed a
notice of proposed rulemaking for FERC to accurately compensate
generation resources like nuclear, which is extremely important
in my district and in my State necessary to maintain
reliability and resiliency.
The secretary cited events like the 2014 polar vortex,
which, in Illinois and throughout PJM, could have been much
worse if it was not for our nuclear fleet.
What challenges does the nuclear industry face when it
comes to participation in wholesale electricity markets?
Ms. Korsnick. One of the challenges, for example, and it
actually occurs in your States--some of the other technologies
make money besides just from what they get from the market, so,
say, from tax credits, for example. And as a result of that,
they are interested in putting their power on the grid and it
can even be at a low price.
It could be zero. It could be even less than zero, and they
are still going to make money because they are going to get
that tax credit.
So I think we are all a fan of fair markets. We would just
share that the markets in fact are not fair today and that's an
example in this case where it's not fair to both sides and in
this case when the prices go negative and the nuclear plant is
operating, essentially they have to pay the grid operator to
take their power.
Mr. Kinzinger. And let me ask you, if this DOE's rulemaking
is put into place, if it's implemented, how would that affect
the existing nuclear generation fleet?
And let me--I guess I'll follow on--if the markets aren't
reformed, do you anticipate this trend of early plant
retirements will continue and how would that affect grid
reliability?
Ms. Korsnick. Absolutely. I'll take your second question
first. But if this trend were to continue, yes, you will see
more premature closures of nuclear plants and, again, from a
nuclear plant perspective, once that decision is made to close
that plant, that decision isn't reversed. Once people no longer
are licensed, et cetera, and you start going through the
decommissioning process, it's not something that you turn
around and change.
So these decisions are once and done decisions, which is
why we want to be very careful that as a nation we are not
making some strategic decisions based on some market challenges
that we will later regret.
And so, as you mentioned, the notice of proposed rulemaking
from Secretary Perry, one of the things that it does is it
recognizes some of the attributes that nuclear does bring to
the market in the area of resiliency.
Specifically, they are focused on that 90-day fuel supply
as one of the examples that they use for resiliency and some of
the other ancillary services like voltage support, et cetera,
that can be offered by a nuclear plant.
So it goes to valuing some of the attributes that nuclear
is bringing to the market today that aren't being recognized.
So yes, it would be helpful.
Mr. Kinzinger. As well as carbon neutral, I think it's
important to note.
In your testimony you discuss that China and Russia are
aggressively working to export nuclear technology around the
world. It's a big concern of mine. Can you discuss that effort
and provide your perspective on how this could actually affect
our national security?
Ms. Korsnick. Absolutely. There is 58 reactors being built
around the world today. Two-thirds of those are being built by
Chinese and Russian design.
The Russians know very well what it is that you get when
you build a reactor in somebody's country. You start a 100-year
relationship with that country, by the time you design it,
build it, operate it, and decommission it.
So they strategically look at the building of these
facilities in terms of establishing that relationship, and if
you look at the United States, quite frankly, as a result of us
allowing our nuclear fleet to begin to atrophy, we are ceding
our leadership at the national--at the international table,
quite frankly, on nuclear issues.
That means we have less of a voice on operational
excellence. That means we have less of a voice on
nonproliferation issues, because all of that comes with the
package, if you will, when we build American reactors around
the world.
And so, quite frankly, we just need to look strategically
at the messages that we are sending, and by shutting down our
fleet at home it does not put us in a leadership role
internationally and that affects our national security.
Mr. Kinzinger. Yes, and it's hard to take a leadership role
when you have less skin in the game than your competitors I
think is important to note.
So thank you all for being here. Thank you for
participating and, Mr. Chairman, I'll yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from Oregon, Mr.
Schrader, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it very
much. Just to preface my remarks, I am one of those all-of-the-
above energy guys. I think that's an important--you have made
that crystal clear, I think, in your testimony to not get
locked in on just one source of energy.
Focusing a little bit on the hydro, if I may, with Mr.
Wright. You know, some discussion about base load. I do want to
make sure that we have--our lights go on, our heat work, or
whatever as time goes on.
Seems like hydro is never talked about as base load. Could
you give me your perspective on that?
Mr. Wright. Sure. I think--I think base load actually is
two components. It's a pricing component and it's an
availability component.
So, historically, the lowest cost--lowest variable cost
resource on the system operated as much as you could possibly
operate it and those tend to be nuclear and coal plants, and it
was also available all the time.
Now what we are finding with variable energy resources--
those lowest variable cost resources tend to be solar, wind,
and hydro--are all operating and we compete, candidly, for
market share at the points when lows are low and then we also
are operating as much as we can when loads are higher.
So what you really need is to be able to combine those two.
You want the lowest cost resources operating but you want to
make sure that you have the availability to meet all loads at
all times.
And so it's going to take a new concept, I think, beyond--a
new word, because the word that we've been using for our
history in the electricity industry, the industry has changed
too much----
Mr. Schrader. I know.
Mr. Wright [continuing]. And we are going to have to come
up with a new way to describe this.
Mr. Schrader. Could you also comment on long-term versus
short-term focus on energy sources? You know, natural gas is a
great resource--very low cost now, total disruptor in the
market place putting pressure on our nuclear friends and,
frankly, our hydro friends and I think pretty much everybody in
the marketplace--coal, you name it.
So how do we--how do we deal with that sort of disruption?
I know out in my neck of the woods in the Pacific Northwest
people are talking about really having trouble coming to grips
with long-term BPA contracts--our Bonneville Power
Administration, which have historically been the backbone of
energy up there.
What--get a comment maybe from Mr. Wright and maybe Mr.
Durbin, if that's all right, or anyone else?
Mr. Wright. First of all, we go through cycles in
electricity markets. We went through cycles in the late 1990s
when prices were really low and then we had the West Coast
energy crisis and prices got really high.
And what we struggle with is how do we go through those
periods when prices are low and make sure that we maintain the
resources that will create best value for consumers for the
longest period of time.
In this moment, I think what we are seeing is, as I said in
my testimony, low energy prices and low capacity prices. To the
extent that we can find ways to be able to think long term--
what is it that will create best value for consumers over the
long term both from a cost perspective and an environmental
perspective and then we make sure that we have pricing regimes
that will support those resources for the long term.
The difficulty that I see right now is that we--in the
market formations that have been put together so far they are
too focused on the short-term. You know, they are too much
looking at the next couple of years as opposed to how do we be
positioned for the longer term.
Mr. Schrader. Mr. Durbin?
Mr. Durbin. Sure. I, certainly, acknowledge that natural
gas and power generation has been a disruptive force. But I
would also argue it's been a very positive disruptive force
from consumer benefits on the costs of power, wholesale costs
of 50 percent, environmental benefits, and emission
reductions--you know, greater reliability to the system itself.
So do we--are there--are there ways that we can look at the
market rules that are out there to catch up, if you will? Yes,
absolutely. But I think, again, we have got to go back--go back
and make sure that what's being valued are the reliability
attributes and do that in a fuel-neutral and technology-neutral
basis.
Mr. Schrader. All right. Very good.
Last question, if I may, I think, is large-scale battery
storage. How closer are we to that? I mean, is it going to
happen in the next year or two, or is it 10 years off, or can
you give us a prediction, please?
Ms. Speakes-Backman. It's happening today. It is happening
today. There are--there is currently--the largest scale battery
storage is 100 megawatts for 4 hours of riding through on the
grid scale, and that's in North America.
Exponentially, our market is growing. It's grown at the
grid scale level by 70 percent in the last eight--sorry, the
costs of grid scale storage has gone down 70 percent in the
last 8 years on the grid, and commercial and industrial level,
those costs have gone down 80 percent in the last 2 years.
So we are seeing steep, steep drops in the cost. We are
seeing States and Federal agencies begin to understand the
valuation of storage, both on its supply into the grid and its
taking off the grid of excess resources and beginning to
consider, at least, being able to value that.
And so I say that that time is now. We are able to
encourage more penetration of low and no-carbon resources. We
are able to take additional power off the grid for those base
load resources that are inflexible and can't ramp up and down
very easily, thereby extending the life of those resources.
So I think this is happening now.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you very much, and I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now calls upon the Texan with the patience of
Job, the gentrifying Aggie from College Station, Texas, Mr.
Flores, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. You've misstated the patience part.
But I am an all-of-the-above resilience and reliability
guy. I just noticed my solar system at my house was producing
2\1/2\ times what I was consuming at this point in time. But
then it just dropped offline because it got cloudy a few
minutes ago.
So for you three at that end of the table, I am glad you're
here.
Ms. Speakes-Backman. You should have storage.
Mr. Flores. I am working on it. That's the next. I am
waiting for the exponential price decreases that you're talking
about. But I plan to do that.
We have talked a lot today about reliability, resilience,
emissions characteristics, inventory, and fuel on board. One of
the things we haven't talked about too much is the land
environmental impact of the different types of energy.
So I have a question for Mr. Durbin and Mr. Bailey and Ms.
Korsnick about if you--if you could, and you can use whatever
metric you want to, but if you have a, let's say, a typical
500-megawatt plant, how many acres does it take of your
respective power sources vis-a-vis solar, vis-a-vis wind?
Do you all have those numbers off the top of your head? If
you don't, just pass and we will go to the next one.
Mr. Durbin. I don't have them with me. We do have them. I'd
be happy to provide them for you.
Mr. Flores. OK. All right. Mr. Bailey?
Mr. Bailey. Pass.
Mr. Flores. OK. Ms. Korsnick?
Ms. Korsnick. I would just say, roughly, you know, a square
mile is what you would need for--you said 500 megawatt. It
could be a 1,000-megawatt----
Mr. Flores. OK.
Ms. Korsnick [continuing]. Nuclear plant. I guess wind and
solar----
Mr. Flores. So it--OK. What would it be for wind?
Mr. Kiernan. If I can jump in----
Mr. Flores. Sure.
Mr. Kiernan [continuing]. It's interesting. For a wind farm
it's actually less than 2 percent of the land is used for
turbines and foundations. The rest is continued to be used for
farming and ranching and other sources at the land--or other
activities the landowner wants.
Mr. Flores. It takes a certain footprint to make that work,
though.
Mr. Kiernan. But that is just 2 percent. The foundation or
the access roads--you aggregate that all, it's still just 2
percent and cattle, they don't seem to mind, and the wheat does
seem to grow. So it's a wonderful multiple use of the land.
Mr. Flores. OK. How about the birds? OK. We will come back
to that later. Go ahead.
Mr. Kiernan. Happy to----
Mr. Flores. No, go ahead, Mr. Mansour.
Mr. Mansour. From the standpoint of solar, you know, a 500-
megawatt solar facility would probably be somewhere in the
range of eight to nine square miles.
Mr. Flores. OK.
Mr. Mansour. So it is taking up a lot of room. You'll see
those bigger ones, though, on mostly public lands and they are
lands that, for the most part, nobody else has any desire to
use or, you know, either in the--now or in the future other
than for----
Mr. Flores. And I won't talk about batteries because, I
mean--do you have a--you had an answer for that?
Ms. Speakes-Backman. Yes, I do, actually.
Mr. Flores. OK.
Ms. Speakes-Backman. There is no direct air, water, or--air
or water impacts and it's got a minimal footprint. You can put
a 30-megawatt battery storage in the--in the space of a--spare
space of a substation.
Mr. Flores. OK. Very good.
Mr. Moore. And, Mr. Flores, can I just add, I think I've
got the proxy for energy efficiency at the meeting today and
energy efficiency takes zero additional land resources.
Mr. Flores. I like your answer. That's good. Yes. I've gone
almost all LED in my home.
In terms of the--there's--we have talked a lot about
resilience and reliability and one of the things that got my
attention a few weeks ago is that there was a large-scale
failure in eastern Australia because there was a weather
disruption that knocked the wind offline.
They didn't have enough spinning reserves backed up. And so
that implies to me that there is a relationship between the
base load terminology that we have used and then also the other
non-base-load power.
So my question for this, and I am going to ask this of our
three base load folks, if I can, although I guess hydro is sort
of base load from time to time--if you have one megawatt of
base load, with your three technologies what would it--let me--
if you have a megawatt of solar or wind, what does it take in
terms of reserves to back that up in your three technologies
for base load? No? You want to start first, Ms. Korsnick? Mr.
Bailey? Mr. Durbin?
Mr. Bailey. I should turn the mic on them. I think the
capacity--you probably ought to ask solar and wind what the
capacity factors are. But they are less than 50 percent, as I
recall.
Mr. Flores. OK. And then----
Mr. Bailey. Maybe 30, 20 percent--something like that.
Mr. Flores. OK. I have a question for--how many were
against the FERC proposal, by a show of hands?
Mr. Durbin. The the DOE proposal?
Mr. Flores. The DOE. Excuse me. The DOE request of FERC. I
am sorry. OK. Against. OK. All right.
And so you would essentially be against putting in pricing
characteristics because of fuel resilient or fuel supply for
resiliency purposes.
How do you feel about getting rid of all subsidies for all
technologies to have a truly economically neutral technology
solution? We will start with wind.
Mr. Kiernan. I'm happy to address that. Thank you.
The production tax credit is being phased out, as you well
know, and I am pleased to say the wind industry proposed that,
supported that, and as we say, we kind of have tax reformed
ourselves. So that's phasing out. We are good with that, and
honestly, we do call on our colleagues let's level the playing
field and not have subsidies across the board.
I would also, if I may--you mentioned birds earlier. It's
actually only .03 percent of all human-caused bird deaths are
wind turbines.
Mr. Flores. OK. That's cool.
Mr. Mansour. With solar, again, we are in the same kind of
situation. Not exactly the same ramp down for the investment
tax credit but with the extension in 2015, you know, Congress
gave us an extension with the ramp down in the out years. And
our company is--nobody is excited about having their tax credit
go down. But our companies are willing to go along with that.
I would say I think you'd be hard-pressed to find any of
the technologies represented up here who haven't received some
sort of help from the Federal Government since their inception
with the possible exception of Energy Storage, which really
deserves some.
Mr. Flores. I am into spending R&D for the battery parts.
So anyway, I've run out of time. I wish I could go longer. I
yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now calls upon the gentlelady from Florida, Ms.
Castor, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Mr. Olson, for yielding and thank
you to all of the witnesses for a very interesting discussion.
And at the outset, I want to say thank you to Mr. Rush for
continuing to raise the important issue of rebuilding or
building a new resilient modern grid in Puerto Rico. In the
U.S. Virgin Islands we have a once in a lifetime opportunity to
do so and I look forward to the bipartisan efforts to protect
the taxpayer in the future from another catastrophe.
And I guess Chairman Upton kind of set the tone at the
outset with his questions relating to the Department of
Energy's notice of proposed rulemaking for their so-called grid
resiliency pricing rule.
I'd say, first off, that the time frame set by the DOE is
extraordinarily too short for such a transformative impactful
type of shift in Federal policy that is going to impact all
consumers across the country and all businesses, likely
shifting huge costs onto the folks we represent at home. So
that's--hopefully, smarter heads will prevail on that time
frame.
And then--but to the heart of the matter, for the DOE to
cite economic and national security as the guiding principle
for this notice of proposed rulemaking really turns that on its
head.
It's--especially looking at it now through the lens of the
most destructive hurricane season that we have had probably in
our lifetimes. Maybe Katrina standing alone.
Even Katrina standing alone probably will not rise to what
we are going to have to do for the three hurricanes that have
hit this year and the other extreme weather events.
What they have put forward at the Department of Energy is a
policy for 50 years ago based on the fuel MECS of 50 years ago.
It is not a policy for resiliency and modernization for 2017
and the changing energy mix that is out there.
And when they--when I hear the talk of costs, I always like
to remind everyone, yes, they are the finite energy costs that
we analyze.
But if you're a person in Texas or Florida or just about
anywhere, what you're seeing right now--rising air conditioning
costs because of higher temperatures, your flood insurance is
going up, the emergency aid package that all taxpayers will
pay, that's going to be a high-ticket item--property insurance,
beach re-nourishment, property taxes, not even to mention the
increased cost of carbon pollution.
So this is quite a misguided effort that they need to take
back to the shop and work on it. And I'll give you one example.
In the Tampa Bay area just last week the Tampa Electric
Company, now owned by Emery, that has been primary--primarily
natural gas but the Big Bend plant is a longstanding coal-fired
power plant, they've just announced the largest investment in
solar power in the history of the State of Florida.
The so-called Sunshine State--we are not quite there when
it comes to solar power. They are able to do this because not
just consumers are demanding it but it makes sense for their
bottom line. This is what the market is telling them.
Solar is much more inexpensive now, and I think this is
just going to be the first step. You're going to--Duke Energy
has already said they are going to do this. Other utilities are
going to do this.
But, Mr. Mansour, with a so-called resiliency pricing rule
like this, don't you think if you're favoring certain fuel
sources that's going to have a chilling effect on other low-
carbon fuels of the future?
Mr. Mansour. Congresswoman Castor, we share your concern
both with the timing--the speed with which this is going
forward--and actually the intent in general.
We feel very strongly that the grid itself right now, yes,
it needs improvement. Those improvements should come as a
result of market forces that look at and value some attributes
in the way that they should be. We think----
Ms. Castor. And this is in a State that does not have a
renewable portfolio standard, no renewable goals. So there is
not that argument either that we are tipping the scale somehow.
Mr. Mansour. And we share your concern with transfer of
lots of money from ratepayers to basically subsidized certain
types of generating capacity.
Ms. Castor. Mr. Moore, you've said that you anticipate this
would be extraordinarily expensive for consumers and
businesses, and you threw out a multibillion-dollar number.
Do you see the chilling effect, as well, and we will add in
those costs, too?
Mr. Moore. Sure. I see it in numerous ways and I think that
to simply pick one attribute over all others and reward that
one attribute without any evidence to back it up, those mean
that is diverting, easily, billions of dollars a year directly
and indirectly, chilling market design and, you know, taking
away good dollars that could have been--you know, the consumers
could have held on to those dollars.
Ms. Castor. So I would say that the true threat to
resiliency is the Trump administration's allegiance to the
policies and the fuel MECS of 50 years ago.
Clearly, they are favoring fuel sources that are less
competitive today. This is going to cost consumers dearly. I
cannot believe that in--while we are still recovering from
hurricanes there is no mention of mitigating transmission or
distribution damage in a resiliency rule or how we accelerate
restoration after an extreme weather event.
So I trust that the comments to the DOE and FERC will
reflect all of these concerns. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from the
Commonwealth of Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate it greatly. I find some of the comments today
somewhat interesting.
I, too, am an all-of-the-above kind of guy but, you know,
let's take a look at history as we see it in reality as opposed
to just with our particularly viewpoint.
I confess up front, my district has a lot of natural gas
and a lot of coal. With that being said, Mr. Moore said we
don't want to get into a situation where we have, you know, one
administration coming in and then another administration coming
in.
But in fairness, that's exactly what we have seen because
the--if we would have gone to the market policy, say, 10 years
ago that many have advocated today, wind and solar and even
battery storage would be in a lot different position because
the market kings would have been those forces that have
recently been characterized as being 50 years old, and to now
have those particular fuel sources castigated to the trash heap
of history without recognizing the huge investments that our
ratepayers have put into those and recognizing that that is at
least for the next 10 or 15, maybe 20 years a big part of our
grid reliability creates some interesting issues.
We are where we are. We need to move forward. I understand
that. But it is nice to note that sometimes you have to look at
history.
For example, the great State of Florida talks about air
conditioning. You know, 125 years ago, before coal was
discovered in my district, the people came to the mountains to
get out of the heat, and they spent months in the summertime
getting out of Richmond and Washington and coming to the
mountains of Virginia.
It was a big economic source. We have shifted from that to
coal and now we are shifting again. But I don't know that we
should do it as rapidly as some people want without, I think,
risking our reliability.
Mr. Bailey, I got to--I got to say, you know, I was
listening. I wasn't in the room when you actually said it but I
was listening on the TV as sometimes we want to do when we are
trying to do five things at one time.
And could you tell me again those numbers? Seventy-two days
I think I heard that we have--able to stockpile certain types
of coal and 80 something for another kind. Could you go over
that again? Because it was just nice to hear.
Mr. Bailey. I would be pleased to. Over the past 5 years,
average coal stockpile at a power plant has been 72 days for
bituminous and 83 days for sub-bituminous.
Mr. Griffith. Yes. Over--since you ask, over the last 9
years, the low has been a little over 40 days and the high has
been a little over a hundred days.
So while there may be some difficulties with other things,
you can put a lot of coal in the back 40 if you need it to be
there for reliability purposes.
Mr. Bailey. There is--there is a lot. Yes, sir.
Mr. Griffith. Yes. I do appreciate that.
Look, we have got some interesting things going on. I am
curious, Ms. Speakes-Backman, if you all consider from your
industry standpoint pump storage hydro to be batteries, because
that's kind of the way I've been looking at it, and we are
looking at putting some of those, hopefully, into some
abandoned coal mines to generate some economic development in
our neck of the woods and store that.
They are even talking about using some renewable sources--
wind or solar--to pump it up in the nonpeak periods and then
have the water ready to flow down to the lower levels of the
mine at the appropriate time when it's peak. Do you all
consider that a part of your mission?
Ms. Speakes-Backman. Absolutely. Absolutely, 100 percent.
You know, hydro is one of the early storage technologies.
It helped to offtake the oversupply from base load resources
back in the day when it was beginning to be installed.
So we absolutely consider storage as or hydro--pumped hydro
storage as part of our storage infrastructure. Mr. Wright has
represented the hydro storage industry quite well and so I
focused on batteries today.
Mr. Griffith. And I appreciate that very much and do
appreciate Mr. Wright's testimony as well.
In closing, I have to say it's not politically necessarily
a positive, but as a conservative Republican I am also a bird
watcher. So I am concerned about wind killing birds.
I recognize that it may not be a huge percentage. Clean
windows on big office buildings does a lot of damage to birds
as well. But I once had a bill on that and tried to solve that
problem at least for Federal buildings as we renovated as well.
But I do hope that the wind industry and the solar industry
will recognize that we have some obligation to make sure we are
not whacking or frying the birds as they go over or near our
energy facilities.
Mr. Kiernan. Thank you for bringing that up, and I very
much share your concern as a former executive with New
Hampshire Audubon.
I, as well, am out there birding on a regular basis and I
will say the wind industry takes very seriously our strategy to
reduce bird take.
And I appreciate the Department of Energy. Actually some of
their grants have gone to helping advance new technologies that
are being commercially tested as we speak.
So we are hopeful that we can take our low impact and make
it even lower.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, and I yield.
Mr. Mansour. Let me just add, on behalf of the solar
industry, we also work very hard to mitigate the impact on
wildlife whether it is avian species or some of the terrestrial
ones, as well.
So our companies spend tens and tens of millions of dollars
per project to try to mitigate those kind of impacts.
Mr. Griffith. And I appreciate that, and thank you very
much and yield back.
Ms. Speakes-Backman. For the record, we don't kill any
birds.
[Laughter.]
We are pretty good on that front, too.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now calls upon himself for 40 minutes, 5 per
witness.
[Laughter.]
OK, you guys passed the test.
This is an important hearing, and that importance was
reinforced this week by the Department of Energy's proposal to
FERC on valuing base load generation.
But most importantly, it gives Texans like me a chance to
do what we like best--brag about Texas. Unlike many States,
Texas has a very diverse power grid.
We think we have the most diverse one in America. Mr.
Durbin, natural gas is number-one for power production in
Texas.
Mr. Bailey, it was coal until 2 years ago. Coal is number 2
very closely. Ms. Korsnick, we have Comanche Pass and south
Texas, two nuclear plants. My colleague, Gene Green, mentioned
about south Texas.
Harvey hit in Corpus Christi. The worst part of the
hurricane is the northeast side. That part hit Bay City in
south Texas. Not one blip of power lost, despite a category
four hurricane hitting a nuclear reactor.
Also, we have exploding solar. Mr. Mansour, Army bases--
Fort Hood and Fort Bliss, the biggest ones in the Army are now
using solar to power the base. They actually export that to the
power grid there locally.
We are number one, Mr. Kiernan, in wind power. Texas is
number one for wind. And last spring, as you know, almost half
of our power grid was supplied by wind power--one half for one
day.
And back home in my district, a place called Thompsons,
Texas, I wish Mr. McNerney was still here because we have
what's called the Petro Nova Project. It's NRG's Parish Power
Plant and this is a true carbon capture sequestration for
enhanced oil recovery that works.
Working with a Japanese company, we have technology that
grabs 98 percent of the CO2 coming from one coal generator.
That's viable because about 65 miles southeast is an old
oilfield. There is a pipeline that comes by.
So they grab that CO2, put it in that pipeline--like
fracking fluid, repressurized. Hey, they are making money by
carbon capture sequestration. But that's rare.
But this diversity does not make the coast immune to
problems. In the winter of 2013, we had a big cold snap. Lost
two of our coal generators. Had rolling brownouts and blackouts
all across the State.
Some days there is not enough wind, and then during
Hurricane Harvey, we had way too much wind. The turbines went
offline. And these problems aren't hypothetical and they show
that there is not one perfect energy source.
And my question just to the entire panel, I'd like to go
down the line for the different sources here and I'd like you
to describe what's the common cause of unplanned outages where
you can't provide power and then talk about how you are
addressing those issues.
Mr. Durbin, you're up. Natural gas.
Mr. Durbin. Thank you for the question. As I mentioned to
Mr. Green--as we talked about it, and Mr. McKinley had raised
the issue of outages--for natural gas and power generation, any
outage is being caused not by a lack of supply or a lack of
availability but by contracts that--you know, they are
interruptible contracts.
So these are all things that can be addressed, can be--can
be resolved with the natural gas to continue to provide that
reliable service.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Bailey--coal, sir.
Mr. Bailey. Yes, sir.
Well, we talked about the amount of fuel onsite at fuel
plants. We think that makes the coal fleet very reliable and
subject to very few outages, frankly.
Mr. Olson. Ms. Korsnick, nuclear power, ma'am.
Ms. Korsnick. As I stated, if you look at the nuclear fleet
in the United States, we have had greater than a 90 percent
capacity factor for 15 years. So I would say in general nuclear
has fewer unplanned outages.
We do have a refueling outage every 18 to 24 months on our
plants.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Kiernan, wind power, sir.
Mr. Kiernan. If I can start with a contextual observation.
Gerry Cauley of NERC a week or two ago commented about the
reliability on the grid is good and getting better.
So I just, first, want to observe that this is an important
topic. But we don't have an urgent problem. We just need to
work it.
As to wind, it's fascinating because we have wind turbines
that are relatively small--1, 2, 3 megawatts--and they are
geographically dispersed, while there might be a few that go
down because the winds are too high in one part of Texas, there
are a bunch in another part of Texas that are still rolling
along.
So actually our geographic diversity gives us tremendous
resiliency that we are adding to the grid.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Wright, solar power, sir. I am sorry.
Mr. Wright. Water.
Mr. Olson. Water guy--hydro. That's not much for Texas but,
please, what's your biggest challenges for the Nation?
Mr. Wright. My colleagues from the large public power
council.
So you have hydro power in Texas as well. The--what I would
say is, look, anybody that has hydro resources, run them, son,
as much as they can because it's the low-cost resource. It's
the most reliable resource. It's the air emission-free
resource.
The biggest challenge in the hydropower industry is that
it's an aging fleet and we need to make investments in that
fleet in order to make sure that we continue to be able to get
the output from it.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Mansour, finally.
Mr. Mansour. Yes, sir.
Mr. Chairman, I am going to totally ignore your question.
But I am going to follow your lead by bragging on solar in
Texas.
We got 1.6 gigawatts right now. We are going to go to
another almost 5 gigawatts over the next 5 years, and a lot of
that is because the way ERCOT and the Texas market is set up.
Mr. Olson. Keep talking.
Mr. Mansour. Yes. I am not sure. I think it was Mr. Green
that talked about some of the work that former Governor Perry
did with the CREZ lines.
Yes, that incentivized a lot of wind. Basically, it was the
classic build it and they will come. So, you know, the people
of Texas put out I think it was $10 billion or more to build
these CREZ lines or some--these transmission lines.
Wind was the first to respond because they were a little
bit ahead of us. But solar is catching up and we already employ
over 9,000 people in the State of Texas and we are going to be
growing in your State.
Mr. Olson. Ms. Speakes-Backman, concentration type stuff.
Ms. Speakes-Backman. I love this question because we are
here for reliability and resilience, and for all of these
resources along the table.
In fact, Texas has quite a few batteries in place on the
grid and just pointing that out. Duke has batteries providing
frequency regulation. AEP has batteries that have extended the
transmission and distribution life with another 20 megawatts
being built colocated with wind, as a matter of fact.
Fort Bliss was among one of the first locations to build
micro grid with mission insurance as its--as its objective. So
we are here for everybody. We are kind of like the bacon of the
grid. We make everything better.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Olson. You know what Texans like to hear? The bacon of
the grid. Mr. Moore?
Ms. Speakes-Backman. I grew up in Ohio. I love bacon.
Mr. Olson. Your comments, Mr. Moore.
Mr. Moore. Sure. Just that people come from all over the
world to see how Texas integrates large amounts of renewable
energy onto the system.
ERCOT has done a terrific job with it and I think a key
reason for the success, to echo another speaker, is the
incredible amount of new transmission to pull the grid
together.
So given that most outages are caused to the distribution
transmission system with the, you know, wires and poles, let's
focus on smart design for the system.
Mr. Olson. All those praises for Texas. So join me:
[singing] ``The stars at night ...''
[Laughter.]
And seeing no further Members wish to ask questions, I
would like to thank all of our witnesses for being here today.
And there is one document for the record. I ask unanimous
consent that written testimony of Dr. Susan Tierney in a
summary--she was supposed to be here, but she could not be
here--be entered into the record.
Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Olson. And pursuant to committee rules, I remind
Members that they have 10 business days to submit additional
questions for the record and ask the witnesses to submit their
response within 10 business days upon receipt of the questions.
And without objection, this committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:23 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
