- OUTDOOR RECREATION: VAST IMPACT OF THE GREAT OUTDOORS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OUTDOOR RECREATION: VAST IMPACT OF THE GREAT OUTDOORS

=======================================================================
HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DIGITAL COMMERCE AND CONSUMER PROTECTION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 27, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-27

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
26-025 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2018

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            GENE GREEN, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                   Massachusetts
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             TONY CARDENAS, California
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           RAUL RUIZ, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia

7_____

Subcommittee on Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection

ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
Chairman
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            TONY CARDENAS, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virgina      DORIS O. MATSUI, California
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana                   Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           GENE GREEN, Texas
MIMI WALTERS, California             FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania           officio)
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Robert E. Latta, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Ohio, opening statement.....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, opening statement...........................     4
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, prepared statement.....................................    72

Witnesses

Hon. Donald S. Beyer, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Virginia.......................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Amy Roberts, Executive Director, Outdoor Industry Association....    13
Prepared statement...........................................    16
Ginger Mihalik, Executive Director, Baltimore Chesapeake Bay
Outward Bound School, Outward Bound............................    23
Prepared statement...........................................    25
Jeffrey Tooze, Vice President, Global Customs & Trade, Columbia
Sportswear Company.............................................    37
Prepared statement...........................................    39
Marc Berejka, Director of Government & Community Affairs,
Recreational Equipment, Inc....................................    41
Prepared statement...........................................    43
Jeremy Jones, Founder and President, Protect Our Winters.........    45
Prepared statement...........................................    47
James Landers, Vice President of Government Affairs, Recreation
Vehicle Industry Association...................................    50
Prepared statement...........................................    52

Submitted Material

Outdoor Industry Climate Declaration, submitted by Ms. Schakowsky    73
Letter of April 25, 2017, from Fred Ferguson, Vice President,
Government and Industry Relations, Vista Outdoor, to Mr. Latta,
submitted by Mr. Harper........................................    74
Letter of April 26, 2017, from Wayne Allard, Vice President,
Government Relations, American Motorcyclist Association, to Mr.
Latta and Ms. Schakowsky, submitted by Mr. Harper..............    76
Statement of Business Backs Low-Carbon USA, submitted by Ms.
Schakowsky.....................................................    78
Fact sheet, ``EPA's Clean Power Plan, Climate Change and Outdoor
Recreation,'' Environmental Protection Agency, submitted by Ms.
Schakowsky.....................................................    88

OUTDOOR RECREATION: VAST IMPACT OF THE GREAT OUTDOORS

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 27, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Digital Commerce and Consumer
Protection,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Robert Latta
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Latta, Harper, Upton,
Burgess, Lance, Guthrie, McKinley, Bilirakis, Bucshon,
Costello, Schakowsky, Dingell, Matsui, Welch, Green, and
Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Zach Dareshori, Staff Assistant; Blair
Ellis, Press Secretary/Digital Coordinator; Melissa Froelich,
Counsel, Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection; Giulia
Giannangeli, Legislative Clerk, Digital Commerce and Consumer
Protection/Communications and Technology; Alex Miller, Video
Production Aide and Press Assistant; Paul Nagle, Chief Counsel,
Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection; Mark Ratner, Policy
Coordinator; Olivia Trusty, Professional Staff Member, Digital
Commerce and Consumer Protection; Madeline Vey, Policy
Coordinator, Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection; Hamlin
Wade, Special Advisor for External Affairs; Everett Winnick,
Director of Information Technology; Michelle Ash, Minority
Chief Counsel, Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection; Jeff
Carroll, Minority Staff Director; Jacqueline Cohen, Minority
Senior Counsel; David Cwiertny, Minority Energy/Environment
Fellow; Jean Fruci, Minority Policy Advisor, Energy and
Environment; Lisa Goldman, Minority Counsel; Caroline Paris-
Behr, Minority Policy Analyst; and Matt Schumacher, Minority
Deputy Press Secretary and Digital Director.
Mr. Latta. Well, good morning. And I would like to call the
Subcommittee on Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection to
order, and I appreciate all of our witnesses that will be
testifying today before the committee. And at this time, the
Chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT E. LATTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

And again, good morning, and welcome to the subcommittee.
And today the subcommittee hearing is on the outdoor recreation
industry.
As a current member and former chairman of the
Congressional Sportsmen's Caucus as well as someone who
passionately enjoys all outdoor recreation has to offer, I am
very excited to explore the industry with you today. The
outdoor recreation industry is both diverse and far-reaching
spanning many of the traditional major U.S. economic sectors
and at the core of the industry is the American consumer.
The outdoor recreation industry thrives when Americans are
engaged, and now more than ever we are seeing more Americans
getting involved. Every year, millions of Americans across the
country go outside and enjoy the great outdoors. Whether they
are camping, fishing, hiking, hunting, or enjoying many of the
other pastimes outdoor recreation has to offer, Americans are
actively engaged.
Increasingly, more and more Americans are prioritizing
outdoor recreation and in doing so helping grow the industry.
Vast contributions made by the outdoor recreation to the
overall U.S. economy reflect this trend. Americans spend $887
billion in outdoor recreation annually in helping to create 7.6
million jobs and generate almost $125 billion in Federal,
State, and local tax revenue.
In my home State of Ohio where residents come to enjoy the
Ottawa National Wildlife Refuge, the Magee Marsh Wildlife Area,
and other public destinations near our beautiful Lake Erie, we
have also seen significant economic benefits outdoor recreation
has to offer. Over 53 percent of all Ohioans participate in
outdoor recreation each year. With approximately 17.4 billion
spent by consumers in this industry, outdoor recreation helps
create almost 200,000 jobs and 5.1 billion in wages and
salaries alone in Ohio.
In recognition of the outdoor recreation industry's growing
influence, Congress passed the Outdoor Recreation Jobs and
Economic Impact Act last year. Under this law, the Department
of Commerce in consultation with Federal agencies will analyze
outdoor recreation's contributions to the Nation's gross
domestic product.
Through this analysis all the economic activity generated
by manufacturers, retailers, service providers, and thousands
of other businesses supporting the outdoor recreation across
the country will be quantified and incorporated into an annual
Federal assessment of the national economy. As a result, the
policymakers and stakeholders alike will have the necessary
information to make critical decisions that will allow this
industry to thrive for generations to come.
In addition to economic output, outdoor recreation offers
many other benefits. Outdoor recreation helps Americans get fit
and lead healthy lives. Whether it be hiking, trail running,
rafting, or the like, outdoor recreation offers Americans many
opportunities to get outside and be active. Recent studies also
suggest that investments in outdoor recreation may help reduce
crime and improve education throughout our communities.
Another example of the positive impact outdoor recreation
has on our communities that I am excited to hear about today is
Outward Bound's veteran program. Outward Bound combines outdoor
group adventures such as canoeing and hiking with facilitated
therapeutic sessions designed to help build self-confidence,
pride, trust, and communication skills that help veterans
readjust upon their return.
Today as we gather to discuss the outdoor recreation
industry, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on how
outdoor recreation is driving investment, creating jobs, and
promoting innovation and working to establish more enjoyable
consumer experiences through outdoor activities. For many
States and communities, outdoor recreation is the cornerstone
of economic activity. It creates jobs and generates revenue and
spurs vital investments. Our goal is to continue that progress
and ensure that the outdoor recreation industry remains a
strong pillar in the United States economy.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Latta follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Robert E. Latta

Good morning and welcome to the Digital Commerce and
Consumer Protection subcommittee hearing on the outdoor
recreation industry. As a current member and former chairman of
the Congressional Sportsmen's Caucus, as well as someone who
passionately enjoys all that outdoor recreation has to offer, I
am very excited to explore this industry with you all today.
The outdoor recreation industry is both diverse and far
reaching, spanning many of the traditional major U.S. economic
sectors-- and at the core of this industry is the American
consumer. The outdoor recreation industry thrives when
Americans are engaged and now more than ever we are seeing
Americans get involved.
Every year, millions of Americans across the country go
outside and enjoy the great outdoors. Whether they are camping,
fishing, hiking or enjoying many of the other pastimes outdoor
recreation has to offer, Americans are actively engaged.
Increasingly, more and more Americans are prioritizing outdoor
recreation and, in doing so, helping grow this industry. The
vast contributions made by outdoor recreation to the overall
U.S. economy reflect this trend. Americans spend $887 billion
in outdoor recreation annually helping create 7.6 million jobs
and generating almost $125 billion in Federal, State, and local
tax revenue.
My home State of Ohio, where residents come together to
enjoy the Ottawa National Wildlife Refuge, Magee Marsh Wildlife
Area and other public destinations near the beautiful Lake
Erie, has also seen the significant economic benefits outdoor
recreation has to offer. Over 53% of all Ohioans participate in
outdoor recreation each year. With approximately $17.4 billion
spent by consumers in this industry, outdoor recreation helps
create almost 200,000 jobs and $5.1 billion in wages and
salaries in Ohio alone.
In recognition of the outdoor recreation industry's growing
influence, Congress passed the Outdoor Recreation Jobs and
Economic Impact Act last year. Under this law, the Department
of Commerce, in consultation with other Federal agencies, will
analyze outdoor recreation's contributions to the Nation's
gross domestic product. Through this analysis, all of the
economic activity generated by manufacturers, retailers,
service providers, and the thousands of other businesses
supporting outdoor recreation across the country will be
quantified and incorporated into an annual, Federal assessment
of the national economy. As a result, policymakers and
stakeholders alike will have the necessary information to make
critical decisions that will allow this industry to thrive for
generations to come.
In addition to economic output, outdoor recreation offers
many other benefits. Outdoor recreation helps Americans get fit
and lead healthy lives. Whether it be hiking, trail running,
rafting or the like, outdoor recreation offers Americans many
opportunities to get outside and be active. Recent studies also
suggest that investments in outdoor recreation may help reduce
crime and improve education throughout our communities. Another
example of the positive impact outdoor recreation has on our
communities that I am excited to hear about today is Outward
Bound's veteran program. Outward Bound combines outdoor group
adventures, such as canoeing and hiking, with facilitated
therapeutic sessions designed to build self-confidence, pride,
trust and communication skills that help veterans readjust upon
their return.
Today as we gather to discuss the outdoor recreation
industry, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on how
outdoor recreation is driving investment, creating jobs,
promoting innovation, and working to establish more enjoyable
consumer experiences through outdoor activities. For many
States and communities, outdoor recreation is the cornerstone
of economic activity. It creates jobs, generates revenue, and
spurs vital investments. Our goal is to continue that progress
and ensure that the outdoor recreation industry remains a
strong pillar in the U.S. economy.

Mr. Latta. And at this time, I have about a minute left,
are there any Members on our side that would like the
remainder? The gentleman from Indiana is recognized.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would just like to
comment on the State of Indiana. Obviously this industry is
very important to our State, specifically the RV industry in
the northern part of our State, and I am pleased to see that
last year was the best year that that industry has had since
the late 1970s. So I appreciate the hearing and look forward to
the testimony. I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields back,
and I yield back the balance of my time. And at this time I
would like to recognize the gentlelady from Illinois, the
ranking member of the subcommittee, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, let me
welcome our colleague, Don Beyer, who is not only the sponsor
of the bill that we passed last year, the Outdoor Rec Act, but
also the co-chair of the Safe Climate Caucus, and appreciate
you being here.
Let me just add, Mr. Mullin, I recreate in Indiana. I have
a house on the lake, so it is not just RVs, but it is a
wonderful place in Michigan City.
The outdoor recreation industry is an important part of our
economy, and outdoor activities are enjoyed by 144 million
Americans every year. Outdoor recreation in the United States
thrives because of our tremendous natural resources and diverse
landscape. But our natural wonders are under threat from a
changing climate and destructive policies that we have seen by
this administration and this Congress.
Climate change is already having a noticeable impact. In
Chicago, we had a snow drought this winter. There was not a
single flake of snow in January or February. If we don't act
now, winter will become a thing of the past. That means fewer
people enjoy winter sports and fewer sales for the outdoor
recreation industry.
And summer will be worse too. When summers become too hot
that discourages Americans from leaving air-conditioned
buildings to experience the great outdoors. The actions of the
Trump administration and Republicans in Congress are putting
outdoor recreation at further risk. President Trump has moved
to dismantle the Clean Power Plan to reduce carbon pollution
from our power plants. Republicans in the House of
Representatives voted to undo limits on methane emissions from
drilling on public lands. Instead of investing in the green
economy of the future, they are trying to reverse the progress
we have already made.
Where leadership from the President is lacking, the private
sector is stepping up. Those working in the outdoor recreation
industry know the real economic impact of our changing climate
and they have been leaders in the fight against global climate
change. In November, REI and Columbia joined 1,000 other
companies on a letter to President Trump calling for
implementation of the historic Paris climate agreement. That
letter stated, quote, ``Failure to build a low-carbon economy
puts American prosperity at risk. But the right action now will
create jobs and boost U.S. competitiveness.''
The success of the outdoor recreation industry relies on
protecting the outdoors starting with our public lands.
Yesterday, the Trump administration took first steps to
undermine protection for our public lands. I joined with
Democratic colleagues on the Energy and Commerce Committee and
the Natural Resources Committee to call on the Department of
the Interior to explain its review of the Antiquities Act. I
hope our Republican colleagues will join us in efforts to make
sure that our public lands remain protected.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for your work to
promote outdoor recreation and to protect our environment, and
I look forward to hearing from you as we work to ensure that
future generations can enjoy America's unparalleled outdoor
spaces.
I have a minute left. I don't know if anyone would like it.
Yes, Congresswoman Dingell, I yield to you.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Ranking Member Schakowsky. Outdoor
recreation is not only a driver for Michigan's economy it is a
way of life. In my State, everyone heads up north to go
camping, skiing, fishing, or John Dingell's case, hunting. But
I can tell you it wasn't always like that. To give you one
example, from 1946 to 1948, 5.9 million gallons of oil products
were released annually into the Detroit River. It was one of
the most polluted rivers in the country.
Pollution was killing thousands of water fowl every year
and threatening the local walleye and perch population. It was
a drag on the economy. Today, the river is now home to the
Detroit River International Wildlife Refuge, our country's only
international refuge. The refuge is a huge driver of our local
economy and is home to 30 species of waterfowl, 117 kinds of
fish, and over 300 species of birds, a huge turnaround in the
not-so-distant past.
I mentioned the walleye population that was threatened.
Today, the river is part of the Walleye Capital of the World
with anglers from across the country coming to the region. It
didn't happen by accident. It happened because we passed laws
like the Clean Water Act, the Clean Air Act, the Endangered
Species Act, established the Land and Water Conservation Fund,
and dedicated significant resources to cleaning up our air and
our water.
As we discuss the impact of our outdoor recreation on our
economy, I hope the committee will remember the story of the
Detroit River and will protect the Clean Water Act and will
strongly support Federal investments in cleanup and
conservation. It not only helps our environment, it helps our
economy as well. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Schakowsky. And I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields back.
And at this time, the chairman of the full committee, the
gentleman from Oregon, is not here, but when he arrives we will
recognize him for his opening statement. And at this time, the
Chair will recognize for 5 minutes the gentleman from New
Jersey, the ranking member of the full committee, for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today's hearing is on
the effect of outdoor recreation on the U.S. economy. It is an
opportunity to celebrate outdoor recreation. Nothing gets
families clamoring to be outdoors more than a day at the beach.
And in my district with the beautiful beaches of Monmouth
County, tourism was up more than five percent in 2016 due to
the great weather we had last summer.
When tourism increases, our local economy thrives. This
hearing also gives us the opportunity to highlight the clear
link between the economy and environmental stewardship.
Supporting outdoor recreation means taking meaningful action to
protect the environment. If we don't take care of our
environment the benefits of outdoor recreation to the economy
and to the American people will vanish.
Severe weather events are increasing, having devastating
effects on communities across the country. Superstorm Sandy
wrecked shore towns in New Jersey and badly hurt our economy.
The storm caused catastrophic property damage, destructive
shoreline erosion, and many deaths. Temperatures are increasing
and precipitation patterns are changing. Not only does this
affect ski and snowboarding resorts, it leads to water
shortages and increases the risk of fires. It also means more
heat advisories and air quality warnings, forcing more people
to stay indoors and avoid outdoor activities.
We are also seeing an increase in vector-borne diseases
like Zika, as mosquitoes and ticks migrate northward,
increasing health risks and again giving people a reason to
stay inside.
So at the same time, as we pay tribute to outdoor
recreation's positive effects on our economy we would be remiss
if we did not acknowledge existing environmental concerns,
including climate change, and consider how recent Federal
policy initiatives could exacerbate those concerns. It is hard
to know where to start.
Just yesterday, President Trump issued an executive order
instructing a review of national monument designations as an
attack on the Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante National
Monument designations by Presidents Obama and Clinton and
perhaps others. This attack comes despite the fact that
counties with protected lands have faster economic growth than
those without such protections. Therefore, also yesterday, my
colleagues and I wrote to the Interior Secretary seeking to
ensure protection of these vital national lands.
Then there is the Trump administration and Republican
efforts to slash funding for the EPA, the Department of
Interior, and other Federal agencies that have a mission to
keep our water and air clean and Federal lands protected and
open to the public. Republicans are also attempting to rollback
efforts to curb carbon pollution, exit the Paris agreement,
privatize public lands, and allow coal production and oil and
gas drilling in national parks.
Concerns also have been raised over the decline in
international visitors to the United States in response to the
administration's travel ban. Thirty five percent of
international visitors go to national parks and monuments while
in the United States. The administration's actions can
seriously harm tourism and the outdoor recreation economy.
If we want the outdoor recreation industry to thrive we
must protect the land, water, and wildlife resources that are
the foundations of outdoor activities. The outdoor recreation
economy is dependent on funding for protection of and access to
public lands and waters.
So while I was pleased that this committee was able to pass
the Outdoor Recreation Act last Congress, which elevated the
issue of outdoor recreation and gave it the bipartisan support
it deserves, I want to stress that there is more work to be
done. Damage to the environment leads to damage to outdoor
recreation hurting the U.S. economy, so let's work to address
the changing climate and protect our shoreline, streams, and
Federal lands. Thank you. And I don't think anybody else wants
my time, so I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Mr. Chairman, today's hearing is on the effect of outdoor
recreation on the U.S. economy. It is an opportunity to
celebrate outdoor recreation. Nothing gets families clamoring
to be outdoors more than a day at the beach. And in my
district, with the beautiful beaches in Monmouth County,
tourism was up more than 5 percent in 2016 due to the great
weather we had last summer. When tourism increases, our local
economy thrives, especially in more rural areas.
This hearing also gives us the opportunity to highlight the
clear link between the economy and environmental stewardship.
Supporting outdoor recreation means taking meaningful action to
protect the environment. If we do not take care of our
environment, the benefits of outdoor recreation to the economy,
and to the American people, will vanish.
Severe weather events are increasing, having devastating
effects on communities across the country. Superstorm Sandy
wrecked shore towns in New Jersey and badly hurt our economy.
The storm caused catastrophic property damage, destructive
shoreline erosion, and many deaths.
Temperatures are increasing and precipitation patterns are
changing. Not only does this affect ski and snowboarding
resorts, it leads to water shortages and increases the risk of
fires. It also means more heat advisories and air quality
warnings, forcing more people to stay indoors and avoid outdoor
activities. We are also seeing an increase in vector-borne
diseases like Zika as mosquitos and ticks migrate northward,
increasing health risks and again giving people a reason to
stay inside.
So at the same time as we pay tribute to outdoor
recreation's positive effects on our economy, we would be
remiss if we did not acknowledge existing environmental
concerns--including climate change--and consider how recent
Federal policy initiatives could exacerbate those concerns.
It is hard to know where to start. Just yesterday,
President Trump issued an executive order instructing a review
of national monument designations as an attack on the Bears
Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument
designations by Presidents Obama and Clinton, and perhaps
others. This attack comes despite the fact that counties with
protected lands have faster economic growth than those without
such protections. Therefore, also yesterday, my colleagues and
I wrote Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke seeking to ensure
protection of these vital national lands.
Then there is the Trump administration and Republican
efforts to slash funding for the Environmental Protection
Agency, the Department of the Interior, and other Federal
agencies that have a mission to keep our water and air clean
and Federal lands protected and open to the public. Republicans
are also attempting to roll back efforts to curb carbon
pollution, exit the Paris Agreement, privatize public lands,
and allow coal production and oil and gas drilling in national
parks.
Concerns also have been raised over the decline in
international visitors to the United States in response to the
administration's travel ban. Thirty-five percent of
international visitors go to national parks and monuments while
in the U.S. The administration's actions can seriously harm
tourism and the outdoor recreation economy.
If we want the outdoor recreation industry to thrive, we
must protect the land, water, and wildlife resources that are
the foundations of outdoor activities. The outdoor recreation
economy is dependent on funding for, protection of, and access
to public lands and waters.
So while I was pleased that this committee was able to pass
the Outdoor Rec Act last Congress, which elevated the issue of
outdoor recreation and gave it the bipartisan support it
deserves, I want to stress that there is more work to be done.
Damage to the environment leads to damage to outdoor
recreation, hurting the U.S. economy. Let's work to address the
changing climate and protect our shorelines, streams, and
Federal lands. Thank you.

Mr. Latta. Well, thank you. The gentleman yields back the
balance of his time, and that will conclude the Member opening
statements. The Chair would like to remind all Members that,
pursuant to committee rules, all Members' opening statements
will be made part of the record.
Again, I want to thank our witnesses for being with us
today and taking the time to testify before the subcommittee.
Today's hearing will consist of two panels. Our first witness
panel for today's hearing will include the Honorable Don Beyer,
who is the Representative from Virginia's 8th District. The
gentleman will not be answering questions today from the
subcommittee.
The second panel of witnesses will have the opportunity to
give opening statements followed by a round of questions from
the committee members. Once we conclude with the opening
statement on the first panel, we will take a brief recess for
the second panel to be seated. We appreciate you all being with
us today, and at this time the gentleman from Virginia's 8th
District is now recognized for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement. Good morning.

STATEMENT OF HON. DONALD S. BEYER, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA

Mr. Beyer. Good morning. Thank you, Subcommittee Chairman
Latta, Ranking Member Schakowsky, for holding this hearing and
for inviting me to be here to give testimony on this really
important outdoor recreation. No one ever said the great
indoors. John Muir said, ``Everybody needs beauty as well as
bread, places to play in and pray in, where nature may heal and
give strength to body and soul.'' So beyond their impact on our
hearts or minds, our outdoors are powerful economic drivers
that give rise to a vast outdoor economy. I have had a long
relationship with this outdoor economy.
I am glad, Mr. Chairman, you mentioned Outward Bound. I am
a 1971 January graduate of Outward Bound in the White Mountains
of New Hampshire. I lost 33 pounds in 26 days eating everything
I could find. I started section hiking the Appalachian Trail in
2002. I was always going to through hike it, but I decided the
happy marriage was more important than through hiking the AT.
But I am up to 1,481 miles right now, so as long as you guys
keep the calendars and the voting schedule OK, I will finish in
2020. My legs--and then I started the Pacific Crest Trail and
the Continental Divide Trail.
So people like me--the hikers, bikers, climbers, skiers,
snowboarders, RV owners, paddle boarders--we spend billions
each year getting outside. To reiterate, Chairman, your
numbers: $887 billion in spending, $124 billion in tax revenue,
and almost 8 million jobs. And our policies towards public
lands should reflect this tremendous economic success.
So with Representatives Dave Reichert, Peter Welch, Cathy
McMorris Rodgers, and I on the House side, and Senators Gardner
and Shaheen on the Senate, we recognized this impact when we
introduced the Outdoor Rec Act. Incorporating data on such a
sizeable share of the economy will ensure that we adopt
policies which will help foster growth and prosperity. You
know, without this data we are left to wonder about say the
Appalachian Trail's contributions to the GDP.
So back to the napkin math. A good pack goes for at least
$200, a good sleeping bag another $200, an inexpensive one-
person tent $75, durable hiking shoes around $120--although
mine was much higher--a good headlamp $27, pack liner 45, Swiss
Army knife $16, trekking pole $70. We will let Jeremy talk
about how much a good snowboard costs. None of this will even
account for clothing, food, basic first aid, cooking supplies,
a sleeping pad, or all the technical weather gear.
Over 2,200 miles, a through hiker on the Appalachian Trail
will eat at countless small-town diners, delis, coffee shops,
Pizza Huts, even rent the occasional room for a night off the
trail. And you multiply that times 2,700 successful through
hikers a year and you are talking about literally billions of
dollars. And though the trail itself is very long, this is just
to look at one small portion of our outdoor economy.
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, I believe in the
importance of data and measurements. As a businessman you can't
manage what you don't measure, and Werner Heisenberg pointed
out that anything that we measure we change. So these numbers
if we quantify them, it enables us to enact responsible public
policy to grow our economy, create jobs, and foster
appreciation and enjoyment of our great outdoors. So this is
what the Outdoor Rec Act accomplishes by getting the Bureau of
Economic Analysis at the Department of Commerce to quantify the
value of the outdoor recreation economy.
So from the green vistas of the Shenandoah National Park,
the boulder fields up on Mount Washington and the ankle-
breaking routes on the Hundred-Mile Wilderness in Maine, which
I traversed last summer, this Nation has been blessed with
majestic national bounty. But our public lands are much more
than beautiful parks. They are also a source of health both
physical and financial and they are an economic engine that
must continue to grow.
So again, thanks for allowing me to testify on the
importance of outdoor recreation. I have raised four kids and
now two grandkids on the simple ethic that no child should be
left inside. And I know you have a wonderful panel of witnesses
who can reinforce why it is so important for us to pay
attention to this enormous economic sector. Mr. Chairman and
Ranking Member, thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Beyer follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Well, I want to thank the gentleman for his
testimony today. And as you rattled off all the different
things and the costs, I will need you to probably talk to my
wife to explain what our credit card bill looks like sometimes
when I am out buying and why I need it. But I want to thank you
again for your testimony and for your love of the outdoors. So
thanks for being with us today.
At this time, that will conclude our first panel, and at
this time I would like to ask for our second panel to come up
to be seated and we will just take a quick recess as they get
their seats.
[Recess.]
Mr. Latta. Well, thanks very much and welcome back. Thank
you again for your patience and for all of the time for you
being with us today. We now move into our second panel for
today's hearing. Each witness will be given 5 minutes for an
opening statement followed by a round of questions from our
Members.
For our second panel we have the following witnesses: Ms.
Amy Roberts, executive director of the Outdoor Industry
Association; Ms. Ginger Mihalik, executive director of the
Baltimore Chesapeake Bay Outward Bound School at Outward Bound;
Mr. Jeffrey Tooze, the vice president of Global Customs & Trade
at Columbia Sportswear; Mr. Marc--I hope I pronounce your last
name correctly, is it ``Bur-hay-kay''?--Berejka, director of
Government and Community Affairs at REI; Mr. Jeremy Jones,
founder and president at Protect Our Winters; and Mr. James
Landers, vice president of Government Affairs at the Recreation
Vehicle Industry Association. Again we appreciate you all being
here today.
And we will begin our panel with Ms. Roberts and you are
now recognized for 5 minutes for your opening statements. And
you will see a yellow light comes on, that is the 30-second
light, and the red is at the 5-minute mark. But thanks again
for being with us today.

STATEMENTS OF AMY ROBERTS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, OUTDOOR INDUSTRY
ASSOCIATION; GINGER MIHALIK, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, BALTIMORE
CHESAPEAKE BAY OUTWARD BOUND SCHOOL, OUTWARD BOUND; JEFFREY
TOOZE, VICE PRESIDENT, GLOBAL CUSTOMS & TRADE, COLUMBIA
SPORTSWEAR COMPANY; MARC BEREJKA, DIRECTOR OF GOVERNMENT &
COMMUNITY AFFAIRS, RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT, INC.; JEREMY JONES,
FOUNDER AND PRESIDENT, PROTECT OUR WINTERS; AND JAMES LANDERS,
VICE PRESIDENT OF GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS, RECREATION VEHICLE
INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION

STATEMENT OF AMY ROBERTS

Ms. Roberts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, for calling this hearing today and highlighting the
important role of the outdoor recreation industry and America's
great outdoors on the United States economy. Outdoor Industry
Association is the national trade association for suppliers,
manufacturers, and retailers and we have more than 1,200
members nationwide.
Many Members of Congress are familiar with our 2012 Outdoor
Recreation Economy Report and those numbers have become the
gold standard for measuring outdoor recreation's impact on the
U.S. economy. Our new economic report released just 2 days ago
shows a very strong and growing sector that is critical to
America's economic well- being and the livelihood of Americans.
Our 2017 report shows that outdoor recreation contributes $887
billion in consumer spending annually. This means that
Americans spend more on outdoor recreation than on
pharmaceuticals and gas and fuels combined.
7.6 million American jobs depend on outdoor recreation.
More American workers are employed by outdoor recreation than
by computer technology, construction, finance, or insurance. As
a multidimensional economic sector, outdoor recreation fuels
employment in other sectors such as manufacturing, finance,
retail, transportation, food service, tourism and travel.
Demand for advanced outdoor technical apparel, footwear,
and equipment drives innovation and entrepreneurism. It creates
jobs for highly skilled workers in diverse fields. The outdoor
industry also contributes a combined 125 billion every year in
taxes, 60 billion in local and State and 65 billion in Federal
tax dollars. Unfortunately, outdoor recreation assets reap very
little of that through reinvestment back into our shared public
lands and waters, the infrastructure needed for the outdoor
recreation economy.
Businesses in our industry are no different from businesses
in other sectors. They rely on certainty that they can have
access to adequate infrastructure to plan their investments and
grow jobs. The outdoor activities that the outdoor industry
represents are as diverse as the companies who make up our
industry. From hiking, hunting, fishing, skiing, biking,
surfing, paddling, ATV and off-roading to snowmobiling,
camping, boating, climbing, and horseback riding, there is an
outdoor activity for everyone.
The growth in our sector makes sense and our annual Outdoor
Foundation Participation Report shows that outdoor recreation
participation grew, adding 1.6 million participants from 2015
to 2016. The report also shows that half of all Americans
participated in at least one outdoor recreational activity in
2016. So that equates to 144 million participants who went on a
total of 11 billion outdoor outings and that is a lot of hiking
boots and water bottles.
Our public lands and waters belong to every American and
they are the foundation of our outdoor recreation economy.
Preserving access is imperative to enhancing the industry's
economic and social impact and ensuring that every American's
ability to get outside whether close to home or on a weekend
adventure.
In order to ensure the growth and success of the outdoor
recreation economy, policymakers must protect America's public
lands and waters. These assets are foundational to our sector.
We ask you to invest in local and Federal recreation
infrastructure and programs to ensure all Americans have access
to public lands and waters, and to promote outdoor recreation
as part of a public health policy and national economic
discussions.
Your committee has been integral in the Outdoor Recreation
Jobs and Economic Impact Act, which passed last year with
bipartisan support by unanimous vote, and I think that is
something to note that this is a very bipartisan industry. We
hope that this official Government data will shed light on
business and land management policies that can help us continue
our trend of growth and success.
I want to thank the committee on behalf of the outdoor
industry, as the bipartisan REC Act is the first step to
elevating awareness about the impact of the outdoor recreation
economy. It underscores the imperative for leaders and
lawmakers to protect and invest in policies that grow their
infrastructure on which outdoor recreation economy is built.
Thank you for your time and attention to our growing industry.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Roberts follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Thank you very much, and Ms. Mihalik, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GINGER MIHALIK

Ms. Mihalik. Thank you, Chairman Latta and Ranking Member
Schakowsky, for holding this hearing today, and good morning to
all of the members of the committee. It is an honor to be
before you today. My name is Ginger Mihalik and I am proud to
represent Outward Bound USA at this hearing.
For over 75 years, Outward Bound has educated thousands of
students in outdoor classrooms across the United States. I am
proud to serve as the executive director of the Baltimore
Chesapeake Bay Outward Bound School which is but one of 11
schools. We use the wilderness to provide unparalleled
opportunities for discovery, personal growth, self-reliance,
teamwork, and compassion. This, paired with our proven
curriculum, produces remarkable documented results, strength of
character, ability to lead, and a desire to serve.
Outward Bound schools in Colorado, California, Maine,
Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Nebraska, New York, North
Carolina, Oregon, and Pennsylvania use the power of these
amazing places to serve over 40,000 students a year. The
programs in each of these schools all teach students to be
compassionate, resilient leaders that are equipped with the
skills needed to improve themselves and our world.
Outward Bound schools design programs to respond to the
needs of their specific community and the needs of the times.
For example, locally, my school responded to violence between
police and youth. Nationally, Outward Bound has designed a
program specifically to address the needs of veterans returning
home.
For many veterans, returning home can be as stressful as
shipping out. Although they are safely removed from the dangers
of war, they are also removed from the routine, the sense of
purpose, and the camaraderie that their years of service
provided. Experience in conflict zones can cause veterans to
lose touch with their skills, to lose confidence in themselves,
and to disengage from the families and communities that welcome
them home.
Our weeklong Outward Bound Veterans expeditions provide a
unique setting with physical and mental challenges which create
a sense of purpose and accomplishment while building trust in
other members of the expedition. In 2016, we were able to take
553 veterans on 47 wilderness expeditions which included
everything from rafting in Oregon to backpacking and rock
climbing on the Appalachian Trail to dog sledding in Minnesota.
Over the course of each trip, veterans work in a group to
overcome shared obstacles and achieve shared goals in a non-
combat setting which helps to build the skills and connections
needed to transition back to life at home. Results of a recent
study at the University of Texas showed that our veterans
program helps to increase overall mental health, interpersonal
relations, resilience, sense of purpose, and greater interest
in personal growth. Many returning veterans are reticent to
seek help through traditional mental health avenues and Outward
Bound Veterans has proven to be an effective therapeutic
alternative.
We at Outward Bound share a belief with this subcommittee.
Outdoor recreation provides a space for self-discovery. I have
witnessed truly remarkable transformations happen among our
students in the outdoors. I have watched an inner city youth
view the horizon for the first time. I have watched grown men
cry at the beauty of a wilderness sunrise. And I have witnessed
a veteran who had lost his legs in war find himself and his
ability to lead again at the stern of a canoe on the Potomac
River.
As a double amputee he lost his confidence in what he was
able to do and believed that he could never complete an
expedition. Once in his canoe he soared. He was the strongest
paddler, he quickly found his rhythm in the boat, he had the
support of his crew on land, and he ultimately found the
confidence he had lost. These experiences are powerful and are
impossible to recreate in any other place than the outdoors.
Thank you again, Chairman Latta and Ranking Member
Schakowsky, for the invitation to be here today. I look forward
to answering any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Mihalik follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. And again thanks for being
with us today. And Mr. Tooze, you are recognized for 5 minutes
for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JEFFREY TOOZE

Mr. Tooze. Chairman Latta, Ranking Member Schakowsky, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to
testify on matters of importance to the 142 million Americans
who recreate outdoors each year and the compelling numbers that
you have already shared with us and Amy shared as well from the
updated Outdoor Recreation Economy Report released just a
couple days ago.
I am proud to be here today on behalf of Columbia
Sportswear Company, based in the beautiful Pacific Northwest
and in the great State of Oregon. I currently serve as vice
president of Global Customs and Trade and have been with the
company for over 16 years.
Columbia Sportswear Company is a true American business
success story that parallels the evolution of outdoor
recreation as a vital and integral part of American culture and
America's economy. What began in 1938 as a small company
purchased by a family that had just immigrated from Nazi
Germany, it has grown to become a global leader in the outdoor
recreation industry with $2.4 billion in annual sales and
supporting over 4,200 jobs across 38 States and an additional
2,300 jobs across the globe. In 2016, the company ranked number
882 on the Fortune 1000, and next year the company will
celebrate its 20th anniversary as a publicly traded company.
While most people are very familiar with our Columbia
Sportswear flagship brand, many are less aware that the
company's brand portfolio also includes Mountain Hardwear,
SOREL, and prAna. Each of our brands targets specific consumer
segments within the outdoor recreation industry. Columbia
Sportswear Company's rich heritage features storylines of
immigration, entrepreneurship, innovation, and perseverance.
Today, the company's four brands and respective 4,200 hard-
working American employees pursue a single, unified mission: We
connect active people with their passions. We do that by
designing innovative performance apparel, footwear, and
accessories that enable people to enjoy the endless variety of
healthy outdoor recreational activities available across this
great Nation and in any climate, any weather, and any day of
the year.
We also support the efforts of more than 400 nonprofits
around the country that are working to improve access to
outdoor spaces and preserve the natural beauty of our parks,
trails, and wetlands, so that they will be there for the next
generations to enjoy. We pride ourselves on designing products
that deliver real performance benefits and at accessible prices
that put them within reach of consumers at all income levels.
However, unlike many of the other 90 countries where our
products are sold, the United States assesses among the highest
import tariffs on our categories of products making them more
expensive for U.S. consumers than they would otherwise need to
be, and also stifling innovation of new, highly technical and
high performance products and hampering our ability to keep our
prices within the reach of the broadest consumer base possible.
In fact, U.S. duty rates on our products typically range from
7.1 percent to as high as 67\1/2\ percent with an overall
industry average of approximately 15 percent.
These duties in the U.S. date back to the 1930s and are no
longer relevant as means to protect manufacturing jobs that
migrated to other countries more than 30 years ago. Yet to this
day, the apparel and footwear industry and especially the
outdoor industry pays a disproportionate share of the U.S.
duties. For example, the amount of duties paid by Columbia
Sportswear Company in 2016 ranked it 49th out of 375,000 U.S.
importers. We would much rather rank 49 on the Fortune 1000.
We and all of the thousands of companies in the outdoor
recreation industry are trying to expand the market of our
products and promote increased outdoor recreation. But we are
hindered by these high tariffs and in our ability to invest in
more family-wage U.S. jobs such as product innovation, design,
development, supply chain operations, digital commerce,
marketing, finance, legal, human resources, and several other
critical functions of our companies.
We encourage Congress to reevaluate and modernize the
outdated and antiquated duty structure in order to bring
current with today's global market realities and to help ease
the unnecessary cost burden that is being borne by the outdoor
recreation industry and American consumers. We are proud to be
a leader in the outdoor recreation industry, an industry that
embraces values that are foundational to America's heritage,
its culture, and to ensuring a thriving future for all
Americans.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tooze follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much for your testimony.
And Mr. Berejka, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MARC BEREJKA

Mr. Berejka. Thank you. Chairman Latta, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, members of the subcommittee, again thanks for the
chance to testify on behalf of REI Co-op. I am proud to appear
alongside my recreation industry colleagues and share the great
news about our sector's economic impact.
REI was founded almost 80 years ago as a co-op in Seattle
when 23 climbers came together to get good deals on climbing
axes from Europe and other great gear. Today, REI has 145
stores in 36 States, plus over 16 million co-op members across
the country. We buy gear and apparel from over 1,000 firms
distributed across the United States and we get thousands more
Americans into the outdoors with classes, outings, adventure
travel trips.
If there are two thoughts I want to leave with you today
they are these: First, the more we understand about the outdoor
sector, the more we can create jobs and opportunity. Second,
the outdoors significantly enhances all Americans' quality of
live and contributes to a stronger America overall.
As a jumping off point on behalf of the co-op's members,
let me profoundly thank the committee for passing the Outdoor
Rec Act last year. It will ensure that the United States
measures our sector's contributions with more authority and
more detail. This law, this new law, is foundational to our
path forward.
My industry colleagues have spoken to the latest economic
assessment. I won't repeat those details. But let me say that
in my experience, whenever we share this data, policymakers are
hungry to learn how we can use the data for economic
development. The outdoor sector has so many positive economic
attributes. We are made up of thousands of main street and
entrepreneurial businesses. We have prominent brands like REI,
but the reality is our jobs are spread across businesses large
and small. In rural towns it is often the case that recreation
is the economic lifeblood.
We are also an innovative sector, and in this country we
consider ourselves the hotbed of innovation and outdoor
products across the globe. Back in Seattle, REI employs
designers, specialists in materials science, specialists in
advanced manufacturing. We also buy dozens of hot innovative
products from those who are working on outdoor electronics,
high-tech apparel, advanced camping gear.
We also run a sustainable business. In REI's own operations
we work to minimize our environmental impact. Since the year
2008, we have grown revenue by 78 percent; over that entire
period our energy consumption has gone up by less than 5
percent. We are also now 100 percent powered by renewable
energy. We invest in nonprofits, volunteerism, consumer
education to protect the public lands because healthy public
lands are the infrastructure that our sector relies on.
Policymakers want to learn how to create these innovative,
main street, entrepreneurial businesses. For instance, I know
of economic development activities bubbling away in Arkansas,
Oregon, Washington, and Utah; with data generated by the Rec
Act we should be able to develop our economy, our rec economy,
even faster, so again thank you for your work on the
legislation.
We also need to recognize the enormous spillover benefits
of outdoor recreation. In some ways, you can think of our
sector as adjacent to health care, but at the front end. An
increasing body of science shows that time outdoors, whether it
is exercising or just rejuvenating, it is good for you. It is
low-cost preventive medicine. In some exciting research that
REI has backed at Cal Berkeley, people are finding that time
outdoors can mitigate PTSD symptoms in returning vets.
Our sector also fosters positive community development. We
know that towns with great outdoor opportunities attract
businesses, not just outdoor businesses but businesses of all
types. We know that access to safe green spaces in cities makes
neighborhoods more cohesive, strengthens the social fabric. We
know that when more people walk and bike to jobs or to transit
our transportation networks are more sustainable.
Lastly, the outdoors, we should be proud, is also part of
healthy childhood development. There is an increasing body of
research that shows that kids open their minds in unique ways
when they have outdoor opportunities. All of these attributes
in the long run contribute to a healthier economy, healthier
people, healthier communities, and a stronger United States of
America.
We have limited time here today, but REI looks forward to
working with the committee. We are fond of saying that united,
outside we are united. We look forward to working on these
issues in that united spirit.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Berejka follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Thank you very much for your testimony today.
And at this time the Chair recognizes Mr. Jones for 5 minutes
for your opening statement. Thank you for being here.

STATEMENT OF JEREMY JONES

Mr. Jones. Good morning, Chairman Latta, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, and members of the Subcommittee on Digital Commerce
and Consumer Protection. My name is Jeremy Jones. I am a
professional snowboarder and founder of Protect Our Winters, a
nonprofit based in Colorado with over 150,000 members
nationwide, and the founder of Jones Snowboards, a snowboard
company with $8 million in annual sales.
Ten years ago, I founded Protect Our Winters because I have
spent my life in the mountains and I have witnessed the impacts
of climate change on our winters firsthand. Our mission is to
engage and mobilize the snow sports industry to lead the fight
against climate change.
The snow sports community deeply understands the threat
that climate change poses on its future. Snowpack is now
confined to the highest elevations and what should be falling
as snow is in fact falling as rain. Our seasons are noticeably
shorter. We understand that if we don't act to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions we will see the end of winter as we
know it. We are pleased that the Rec Act passed last year with
unanimous bipartisan support, thank you.
Today I will speak to the importance of environmental
protection to ensure a prosperous future for the outdoor
recreation economy. As the climate continues to warm our
winters, the snow sports industry is increasingly vulnerable.
According to the Outdoor Industry Association's 2017 Outdoor
Rec Economy Report, nationwide the snow sports industry
generates 72 billion annually and supports 695,000 jobs. That
means the snow sports industry is responsible for almost 70,000
more American jobs than our country's extractive industries.
Across the United States, average winter temperatures have
warmed almost two degrees Fahrenheit since 1895 and that rate
of warming has more than tripled since 1970. In the Sierra
where I live, the snowpack is projected to decrease up to 70
percent by 2050. Ski resorts have lost over $1 billion in
revenue and up to 27,000 jobs in low snowfall years the last
decade. In recent seasons, 50 percent of resorts are both
opening late and closing early. By 2010, 88 percent of resorts
report utilizing snowmaking to supplement natural snow cover to
stay in business which adds an additional 500,000 expense to
their annual operations.
Unfortunately, climate change will decimate far more than
the snow sports industry. Our snowpack will not be sufficient
to keep stream temperatures low and warmer rivers will diminish
fish habitat, making fishing difficult. In Montana, it is now
prohibited to fly fish after 2:00 p.m. in the summer as the
waters are too warm. This rule has devastated the fishing and
guiding industry. Our rivers will have less water, reducing
stream flow and making waters harder to navigate for kayaks and
canoes.
These changes are already impacting rural economies
nationwide and these are communities in places that you
represent. From the Oregon Cascades to the headwaters of the
Cheat River, from the Sangre de Cristo Range to the shores of
Lake Michigan, they rely on outdoor tourism for economic
security.
I travel the world for my career. The climate change knows
no borders; it is the same story everywhere. Early on, my
career took me to Chamonix to ride the Vallee Blanche, a
popular glacier run in France. In 1920, they built the train to
take you back to town from the bottom of the glacier. As the
glacier receded, they put in a chair lift to take you from the
end of the glacier to the train.
When I first visited in 1990, it was a 20-minute hike from
the end of the glacier to the chair lift. Today, it takes an
hour to go from the end of the glacier to the chair lift to the
train which takes you back to town. We know glaciers are
receding, but this is occurring at an alarming rate. In the
winter of 2010, I hiked up the grassy slopes of an old ski area
in British Columbia with a friend. When I asked him why the
resort wasn't open, he said, it just doesn't snow here anymore.
He is 30 years old. He has seen winter diminish in his
lifetime.
Now I call Truckee, California home. As the owner of a
snowboard company, I run many small businesses that depend on a
stable climate and snowy winters. With every inconsistent
winter our community's economy suffers. Thanksgiving
traditionally marked the start of winter. Tourists are now
hesitant to make Christmas plans. This shortens our tourism
season and the community from local outfitters to restaurants
on Main Street to the resort employees pays the price. Snow is
our currency.
Snowboarding has led me to a life outdoors. Just like
farmers and fishermen I have observed these changes daily for
the past 30 years. I am now a father. I constantly think about
a world my son and daughter will grow up in. Climate change is
changing places we play right now. In the future, what will
these places look like for my kids? Will they experience a
lifetime of snowy winters? I am deeply concerned about the
future of outdoor recreation.
In this hearing's announcement, Chairman, you said you look
forward to hearing how Congress can support the outdoor
recreation economy's growth and viability. I respectfully
request that you act on climate and mitigate greenhouse gas
emissions to ensure the future and prosperity of outdoor
recreation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jones follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Mr. Jones, thank you very much for your
testimony. And Mr. Landers, you are now recognized for 5
minutes for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JAMES LANDERS

Mr. Landers. Thank you. Batting cleanup today, yes, J.
Landers. I am with the Recreation Vehicle Industry Association.
That is the national trade association representing all
recreation vehicles, from the big motor homes all the way down
through the whole trailer system including the little pop-ups
and the sliding campers that go in the back of a pickup truck.
So about a year and a half ago we did our first economic
impact study and what we found we were really surprised. We,
the RV industry, generates about $50 billion for the U.S.
economy. In that process, we also discovered that we support
about 290,000 jobs, and honestly, we are creating jobs faster
than we can fill them. All right, think about that. Let me take
you back a few years before that.
So during the Great Recession our industry got crushed. It
is a disposable income product, so the unemployment rate in
Elkhart, northern Indiana, was about 20 percent. I am happy to
report that right now we are at about 3.1 percent which is
virtual full employment. So as an example one of my biggest
manufacturers, Thor Industries, they are expanding their
capacity at four of their plants; more than that, now they are
adding six new factories. Each factory is probably a hundred to
200 full-time, well-paying jobs. That is in northern Indiana,
Idaho, Oregon, so various States around the country. And I can
tell you they are not alone. There are plenty of other RV
manufacturers and suppliers that are expanding.
So what is really fueling this growth? Several things.
Retail and wholesale credit still readily available; interest
rates are still very reasonable; consumer sentiment is solid;
gas prices steady--that is nice. U.S. citizens have chosen now
to stay home. They are not going abroad as much as they used to
be, so staying home and visiting the iconic lands of our
country, that is where we love to see that.
And the last part is the demand is from Baby Boomers. We
know there are about 10,000 Baby Boomers retiring every day.
And the other side of that is the Millennials. Who knew, right?
The Millennials are looking at the convenience, the comfort,
all of the amenities in these new RVs, whether it be a motor
home or a trailer, and they are all about mobility and that is
what we offer.
But we really do have some significant challenges. Our
research shows that 89 percent of people buy an RV to go
camping at some point. So of the 431,000 units that we put into
the stream of commerce last year, that means about 383,000 want
to go camping at some point and that is part of the problem. I
can tell you now that the RV associated overnight stays in the
national park system is declining.
In the early and mid- 80s, there were about 4.5 million RV
related stays at the national campgrounds. We are down to about
two million now, so it has been cut more than half. Why? The
biggest reason, we have all heard about this in the news,
infrastructure, right. The Federal land agencies haven't
invested in their assets. Campgrounds are in terrible shape,
many of them. Marinas need work, the supply stores, the
bathhouses, the bathing facilities, they all need attention.
What we are really looking at is an Eisenhower-era campground
system trying to provide needs for the 21st century recreation
vehicle, and it is failing. It is just not working.
And as crazy as this sounds, the other big want that we
have come to recognize is both Baby Boomers and Millennials
want WiFi and broadband. I mean, even in the national parks,
you spend the day out hiking and camping and walking,
snowmobiling, you come back you want to connect, and especially
the young Millennials. The other part of this is that the State
campground system and the private campground system have
invested in their facilities and so people are choosing to go
to the State parks instead of the national parks and they are
going to the private campgrounds because they can get the
amenities.
So what are we going to do about this? Well, the recreation
vehicle industry along with several other, about 13 to 18 other
outdoor recreation trade associations formed a new trade group,
a new coalition called the Outdoor Recreation Industry
Roundtable, and this is the business side. Anything to do with
outdoor recreation, it is in this coalition. And what do we
want to do? Our charter is really to become a resource and a
partner with the Federal agencies that deal with outdoor
recreation.
We want to work with the agencies and Congress on three
basic things: ensure reasonable access to all public lands; we
want to establish a system of public-private partnerships, and
specifically for us of course we are interested in modernizing
and expanding the campgrounds; and we also want to encourage
the departments to encourage a culture of yes, first, instead
of well, maybe that is not really in my job description.
So to wrap up, the RV business is looking good. It is
strong. All the indications look like 2017 is going to be even
a better year, and we look forward to working with our fellow
Outdoor Recreation Industry Roundtable partners to work with
Federal agencies making sure that all outdoor recreation
experiences are met and in fact exceeded. Thank you for your
time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Landers follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Thank you very much for your testimony. I thank
all of our witnesses for testifying before the subcommittee
today, and I will recognize myself to begin the questions. And
if I may, Ms. Roberts, I would like to start with a question to
you.
First of all, interested in your testimony and all of the
statistics that you quoted, especially how things have, really,
the exponential number of changes like from 2012 for the
industry of $646 billion and then that changing to, in just 5
years' time, to $887 billion, and also the $125 billion in
taxes, and just on what we are looking at the industry has
generated out there.
So I guess when you look at all this information, how does
this information that we gather from the Outdoor Rec Act, how
is that going to affect the industry as it moves forward and
what do you think the role should be that we as policymakers
should have then?
Ms. Roberts. Thank you for the question, Chairman Latta.
The growth in the number between the 2012 report and the 2017
report really shows the growth in our industry over time. The
other thing that occurred is that this report has really become
the gold standard for how outdoor recreation is viewed and so
we are always approached to add new activity categories, which
we did in the report.
So, and then the other interesting bit of information is
just that the sample size for this report was actually quite a
lot bigger, 70 percent larger than in our 2012 report. And so
looking ahead that is actually going to allow us to release
data in the next 6 months that shows the economic impact, jobs
created, taxes paid at the congressional district level, which
I think will be very informative as local communities and as
this body and Members of Congress think about how do you
develop an outdoor recreation economy in your local community.
And for us that really means investing in outdoor
recreation infrastructure, investing in public lands, ensuring
that the facilities are there when Americans get outside to
recreate that they have places to go. And I think that is both
places to go near their homes so that outdoor recreation is a
part of everyone's lives. Our goal is really to have an outdoor
recreation opportunity within 10 minutes of everyone's homes as
well as that people can aspire for the bigger adventures on the
weekends.
So we really are looking for both local policymakers, State
policymakers, and then the Federal Government to see our
economy as a growth sector as uniquely American. These jobs are
not easily outsourced. We are going to take advantage of our
amazing natural resources that are here in the U.S. and as a
way to drive opportunity for rural communities but also urban
areas.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Ms. Mihalik, if I could ask a couple of questions for you.
Could you explain the program model that you use for Outward
Bound to help our veterans and service members as they come
back to their respective communities? And, really, I want to
thank you for all that you are doing for our veterans out
there. Thank you.
Ms. Mihalik. Oh, you are welcome. Thank you for the
question. So Outward Bound has a curriculum that has been
developed since 1941 when Outward Bound was founded in Wales,
came to the United States in Colorado in '67, and we have used
the same model that entire time. It has evolved a little bit
over time, but essentially you are taking a group of people,
and it could be veterans, it could be youth, it could be any
adult, out into a wilderness setting and there is an
intentional progression that the crew goes through in order to
learn new skills.
With veterans it can be a little more unique. Our
instructors receive a lot of additional training on how to deal
with the issues that they are working through, but you take
them through three phases of a course. There is training, main,
final, where you are trying to teach them the skills that they
are going to need out in real life but in a wilderness setting.
Things like communication, how do you support each other; how
do you ask for what you need? The veterans find as they are on
these courses together they get to practice those skills in a
setting that is familiar to them. It is much like being in a
war setting. They are in the trenches with their crew, they get
to work through those skills, and then they learn how to
transfer them back to their day to day life.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Ms. Mihalik. Sure.
Mr. Latta. And if I could turn to you, Mr. Berejka. In your
testimony you mentioned that the outdoor recreation is an
innovative sector. Can you highlight some of the innovations
that come from this space and speak to the advancements in
technologies that are being used to enhance outdoor recreation
gear and apparel?
Mr. Berejka. Sure. In fact, my buddy Jeff, here, probably
has an example on the chair. They have invented a water
repellent jacket that uses recycled materials and that imposes
limited harm on the environment. One of the things we are very
conscientious of as we produce these products is not just how
we assemble them but what their end of life is. And so REI
awarded Columbia our first ever Root Award for inventing the
most sustainable, water repellent jacket we have ever seen.
That is just one example.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much. And my time has
expired and at this time I will recognize the gentlelady from
Illinois, the ranking member of the subcommittee, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to take
this opportunity, today is Take Your Daughters to Work Day, and
I just wanted to introduce my adopted daughter for the day,
Elena Tate. Stand up for 1 second, OK, Girls Inc., behind me,
and also acknowledge Lizzy Carroll, who is here. Lizzy. Jeff
Carroll, our chief of staff for the Democrats, his daughter.
Thank you, Lizzy. Thank you, kids.
I also wanted to apologize, although he is not here, to Mr.
Bucshon, who I called Mr. Mullin earlier, my colleague in
Indiana, next to where I have a home and next to my district.
So let me talk a little bit about the environment--and I
appreciate the emphasis on environment that we heard from
everyone--from the standpoint very much of economics in our
country which I think sometimes we don't think about. I was
really interested in the statistics. Ms. Roberts and Mr. Jones
talked a bit about that, all of you, really, about the
contribution to our economy that is really dependent on our
environment, and then concerns about the changing environment.
And so I want to turn to our witnesses, and I wanted to
start--Mr.--now I am going to try it. I have ``Bur-ah-ka.''
Mr. Berejka. Bur-ay-ka.
Ms. Schakowsky. Bur-ay-ka, OK.
Mr. Berejka. It is a good Chicago Polish name.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK. I should know. Schakowsky, I should
know that, but----
Mr. Berejka. Polish Lithuanian.
Ms. Schakowsky. Yes. So how concerned is your company,
then, about the effect of climate change on the future
stability and economic growth of the industry and your business
in particular?
Mr. Berejka. I think REI Co-op identified climate change as
a business risk probably 10 to 15 years ago. And so like the
rest of the panelists, we are concerned that with the changing
climate comes hotter, longer summers as well as shorter
winters, and that can affect the economic vitality of the
industry, for sure.
Ms. Schakowsky. Mr. Tooze, I wondered if you wanted to talk
about that at all. I know you were talking about tariffs, and I
want to talk about the climate.
Mr. Tooze. Sure. Well, thank you. I appreciate that,
Ranking Member. I think one way--ours is pretty easy, you know,
we make products to adapt to all these changes. We produce in
over 90 countries around the world and a multitude of climates,
and we rely on the associations and whatnot to help address the
things in a more macro level and then we make sure we protect
our consumers.
We kind of have this--we keep our consumers warm, dry,
cool, and protected, and then I think, you know, but we also
have to align our values with our consumers. Marc was just
talking about this jacket here which we have won lots of awards
on, and it is actually waterproof-breathable, not just water
resistant.
Ms. Schakowsky. Does it come in any other colors? Just
asking, never mind.
Mr. Tooze. It is actually made from 21 water bottles. It
saved 13, one jacket saves 13 gallons of water because there is
no dye using the process. It is PFC-free and it is still
waterproof- breathable, very protective, and I think it is just
a good--and it is recyclable. So it is a good showcase of what
we try to do as a brand to adapt to that.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. Many of the business leaders in
our outdoor recreation industry recognize the threat of climate
change, and since 2013 more than 1,000 companies have signed
the climate declaration as a call to action. And Mr. Chairman,
I would like to request unanimous consent to introduce a copy
of this declaration for the record, including a list of the
signatories from the outdoor industry.
Let me just say one sentence here that I thought I marked.
There must be a coordinated effort to combat climate change
with America taking the lead here at home. Leading is what we
have always done and by working together, regardless of
politics, we will do it again. And I know the Outdoor Industry
Association is listed here and I am hopeful that--are all of
you on this? I don't know. Anybody, oK.
I am just about out of time, but I did want to say to Mr.
Jones, so are you concerned by efforts to slash funding for the
Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Interior,
and other Federal agencies with important missions regarding
outdoor recreation?
Mr. Jones. It is incredibly disheartening. I feel like, you
know, the EPA, for example, is a great example of an agency
formed by a Republican with bipartisan support and to see this
become a political issue, I think, has been a huge problem. And
we are really at this 11th hour. We have the solutions and we
just need to embrace them and we need bipartisan support to do
that. And at a time when the EPA couldn't be more important, to
see 15,000 jobs potentially get slashed is really scary.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. And, without objection, the
gentlelady's letter will be accepted for the record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Latta. At this time the Chair recognizes the gentleman,
the vice chairman from Mississippi, for 5 minutes for
questions. Thank you.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to each of you
for being here. And this is such an important issue in every
State, it is very important in my home State of Mississippi. We
have some great homegrown success stories, companies such as
Drake, and others like Longleaf and Mossy Oak that have really
done a great job in this area for consumers. And Ms. Mihalik, I
want to also thank you for the work with veterans. That is very
important.
And for me, personally, as a parent of a child with special
needs who is 27 and has intellectual disabilities, has Fragile
X syndrome, this is an important area too for us. And so we
look at ways and encourage you as we look at things how we make
sure that they are included in your calculations on doing these
things.
So at this time, Ms. Roberts, can I ask you a couple of
questions if I may, what role do you believe that we play as
policymakers to ensure continued growth and success of outdoor
recreation?
Ms. Roberts. Thank you for the question, Mr. Vice Chairman.
You know, I do really think it is, you know, a few things. One
is ensuring that we keep our public lands public and so that
they are accessible by all Americans and Americans have the
opportunity to go out and enjoy our natural resources. I think
it is funding, providing adequate funding for the land
management agencies, so we do support full funding of the Land
and Water Conservation Fund. And then adequate funding so that
our lands are properly managed and that when Americans go out
and they enjoy, whether it is to a national park, the BLM
lands, Forest Service lands, they have an opportunity to have a
great experience.
To Jeff's comments specific to really the business side, it
really is looking at some of the outdated tariff codes and
ensuring that our products are properly classified and that we
do look at reducing tariffs on products that are no longer made
in the U.S. so that consumers have the opportunity to access
our products, our products remain affordable, and I do think
that would help drive the innovation that Columbia Sportswear,
REI, other companies are doing in terms of product innovation
that is both on the sustainability side, some of the areas that
Jeff talked about, as well as innovation around just our own
operations. So those are some of the things that I feel
Congress can do.
Mr. Harper. Great, thank you very much. And Mr. Landers, I
agree that having enjoyed traveling with friends on occasion in
a motor coach or a motor home, it is great unless you are the
driver. If you are getting to ride on one it is a great
experience, great opportunity.
And the infrastructure issue is an important one that we
face in this country, so are you seeing development, and I know
your concern is the outdated infrastructure within our national
parks and certainly State parks. Are you seeing development on
the private side that is maybe compensating for that and
accounting for any of the reduced numbers that you stated?
Mr. Landers. Yes, absolutely. I mean, when you think about
a private campground that is an entrepreneur who has started
that business, they are going to invest in that business to get
bigger, get better. I would venture to say that almost every
private campground has WiFi right now and has broadband. So,
and if you shift to the States, we know that some States are
investing heavily in their park system because it is a cash
cow. It can be.
Mr. Harper. Sure.
Mr. Landers. So yes, for the States that are doing the
right thing, the privates are all over this, and unfortunately
at the national level we need help.
Mr. Harper. They need help.
Mr. Landers. They need help. They need attention.
Mr. Harper. Right.
Mr. Landers. And really one of the biggest solutions, the
potential solution is offering public-private partnerships
where, you know, we can do things together at a faster pace.
Mr. Harper. Thank you.
Mr. Berejka, if I could ask you. Did I come close on the
pronunciation?
Mr. Berejka. You did. We are honing in on it.
Mr. Harper. All right, that is close. We are in the right
ZIP code.
Mr. Berejka. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Harper. In your testimony you touch on the spillover
benefits of outdoor recreation. Can you explain the benefits
American consumers and participants will see as well as how
outdoor recreations help other economic sectors?
Mr. Berejka. Sure. To elaborate on a couple points in the
testimony, one, like the folks at Outward Bound we are very
excited about the health benefits of time outdoors and in
particular time outdoors as it might address mental health
needs. The research we are funding in California is looking at
PTSD sufferers, and PTSD sufferers in particular enjoy enormous
reductions in stress and anxiety from outdoor experiences.
I like to think of getting folks like PTSD sufferers access
to more hiking and biking and fewer pills and treadmills. If
the American taxpayers spend less on pills for PTSD sufferers
and more on getting them hiking, we will all be better off.
Mr. Harper. Thank you very much. I appreciate each of your
testimony. I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields back
and the Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, the
ranking member of the full committee, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a coastal
district, so the outdoor recreation industry is very important
to the communities I represent. So my questions are of Ms.
Roberts. Your organization just released a report that
highlights the role of beaches and beach-going activities for
State and local economies. Could you just briefly share some of
your findings on the economic role of the outdoor recreation
industry for beach communities?
Ms. Roberts. Thank you for the question. As I mentioned
earlier, one of the areas of growth in the report from the 2012
report to 2017 were really the water-based activities that we
added. So we added sailing, surfing, other activities like
that, and I think some of the reasons behind why we decided to
add those activities has been the growth in those activities,
the popularity of those activities.
The broadening, the crossover between some of the water-
based sports in the past, I think one thing you have really
seen is the growth of stand-up paddle. And so we are starting
to see more accessibility into those types of water-based
activities from the beginner to the more advanced surfing and
that was the decision making behind our process in terms of
adding those activities.
And I think the thing there as well is just as these
communities along the oceans start to transition economies and
think about, you know, how do you grow your economy in the 21st
century, we are starting to see more and more communities
invest in tourism and recreation infrastructure that support
Americans coming to those areas to recreate.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you. Now in my district we are
fortunate to have the Gateway National Recreation Area which
includes Sandy Hook, which is a seven- mile stretch of
coastline that hosts over two million visitors to its public
beaches every year. According to the National Park Service,
Gateway National Recreation Area generated more than $247
million in economic output in 2016.
But the problem is the sea level is already rising at Sandy
Hook and predictions call for as much as six feet of sea level
rise by the end of the century. Modeling by the Union of
Concerned Scientists shows that with that much rise most of
Sandy Hook will flood every day, and that is just one example.
So Ms. Roberts, what might the economic effects be for the
outdoor recreation industry from rising sea levels and loss of
coastline from climate change?
Ms. Roberts. Thank you. We are concerned about that and we
do feel that Congress should take action to enact policy
instruments that combat climate change. At the same time, we
are working at the State and local level to talk with local
policymakers, State legislatures about what can be done. So I
think there is both enacting policy instruments that reduce
carbon, and I think it is also incentivizing cleaner economies,
solar, these other fewer carbon emission producing energy
development. So those are things we are looking at.
I would say the other thing is that our industry is also
doing its part in terms of our own operations. So whether or
not that is producing more sustainable products, it is also
thinking about our own operations as we transport product, as
we build distribution centers. So the discussion within the
outdoor industry is both how do we reduce our own carbon
footprint, but also how do we advocate for climate policies
that transition our economy to a cleaner sector?
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you. Let me ask you one more
question. Climate change is not the only threat to our natural
environment and outdoor recreation. In the first 100 days of
the Trump presidency we have seen numerous attacks on the
environment that threaten public health, ecosystems, and the
outdoor recreation industry. In February, President Trump
signed the repeal the Stream Protection Rule and this rule had
protected streams near surface coal mining operations, like
mountaintop removal mines, from heavy metal contamination. What
are some popular outdoor recreation activities that make use of
rivers and streams, and can poor water quality impair those
activities or make them less popular?
Ms. Roberts. Thank you. Yes, the activities that we have
highlighted in our report would include any water-based
activities, so it could be paddling, canoeing, and then of
course fly fishing. So those are some of the activities that
use streams and are dependent on clean waters.
Mr. Pallone. All right. I mean, the rule that Trump
repealed would have protected or restored nearly 6,000 miles of
streams and 52,000 acres of forest over 2 decades, and those
areas, in my opinion, have immeasurable ecological value and
huge economic value as well. So thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back and the
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Indiana for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Landers, in your
testimony you said that in 2016 the RV industry and we talked
before, has the best year since the late 1970s. So why do you
think the industry had such a remarkable comeback and what do
you kind of attribute that success to?
Mr. Landers. Thank you, Dr. Bucshon. Well, I elaborated on
some of the points, the interest rates are low and--but, you
know, one of the other portions that I didn't mention was the
fact that we have a 20-year-old advertising program called Go
RVing. And while it is focused on some television and video, we
are now all over the social media platforms. And again, this is
driving not only the Baby Boomers, but we are opening up all
sorts of markets with the Hispanic market, with the African
American market and the Millennials and the Gen Xers. So
honestly, we cannot build recreation vehicles fast enough to
satisfy the demand.
Mr. Bucshon. So you think it is probably, really, a big
cultural shift on most in thought process in the 1970s, I mean
we had campers, and every weekend we went to the lake. But I
haven't done that in my own life, I had other things to do, but
maybe my kids are starting to do that, right? So maybe people
are recognizing again the benefits of being out there and how
enjoyable it is.
Mr. Landers. Right. When you look at the campers from back
in the '70s and '80s to the ones now, I mean now you are
pushing a button and virtually both entire walls can expand, so
some of the campsites that are in the campgrounds are not wide
enough any longer and some of the vehicles are longer so you
need the pull-through sites instead of trying to back something
in there.
I think that on the whole recreation vehicles now offer all
of the conveniences that you have in your house. Some of these
vehicles are extremely expensive, but most of them are really
very affordable. And what we are finding is that more people
are deciding to stay home. You know, if you went and you took a
family of four and you flew somewhere you are paying for the
airfare and then you are renting a car and then you are eating
at a restaurant every day and you are staying at hotels and you
have all that in a recreation vehicle.
Mr. Bucshon. And leading into that then, are there any
barriers, you know, governmental barriers or other things that
you see in the future as it relates to whether it is
technological advances or other things that you see that
Washington, DC, can potentially be helpful to you all in your
industry to further advance and expand your business?
Mr. Landers. You know, when you ask that because it was
just last week we ended up having a meeting with NHTSA, because
my own concern is the autonomous vehicle industry is moving
along very quickly and I personally feel like we are going to
be there before you know it and I didn't want the industry to
get caught behind.
So invariably we get caught up in automobile, truck, bus,
housing legislation regulations, but it is time for us to kind
of get out a little bit further in front of, you know,
everybody has this image of wouldn't it be fabulous to get in
an RV and then preprogram it and then go in the back and have a
sandwich and watch the game?
Mr. Bucshon. That would be nice.
Mr. Landers. That would be nice. We are not quite there
yet, but we are on the way, and we want to work with the
Congress, with NHTSA, with everybody to make sure we have----
Mr. Bucshon. Good. And that is appropriate. I am glad you
said that because this subcommittee has been having some
hearings on autonomous vehicles and so the inclusion of your
industry in that overall discussion may be something that comes
out of this hearing and I appreciate that. So Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. And the Chair now
recognizes the lady from the Great Lakes State for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have been on a
camper. We lived in--and my best friend now, whose husband owns
hockey teams and started--will only travel by recreational
vehicle, and I am going to tell her I made that point today.
But Michigan has got over 200,000 snowmobile trail permits
and expenditures on snowmobiling equipment which totals $235
million. We have more hunters than any other State, and Lord
knows I am married to one of them--we don't agree on that one
issue--and they contribute $304 million to local economies
while hunting. That is a good thing. We have 3.9 million acres
of State forest, 150 State forest campgrounds, thousands of
miles of trails, 7,500 hundred miles of river, and hundreds of
miles of Great Lakes shoreline. So we obviously agree with all
of you and care deeply. Certain policies, we are worried about
what is happening here in Washington though and how we make
sure that we are not putting the outdoor tourism economy in
jeopardy.
Ms. Roberts, in your testimony you state that protecting
America's public lands and waters are essential to ensuring the
growth and success of the outdoor recreation economy. Would you
agree that investing in conservation programs such as the Great
Lakes Restoration Initiative has a positive impact on jobs?
Ms. Roberts. Thank you for the question. Yes, we would
agree with that.
Mrs. Dingell. So the President's budget proposal looks to
eliminate $300 million in spending on the GLRI. Would zeroing
that out budget hurt us both economically and environmentally?
Ms. Roberts. We are concerned with proposed cuts to the
Department of Interior and the Department of Ag, the Forest
Service. Obviously we are interested in the Forest Service
recreation. We would also encourage Congress to think about how
we are currently funding wildfires and we think about changing
that and there are several bills that have bipartisan support
that would ensure that we don't take away from our recreational
accounts to fund wildfires. So we do feel that adequate funding
by Congress is important to helping our economy continue to
grow.
Mrs. Dingell. And could be hurt if we didn't.
Ms. Roberts. Yes.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you.
Mr. Jones, in your testimony you state that climate change
will decimate not only your industry but other industries as
snowpacks will not be sufficient to keep stream temperatures
low. What can Congress do to help mitigate manmade climate
change, and then I am going to get political and really say
should we remain in the Paris agreement?
Mr. Jones. Yes. I mean, I guess to end where you, or start
where you ended, I mean we need bipartisan support for real
action on climate. We believe it is a jobs producer, acting on
climate. To not be in the Paris agreement along with 195 other
countries would be very bad.
So in short, I mean, our goal is to have real action from
our elected officials to act on climate, and it is very hard
to--I feel like we look really short-term right now, and we are
behind and we are losing jobs because of it, and this issue is
not going away. It is astonishing. I talked about this ski area
in my testimony, in Canada where this guy had basically lost
his ski area to climate change. It no longer snows, and that
was 12 years ago. And I thought like, well, I don't have an
issue in my town on that. We have never not been able to open.
And we are just coming off of a 4-year drought where we
virtually couldn't open the bottom of the mountain, so real
definitive action on climate at a policy level would be huge.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. I only have a few seconds.
So, Ms. Roberts, I am going to ask you about the Land and
Water Conservation Fund which was created in the '60s, probably
by somebody I know and loved, which has provided recreation
access, secured key, wildlife habitat, and protected the very
outdoor resources that we are talking about today--hunting,
fishing, hiking.
Can you tell me what your companies are saying and how you
view the connection between that key program and the economic
contributions your industry makes, please, in 9 seconds?
Ms. Roberts. Sure. Thank you for the question. We had about
120 of our industry executives in town over the last couple
days and advocating on behalf of the Land and Water
Conservation Fund was a major effort and a major ask in all of
those meetings.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I still want to tell you, my favorite thing
when I want to escape from this place, which is more often
lately, is floating down the river in the inner tube, which
none of you talked about and I did every single day as a kid.
And your parents would kill you for like going out on the buoy
and waiting for the freighter and going in the wake. It was
great.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back and the Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Pennsylvania for 5 minutes.
Mr. Costello. Well, picking up where Mrs. Dingell went off,
whether it is her floating down the river or a lot of people
wanting to throw us all in the river, I think there is probably
some similarities there. But disposing of the levity there, let
me ask a question of the panel with a little bit of context.
Outdoor recreation is so diverse in scope and it means so
much and I think that that is why it is so important to our
country because people look at it and utilize it in many
different ways. A good example in my district, the Schuylkill
River National Heritage Area, for many years a portion of the
Schuylkill River that runs through my district from Valley
Forge National Park west towards the central part of the State
had fallen victim to neglect.
But through efforts of dedicated community leaders and
volunteers, the area was transformed. Today, that National
Heritage Area generates nearly 590 million annually and
supports over 6,000 jobs. The resurgence of the health of the
Schuylkill River and the connected landscape is a core reason
outdoor recreation is flourishing in communities in my
district.
The commitment to revitalize the natural resources through
the restoration of the Schuylkill River and the Schuylkill
River Trail has given the region improved recreational assets
and has been a trigger for economic development whether it is
the free bike sharing program in the State of Pennsylvania,
which was one of the first in the State, or kayak rental shops,
fishing stores, restaurants, and hotels which have sprung up as
a result.
There is a host of public policy considerations which I
would like you to share with me as to what we need to focus on
as policymakers. Community planning, infrastructure--we passed
a water infrastructure bill, which I think is very critical.
Certain environmental protections, Ms. Dingell mentioned the
LWCF which I and many others are strong supporters of from a
recreational resource perspective. Mr. Bucshon mentioned how
technology is playing an increasing role in the outdoor
recreational movement, the role of riparian corridor buffers.
And so here is my question. The multidimensional nature of
outdoor recreation does fuel employment in a variety of
sectors. Can you explain the positive ripple effects you see
with the outdoor recreational industry as a catalyst for
economic resurgence?
And secondly, we talk about leveraging public- private
partnerships; that can mean many different things. But with
respect to your companies, organizations, and trade
associations, how have you worked to employ this dual
cooperation given the unique nature of the outdoor recreational
opportunities in any given congressional district and what can
we do to strengthen that? Related to that, what are the
challenges that we face to make sure that we are providing an
enhanced experience moving forward for all constituents? So I
will keep it open-ended and ask all of you to just weigh in on
that topic. Thanks.
Mr. Landers. Well, it sounds like there was an investment
in the river and the surrounding areas and it has turned into a
job-creating entity and an enjoyment for your local citizens.
So what we are advocating as part of the Outdoor Recreation
Industry Roundtable is that yes, these are assets and when
invested in them it is a cash cow. It is a positive return. So
we are trying to work with Interior and Agriculture to
encourage them to work with us and generate some public-
private partnership opportunities to get a better return.
So I would tell you one quick story that I heard over the
last couple days. The Blue River in Colorado is part of the
Forest Service campground inventory, and it was making money
and it was great, but they ended up closing that whole
campground because of the beetle kill. So instead of investing
money to clear the trees that were causing potential danger
they decided to close the whole thing.
So not only did they lose the revenue, they lost the
ability to--they also said, ``Oh, look, we have addressed part
of the backlog by taking it off our books.'' So it was a double
whammy. So investing in facilities and using public-private
partnerships seems to be the way to go.
Mr. Berejka. I will weigh in here also on the importance of
public-private partnerships. Jeff spoke to how Columbia
supports hundreds of not-for-profits. REI likewise supports
hundreds of not- for-profits. Some overlap there, but between
the two companies, you know, we are probably north of 500
different not-for-profits that we support around the country.
Those not-for-profits aren't just organizations they are
people, and inside the organizations those people are extremely
passionate about whether it is floating down a river or going
on an RV trip.
And so those nonprofit leaders can often find--and it
sounds like this was your experience on the Schuylkill--they
can find the best places for people to recreate and then with
their volunteerism sort of be that leading edge of recreation
infrastructure. But once they are at the leading edge, there is
a role for Government to come in and provide support for the
infrastructure. I think all of us agree that recreation assets
in today's day and age are infrastructure and it is an
important role for Government to be there as you consider
infrastructure packages to include outdoors as infrastructure.
Mr. Costello. That is a good point. Thank you. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Harper [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would like to
thank both Chairman Latta and Ranking Member Schakowsky for
holding today's hearing.
Outdoor recreation including hiking, fishing, hunting are
quintessential American traditions and I am glad that we are
taking time today to recognize the economic impact that this
industry has and examine with our panel the benefits of the
industry towards conservation. I have a very urban district in
Houston, but all of us want to get out in the country because
we are in a big city.
And my experience is I learned to hunt with my father-in-
law and fish, and my son and I did the same thing. And if I
could show it to you, my son and two of our grandsons in South
Texas actually got an alligator last weekend, and it shows my
two grandsons, one of them straddling the alligator. I just
hope he didn't use my grandsons as bait. So outdoors is
important, and in Texas come late November, early December, we
see lots of RVs going to South Texas where my son and his
family actually live. And there are a lot of winter Texans down
there that enjoy the--so it is really important outdoor sports
around the country, but particularly where I come from.
In the early part of last century, many wildlife species
were dwindling in numbers around our country. And at the behest
of the firearms industry, Congress imposed an excise tax on the
sale of firearms and ammunition products known as the Pittman-
Robertson Act. Since its enactment, $11 billion has been
distributed to States for conservation and outdoor education
under Pittman-Robertson, making the firearms industry the
largest contributor to conservation and access. I bring this up
because I am surprised how many people do not know that hunting
and conservation go hand in hand.
And I would like to get a response from any of the panel on
the Pittman- Robertson because Congress should be reauthorizing
it. Anybody have a comment on it? No. Tell me about the ways
your industry contributes to conservation efforts that most
people don't about. I know REI obviously has a great record.
Mr. Berejka. I mean I could elaborate. Of those 300
organizations we support, the overwhelming majority are
stewardship organizations that go into favorite places to
recreate and they do the trail cleaning, they do the trail
maintenance. They are the ones who are at the leading edge
often of repairing infrastructure if it has fallen into
disrepair.
Ms. Mihalik. I will add that for Outward Bound one of the
issues that we have struggled with when we open new course
areas, so course areas anywhere, it could be a river or it
could be a hiking trail where we want to take people, is often
access. So we worked recently with the Chesapeake Conservancy
to open a course on the Nanticoke River. There was not access
to water. There was not access to campsites.
But this is an amazing river in Maryland that people should
be able to explore, so we were able to establish partnerships
with the Conservancy, which is a conservation organization,
National Park Service, and our local Department of Natural
Resources to all come together to be able to open that area,
and now we take about 60 kids per year down that river.
Mr. Green. Anyone else? Going back to the example of
Pittman-Robertson, one of the areas I have concern about is the
aging demographic of sportsmen. If current trends continue,
State wildlife agencies will not be able to rely on the same
level of funding as older hunters hang up their hats and aren't
replaced by younger hunters. As an industry and as a
legislative body, what can we do to ensure that our children
and grandchildren have the same access or expanded access to
natural resources that we have grown up with?
Ms. Roberts. So as part of the outdoor industry's efforts
we have a nonprofit called the Outdoor Foundation, and the
Outdoor Foundation's mission is to encourage a new generation
of youth to get outside and recreate and that includes all of
the activities that we covered in our economic report. And so
our industry has come together to fund nonprofits across the
country who take kids outside.
And one key element that we found early on through really
pilot and error is that the importance of mentorship and create
an opportunity for that bond to form, whether it is in a family
or it is just an older person who is experienced, whether in
fishing, hunting, rock climbing, any sort of activity that
takes a youth outside but repeatedly exposes the youth to that
experience. That is how you build a lifelong love of these
activities.
And so what we have done is really bring together all of
the industry's resources and then spend time ensuring that
these local groups that are on the ground take these kids
outside. And I think that is the most effective way to ensure
that we do have the next generation that loves the land but
also loves these activities.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I know I am out of my time. But if
I could give a commercial, I am the co-chair of the
Congressional Sportsmen's Caucus along with my colleague Jeff
Duncan from South Carolina, and we will soon be introducing the
SHARE Act, the Sportsmen's Heritage and Recreational
Enhancement Act, a compilation of a package of bills aimed at
improving access to public lands and preserving and expanding
sportsmen's issues. And I appreciate you letting me do the
commercial.
Mr. Harper. Very well-done commercial too, Mr. Green.
Seeing there are no other Members here to ask questions for the
panel, I want to thank each of you for taking time out of your
busy schedule to be here and share your insights with us.
Before we conclude, I would like to include the following
documents to be submitted for the record by unanimous consent:
a letter from Vista Outdoor and a letter from AMA. Seeing no
objection, those are admitted.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Harper. And pursuant to committee rules, I remind
Members that they have 10 business days--I believe we may have
something else we would like to submit for the record, and I
will recognize the ranking member.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. The Low-Carbon USA letter from
U.S. businesses and an EPA fact sheet.
Mr. Harper. And, without objection, those are admitted to
the record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Harper. And pursuant to committee rules, I remind
Members that they have 10 business days to submit additional
questions for the record and I ask that witnesses submit their
responses within 10 business days upon receipt of any
questions. Without objection, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:45 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

As the longest-standing committee on the Hill, Energy and
Commerce has long sought to highlight industries and promote
policies that will boost our economy and create more jobs. That
is precisely why I am excited about the topic of our discussion
today: the outdoor recreation industry. Increasingly, we are
seeing the economic prowess of outdoor recreation and
understanding how vital it is to a healthy American economy. In
recent years, outdoor recreation has demonstrated its
importance by injecting hundreds of billions of dollars into
the U.S. economy and generating millions of jobs.
The outdoor recreation industry has quickly become one of
our Nation's largest economic sectors. From manufacturing to
retail and accommodation to transportation, outdoor recreation
affects many major U.S. economic sectors. It's an industry that
is truly driven by the American consumer. Every year millions
of Americans spend their hard-earned dollars on everything from
gear and vehicles to trips and travel. In fact, Americans spend
about $185 billion on outdoor recreation gear and roughly $702
billion on everything from airfare and lodging to lift tickets
and guided tours.
I'd like to highlight Columbia Sportswear and the RV
Industry Association joining us among our panel today, as my
home State of Oregon, and specifically my district, benefit
greatly from both. Northwood Manufacturing and Keystone RV
design develop and manufacture RVs, helping to create jobs and
economic stability in Oregon's Second District. Columbia, which
is headquartered in Oregon, helps supports folks across the
Beaver State. I am happy to have you here with us today and
thank you for your work back home.
Oregon is also home to some of our Nation's greatest public
treasures. From Crater Lake National Park to the Columbia River
Gorge and many other impressive public lands, Oregon offers an
abundance of outdoor opportunities. Nearly 70% of all Oregon
residents take advantage of these public lands and outdoor
recreation opportunities annually. This high level of consumer
engagement has resulted in almost 141,000 jobs and $4 billion
in wages and salaries back home in Oregon alone.
As Chairman Latta indicated in his opening, the 114th
Congress passed the Outdoor REC Act which ensures outdoor
recreation will be counted as part of the U.S. GDP. The data
provided through this effort will help inform policymakers
about how outdoor recreation is quickly becoming a powerful
economic engine on public lands. The data will also help to
guide budget and investment decisions at every level of
Government, including how to boost rural economies, attract
out-of-State employers and visitors, and create sound policies
that preserve public lands for future generations.
I look forward to exploring the economic and social
benefits of outdoor recreation as well as any barriers that may
stifle continued growth and success in this extremely important
industry. I want to thank you all for being here with us today,
and I look forward to hearing your testimony.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
