- H.R., THE NUCLEAR WASTE POLICY AMENDMENTS ACT OF 2017

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. ___, THE NUCLEAR WASTE POLICY AMENDMENTS ACT OF 2017

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 26, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-26

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
25-996 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            GENE GREEN, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                   Massachusetts
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             TONY CARDENAS, California
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           RAUL RUIZ, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia

7_____

Subcommittee on Environment

JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
Chairman
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas                    RAUL RUIZ, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             SCOTT H. PETERS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          GENE GREEN, Texas
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       DORIS O. MATSUI, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    officio)
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Doris O. Matsui, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    10
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, prepared statement........................   122

Witnesses

Dean Heller, a United States Senator from the State of Nevada....    11
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Ruben J. Kihuen, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Nevada.........................................................    18
Prepared statement...........................................    20
Dina Titus, a Representative in Congress from the State of Nevada    24
Prepared statement...........................................    26
Jacky Rosen, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Nevada.........................................................    28
Prepared statement...........................................    30
Joe Wilson, a Representative in Congress from the State of South
Carolina.......................................................    32
Prepared statement...........................................    34
Edward F. Sproat III, Former Director, Office of Civilian
Radioactive Waste Management, Department of Energy.............    38
Prepared statement...........................................    41
Answers to submitted questions...............................   156
Anthony J. O'Donnell, Chairman, Subcommittee on Nuclear Issues--
Waste Disposal, National Association of Regulatory Utility
Commissioners..................................................    46
Prepared statement...........................................    48
Answers to submitted questions...............................   159
Edwin Lyman, Ph.D., Senior Scientist, Global Security Program,
Union of Concerned Scientists..................................    56
Prepared statement...........................................    59
Answers to submitted questions...............................   162
Steven P. Nesbit, Chairman, Back-end Working Group, United States
Nuclear Infrastructure Council.................................    70
Prepared statement...........................................    72
Answers to submitted questions...............................   165
Mark McManus, General President, United Association of Union
Plumbers, Pipefitters, Welders, and Service Technicians........    88
Prepared statement...........................................    91

Submitted Material

Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, the Nuclear Waste Policy Amendments
Acts of 2017,\1\ submitted by Mr. Shimkus
Letter of April 24, 2017, from Judy Treichel, Executive Director,
Nevada Nuclear Waste Task Force, et al., to House Members,
submitted by Ms. Titus.........................................   123
Letter of April 26, 2017, from Geoff Freeman, President and CEO,
American Gaming Association, to Mr. Shimkus and Mr. Tonko,
submitted by Ms. Titus.........................................   131
H.R. 456, the Nuclear Waste Informed Consent Act, submitted by
Ms. Rosen......................................................   132
Southern Nevada Map of Yucca Transportation Route, submitted by
Ms. Rosen......................................................   135
Letter of April 26, 2017, from Matthew McKenzie, Nuclear Program
Director and Senior Scientist, and Geoffrey Fettus, Senior
Attorney, Nuclear Program, National Resources Defense Council,
to Mr. Shimkus and Mr. Tonko, submitted by Mr. Tonko...........   136
Letter of April 21, 2017, from Governor Brian Sandoval, Nevada,
to Mr. Shimkus and Mr. Tonko, submitted by Mr. Shimkus.........   141
Letter of April 21, 2016, from Senator Dean Heller to Mr.
Shimkus, submitted by Mr. Shimkus..............................   143
Letter of April 24, 2017, from Dan Schinhofen, Chairman, Board of
County Commissioners, Nye County, Nevada, to Mr. Walden, et
al., submitted by Mr. Shimkus..................................   145
Letter of April 24, 2017, from Steve Curtis, Past President,
American Nuclear Society, Nevada Section, to Mr. Shimkus,
submitted by Mr. Shimkus.......................................   147
Editorial of November 21, 2016, ``Trump, Congress should open
$15B Yucca Mountain,'' Albuquerque Journal, submitted by Mr.
Shimkus........................................................   148
Editorial of April 11, 2017, ``Revive Yucca Mountain: Illinois
has more nuclear waste than any other state, all of it in
temporary storage,'' Chicago Tribune, submitted by Mr. Shimkus.   149
Article of March 21, 2017, ``Trump's budget could help get rid of
the nuclear waste along the San Onofre coastline,'' by Rob
Nikolewski, Los Angeles Times, submitted by Mr. Shimkus........   152

----------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at  http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF18/
20170426/105877/BILLS-115pih-DiscussionDraftofHR------
theNuclearWastePolicyAmendmentsActof2017.pdf.

H.R. ___, THE NUCLEAR WASTE POLICY AMENDMENTS ACT OF 2017

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 26, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in
Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Shimkus
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Shimkus, McKinley, Barton,
Murphy, Blackburn, Harper, Olson, Johnson, Flores, Hudson,
Cramer, Walberg, Carter, Walden (ex officio), Tonko, Ruiz,
Peters, Green, DeGette, McNerney, Dingell, and Matsui.
Staff present: Grace Appelbe, Legislative Clerk, Energy and
Environment; Ray Baum, Staff Director; Karen Christian, General
Counsel; Zack Dareshori, Staff Assistant; Wyatt Ellertson,
Research Associate, Energy and Environment; Adam Fromm,
Director of Outreach and Coalitions; Tom Hassenboehler, Chief
Counsel, Energy and Environment; A.T. Johnston, Senior Policy
Advisor, Energy; Alex Miller, Video Production Aide and Press
Assistant; Christopher Sarley, Policy Coordinator, Environment;
Dan Schneider, Press Secretary; Peter Spencer, Professional
Staff Member, Energy; Evan Viau, Staff Assistant; Hamlin Wade,
Special Advisor for External Affairs; Everett Winnick, Director
of Information Technology; Andrew Zach, Professional Staff
Member, Environment; Jeff Carroll, Minority Staff Director;
David Cwiertny, Minority Energy and Environment Fellow; Tiffany
Guarascio, Minority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Health
Advisor; Rick Kessler, Minority Senior Advisor and Staff
Director, Energy and Environment; Jessica Martinez, Minority
Outreach and Member Services Coordinator; Alexander Ratner,
Minority Policy Analyst; Matt Schumacher, Minority Deputy Press
Secretary and Digital Director; and Tuley Wright, Minority
Energy and Environment Policy Advisor.
Mr. Shimkus. The Subcommittee on Environment will now come
to order. Can we have someone close the back door, and Members
please take your seats. The Chair now recognizes himself for 5
minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Good morning, and welcome to our hearing to receive
testimony on the discussion draft titled the Nuclear Waste
Policy Amendments Act of 2017. For over 50 years, the Federal
Government has funded activities to fulfill its obligations for
permanent disposal of nuclear waste. In 2008, after decades of
scientific research, engineering design, and technical review
of the Yucca Mountain site, the Department of Energy achieved a
major milestone when it submitted the Yucca Mountain Repository
license application to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission for
review.
Another milestone was achieved in 2014, when the NRC's
independent scientific review of the license application found
that the site is expected to meet all regulatory requirements
up to 1 million years. This meant that the NRC's technical
staff found that the system, DOE, and its National Laboratory's
design could protect the public by preventing radiation at the
site from surpassing natural background levels for 10,000
years, and from surpassing EPA standards for 1 million years.
The NRC analysis determined the expected annual release is
about equal to a cross-country airplane flight, and less
radiation than we all receive from working here in the Capitol.
Despite the positive safety assessments, the process toward the
next legal milestone, adjudication and final NRC license
decision had already stopped because the previous
administration terminated, and I would say illegally, DOE's
Yucca Mountain program.
In response to the situation, the committee heard from
scores of expert witnesses over the past 6 years about
challenges and opportunities to advance our Nation's nuclear
waste management policy. This discussion draft reflects what we
learned through those hearings, oversight activities, and
related work. However, it is just that, a discussion draft, and
today we start the process of taking input from all
stakeholders on this draft.
The discussion draft amends certain provisions of the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act to provide for a favorable path
forward to dispose of spent nuclear fuel for our legacy, to end
our legacy defense material. Key provisions in the draft will,
number one, address issues identified by the NRC to
successfully adjudicate the pending license application for the
Yucca Mountain project and permit certain supporting
infrastructure support activities to move forward.
Two, remove the existing requirement that Nevada waive its
right to disapprove of the process in order to enter an
agreement with the Department of Energy to mitigate potential
impacts associated with the repository.
Three, provide the Department of Energy authority to move
forward with a temporary fuel storage facility, including the
ability to enter into contract with a private entity for that
purpose, while assuring that these interim efforts do not
compete with resources to complete the permanent repository
licensing.
Four, strengthen leadership within the Department of Energy
to manage the multigenerational infrastructure project, and
clarify that the Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste
Management is the sole, statutorily designated office to manage
activities under the law.
Five, reform a broken financing system to protect
ratepayers and ensure that previous investments for nuclear
waste disposal activities will be available when needed.
And six, protect our Nation's priority national security
programs by ensuring previous appropriations to dispose of
defense nuclear waste are taken into account.
A brief note on Nevada's concerns. On Friday, Governor
Sandoval reasserted the State of Nevada's long-established
opposition to Yucca in a letter to the committee. I recognize
the State has filed over 200 contentions on the Yucca Mountain
license application objecting to certain provisions of DOE's
proposals. I believe it is important and right that Nevada make
its case in public before the appropriate body, and have its
legal and technical challenges adjudicated impartially. To do
this, the discussion draft would enable the resumption of the
licensing process and provide the opportunity for the State's
technical objections to be adjudicated in the NRC process. This
would benefit all parties involved, and could, in fact,
strengthen the ultimate license for repository. Also, in
keeping with our practice of listening to Nevada stakeholders,
today on a Members panel, we welcome the testimony of two new
Nevada representatives, Mr. Kihuen and Ms. Rosen.
The committee also welcomes back Representative Titus, who
we heard from last July on this important issue. And I look
forward to hearing from my former colleague in the House, Dean
Heller, who is now the State's senior Senator. We will also
hear from Congressman Joe Wilson of South Carolina, who will
speak to a discussion draft provision that reflects language
from his bill, H.R. 433, the Sensible Nuclear Waste Disposition
Act.
Let me also welcome all the witnesses on the second panel.
In particular, Ward Sproat, who will outline critical steps for
the program. Mr. Sproat served as Director of the Office of
Civilian Radioactive Waste Management during a critical time,
and successfully led the Department's efforts to complete and
submit the repository license application.
Maryland Public Service Commissioner Tony O'Donnell is here
on behalf of the National Association of Regulatory Utility
Commissioners to represent the American ratepayers. As we will
hear, ratepayers have given DOE over $40 billion to pay for
this multigenerational capital infrastructure project, and yet,
the Federal Government has not fulfilled its legal obligations.
Until Congress addresses perpetual problems with the Nuclear
Waste Fund, project management challenges will remain.
Our goal here is to identify the right reforms to ensure we
can fulfill the Government's obligation to dispose of our
Nation's nuclear material. We have the perspectives today to
help us do just that.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. John Shimkus

Good morning and welcome to our hearing to receive
testimony on the discussion draft titled, ``The Nuclear Waste
Policy Amendments Act of 2017.''
For over 50 years, the Federal Government has funded
activities to fulfill its obligations for permanent disposal of
nuclear waste. In 2008, after decades of scientific research,
engineering, design, and technical review of the Yucca Mountain
site, the Department of Energy achieved a major milestone when
it submitted the Yucca Mountain repository License Application
to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission for review.
Another milestone was achieved in 2014, when the NRC's
independent scientific review of the license application found
that the site is expected to meet all regulatory requirements
up to a million years. This meant that NRC's technical staff
found that the system DOE and its national laboratories
designed could protect the public by preventing radiation at
the site from surpassing natural background levels for 10,000
years--and from surpassing EPA's standards for a million years.
The NRC analysis determined the expected annual release is
about equal to a cross-country airplane flight and less
radiation than we all receive from working here in the Capitol.
Despite the positive safety assessments, the process toward
the next legal milestone--adjudication and final NRC license
decisions--had already stopped, because the previous
administration terminated DOE's Yucca Mountain Program.
In response to this situation, this committee heard from
scores of expert witnesses over the past 6 years about
challenges and opportunities to advance our Nation's nuclear
waste management policy. This discussion draft reflects what we
learned through those hearings, oversight activities and
related work. However, it is just that: a discussion draft. And
today we start of process of taking input from all stakeholders
on this draft.
The discussion draft amends certain provisions of the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act to provide for a favorable path
forward to dispose of spent nuclear fuel and our legacy defense
material. Key provisions in the draft will:
1. Address issues identified by the NRC to successfully
adjudicate the pending license application for the Yucca
Mountain Project and permit certain supporting infrastructure
support activities to move forward;
2. Remove the existing requirement that Nevada waive its
right to disapprove of the process in order to enter into an
agreement with the Department of Energy to mitigate potential
impacts associated with the repository;
3. Provide the Department of Energy authority to move
forward with a temporary fuel storage facility, including the
ability to enter into a contract with a private entity for that
purpose, while assuring that these interim efforts do not
compete with resources to complete the permanent repository
licensing;
4. Strengthen leadership within Department of Energy to
manage a multigenerational infrastructure project and clarify
that the Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management is the
sole statutorily designated office to manage activities under
the law;
5. Reform a broken financing system to protect ratepayers
and assure that previous investments for nuclear waste disposal
activities will be available when needed; and,
6. Protect our Nation's priority national security programs
by assuring previous appropriations to dispose of defense
nuclear waste are taken into account.
A brief note on Nevada's concerns. On Friday, Governor
Sandoval reasserted the State of Nevada's long established
opposition to Yucca in a letter to the committee. I recognize
the State has filed over 200 contentions on the Yucca Mountain
license application objecting to certain provisions of DOE's
proposal. I believe it is important and right that Nevada make
its case in public, before the appropriate body, and have its
legal and technical challenges adjudicated impartially.
To do this, the discussion draft would enable the
resumption of the licensing process and provide the opportunity
for the State's technical objections to be adjudicated in the
NRC process. This would benefit all parties involved and could
in fact strengthen the ultimate license for a repository.
Also, in keeping with our practice of listening to Nevada
stakeholders, today on a Members panel we welcome the testimony
of two new Nevada Representatives, Mr. Kihuen and Ms. Rosen.
The committee also welcomes back Representative Titus, who we
heard from last July on this important issue, and looks forward
to hearing from my former colleague in the House, Dean Heller,
who is now the State's senior Senator. We will also hear from
Congressman Wilson of South Carolina, who will speak to a
discussion draft provision that reflects language from his bill
H.R. 433, the Sensible Nuclear Waste Disposition Act.
Let me also welcome all the witnesses on the second panel,
in particular Ward Sproat, who will outline critical steps for
the program. Mr. Sproat served as the Director of the Office of
Civilian Radioactive Waste Management during a critical time
and successfully led the Department's efforts to complete and
submit the repository license application.
Maryland Public Service Commissioner Tony O'Donnell is here
on behalf of the National Association of Regulatory Utility
Commissioners to represent the American ratepayers.
As we will hear, ratepayers have given DOE over $40 billion
to pay for this multigenerational capital infrastructure
project and yet the Federal Government has not fulfilled its
legal obligations. Until Congress addresses perpetual problems
with the Nuclear Waste Fund, project management challenges will
remain.
Our goal here is to identify the right reforms to ensure we
can fulfill the Government's obligation to dispose of our
Nation's nuclear material. We have the perspectives today to
help us do just that.

Mr. Shimkus. My time has expired. The Chair now recognizes
the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Tonko, for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I know this is an
issue about which you are passionate, so I welcome the
opportunity to hear more views on this discussion draft. I also
want to welcome our colleagues, Representatives Titus,
certainly Kihuen, and Rosen, and Wilson for joining us this
morning. Welcome also and thank you to Senator Heller for
joining us from the Senate side.
Mr. Chair, I appreciate you accommodating Mr. Kihuen's
request to hold a member panel. Last year, we heard from some
of our Nevadan colleagues, including Ms. Titus, at nuclear
waste hearing. Since then, we have welcomed two new members
from the Nevadan delegation to the House, and it is important
for us to hear their views on this very important issue.
Similarly, since our last hearing, we have had a change in
administration. President Trump's initial budget proposal
includes a $120 million effort to restart licensing activities
for the Yucca Mountain Nuclear Waste Repository, and to
initiate a robust interim storage program. Clearly, this is a
change in policy from the previous administration which had not
requested funding for the Yucca license application for a
number of years and began to develop a consent-based approach.
It is, indeed, important to get this administration's feedback
on this bill, as well as a better sense of its policy on the
future of America's nuclear waste.
I also want to highlight a concerning trend. This is the
third legislative hearing this year in this subcommittee where
we have not had a witness or feedback from the administration.
We need to hear from them and should not rush forward without
having a better understanding of their position. Today, there
are over 72,000 metric tons of waste, which is as a number
expected to grow to 139,000 metric tons by 2067. More and more
reactors are shutting down. Many of them are going through
decommissioning early.
There is no question our Nation has serious nuclear waste
management challenges. As we will hear, some of these are
political, but there are also technical and transportation
issues.
I understand these are very difficult challenges, but if we
continue to ignore the problem, taxpayers from every State will
pay the price. In December of 2015, CBO testified before this
subcommittee on the Federal Government's liabilities under the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act. Courts have determined that DOE has
breached contractual obligations under this statute. DOE was
scheduled to start removing waste by 1998. After the Government
missed this deadline, utilities began suing for damages, which
have been paid from the Treasury's Judgment Fund. At the time
of our previous hearing, those payments totaled $5.3 billion,
which has only continued to grow. DOE estimated that if it
could begin to accept waste within the next 10 years,
liabilities would ultimately total $29 billion.
So, I understand the urgency of this issue, and I
understand the Chair's genuine desire to help communities
dealing with waste and protect taxpayers from any further need
to make payments from the Treasury, but I am not sure that the
continued strong linkage between Yucca and an interim solution
is the best option to limit further taxpayer liability.
The draft before us takes a number of steps to solve our
Nation's nuclear waste problems, some of which, I think, are
positive, but many provisions will not bring us to a solution
any quicker. The bill authorizes interim storage that can be
operated by DOE or a private contractor, but it prohibits any
interim projects from moving forward until the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission makes a final decision on a construction
authorization for a permanent repository. We know there are
companies interested in pursuing interim storage, but this link
may create unnecessary uncertainty to their financing and
business model. It would be possible for us to consider the
merits of interim storage in a long-term repository on separate
but parallel tracks.
Also, I know many Members, many Members, care about States'
rights, and those from the West are especially sensitive about
water rights. This bill would declare the construction of a
nuclear waste repository a beneficial use of water. I find this
troubling. It is not an issue we need to consider at this time.
There are many members on this committee, on both sides of
the aisle, that would like to see a fair outcome that
acknowledges these challenges, finds workable solutions, and
protects the American taxpayers. But ultimately, if you have
confidence in the new administration--and, frankly, I do not,
but there are many on the majority side that do--you should
trust them to move the ball forward on a long-term, nuclear
waste repository.
Regardless of the text before us today, a permanent
solution will take many years and be mired by litigation. In
the meantime, we may want to examine the steps Congress can
take to start resolving the issue now. I am not wholly
convinced that this draft, as currently written, would
accomplish that. With that, I thank you, Mr. Chair, and I look
forward to this morning's discussion, again, welcoming our
colleagues. And with that I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonko follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Paul Tonko

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know this is an issue you are
passionate about, so I welcome the opportunity to hear more
views on this discussion draft.
I also want to welcome our colleagues Reps. Titus, Kihuen,
Rosen, and Wilson for joining us this morning. And Senator
Heller for making the trip from the Senate side.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate you accommodating Mr. Kihuen's
request to hold a Member Panel. Last year we heard from some of
our Nevadan colleagues, including Ms. Titus, at a nuclear waste
hearing.
Since then, we have welcomed two new Members from the
Nevadan delegation to the House. It is important for us to hear
their views.
Similarly, since our last hearing, we have had a change in
administration.
President Trump's initial budget proposal includes a $120
million effort to ``restart licensing activities for the Yucca
Mountain nuclear waste repository and to initiate a robust
interim storage program.''
Clearly, this is a change in policy from the previous
administration, which had not requested funding for the Yucca
license application for a number of years and began to develop
a ``consent-based'' approach.
It is indeed important to get this administration's
feedback on this bill as well as a better sense of their policy
on the future of America's nuclear waste.
I also want to highlight a concerning trend.
This is the third legislative hearing this year in this
subcommittee where we have not had a witness or feedback from
the administration. We need to hear from them and should not
rush forward without having a better understanding of its
position.
Today, there is over 72,000 metric tons of waste, which is
expected to grow as a number to 139,000 metric tons by 2067.
More and more reactors are shutting down--many of them are
going through decommissioning early.
There is no question our Nation has serious nuclear waste
challenges. As we will hear, some of these are political, but
there are also technical and transportation issues.
I understand these are very difficult challenges, but if we
continue to ignore the problem, taxpayers--from every State--
will pay the price.
In December 2015, CBO testified before this subcommittee on
the Federal Government's liabilities under the Nuclear Waste
Policy Act.
Courts have determined that DOE has breached contractual
obligations under this statute. DOE was scheduled to start
removing waste by 1998.
After the Government missed this deadline, utilities began
suing for damages, which have been paid from the Treasury's
Judgment Fund.
At the time of our previous hearing, those payments totaled
$5.3 billion, which has only continued to grow.
DOE estimated that if it could begin to accept waste within
the next 10 years, liabilities would ultimately total $29
billion.
So I understand the urgency of the issue. And I understand
the Chair's genuine desire to help communities dealing with
waste and protect taxpayers from any further need to make
payments from the Treasury.
But I am not sure that the continued strong linkage between
Yucca and an interim solution is the best option to limit
further taxpayer liability.
The draft before us takes a number of steps to solve our
Nation's nuclear waste problems. Some of which I think are
positive, but many provisions will not bring us to a solution
any quicker.
The bill authorizes interim storage that can be operated by
DOE or a private contractor, but it prohibits any interim
projects from moving forward until the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission makes a final decision on a construction
authorization for a permanent repository.
We know there are companies interested in pursuing interim
storage, but this link may create unnecessary uncertainty to
their financing and business model.
It would be possible for us to consider the merits of
interim storage and a long-term repository on separate but
parallel tracks.
Also, I know many Members care about States' rights. And
those from the West are especially sensitive about water
rights.
This bill would declare the construction of a nuclear waste
repository a beneficial use of water. I find this troubling. It
is not an issue we need to consider at this time.
There are many Members on this committee, on both sides of
the aisle, that would like to see a fair outcome that
acknowledges these challenges, finds workable solutions, and
protects the American taxpayers.
But ultimately, if you have confidence in the new
administration--and, frankly, I do not, but there are many on
the majority's side that do--you should trust them to move the
ball forward on a long-term nuclear waste repository.
Regardless of the text before us today, a permanent
solution will take many years and be mired by litigation.
In the meantime, we may want to examine the steps Congress
can take to start resolving the issue now. I am not wholly
convinced that this draft, as currently written, would
accomplish that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to this morning's
discussion. With that, I yield back.

Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The Chair
now recognizes the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Walden,
for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. I thank the gentleman not only for holding this
hearing, but also for your diligent work on this matter for
many, many years. I am glad that you are moving forward on
this. It is an important task, and I want to welcome our
colleagues from Nevada and South Carolina for being here as
well. We look forward to hearing your testimony. I know it is
important to have a member panel, and so we welcome what you
have to say.
Just this year, an Oregon-based nuclear technology company,
NuScale, submitted a new design for a small modular reactor to
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission for review and approval. It
is a first-of-a-kind design that could operate more efficiently
than existing plans. It would provide future optionality in
design and construction for utilities to meet energy demand.
However, while we look forward to advanced nuclear technology
development, it is long overdue that we solve this waste issue.
Again, when it comes to the Nuclear Waste Policy Act, as you
know, the Government established a fee tied to the generation
of nuclear energy in order to finance the cost of
multigenerational disposal programs. Along with 33 other
States, Oregon ratepayers fulfilled their financial obligations
under the law, paid the Department of Energy $160 million to
dispose of that commercial spent fuel.
The Trojan Nuclear Power Plant, located in northwest
Oregon, stopped producing electricity in 1993 with the
expectation that DOE would then begin to remove the spent fuel
in 1998, as required by Federal law. However, that has never
happened. And since the plant's decommissioning activities were
completed in 2007, only spent nuclear fuel remains stranded at
that site. That hampers any redevelopment efforts surrounding
that site. That story is repeated across the Nation in States
and communities awaiting DOE to fulfill its obligations and
dispose of spent fuel.
Mr. Chairman, I want to commend you and Secretary Perry for
taking the time at different times to go out to Yucca and
review that. I commend you for looking at interim storage as
well, and I look forward to hearing from our witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Nuclear energy is and must remain a vital component of our
Nation's diverse, reliable, and clean electricity portfolio.
Numerous companies are seeking to develop new nuclear
technologies to power our Nation's homes and factories for
another generation.
Just this year, an Oregon-based nuclear technology company,
NuScale, submitted a new design for a small modular reactor to
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission for review and approval. This
first-of-a-kind design could operate more efficiently than
existing plants and would provide future optionality in design
and construction for utilities to meet energy demand. However,
while we look forward to advanced nuclear technology
development, it is long overdue to solve our Nation's nuclear
waste disposal challenge.
Thirty-five years ago, Congress enacted the Nuclear Waste
Policy Act into law. This law was the culmination of decades of
experience by the Federal Government to develop a policy to
dispose of high-level radioactive waste and commercial spent
nuclear fuel permanently. Some of the material was created
during the Manhattan Project and through the Cold War at the
Hanford site, a vital national security facility located on the
Columbia River about 40 miles north of my district. Today,
after years of cleanup activity and with more work remaining,
this nuclear material still sits on a vibrant waterway waiting
to be transported to the Yucca Mountain repository in the
Nevada desert.
The Nuclear Waste Policy Act also established a fee tied to
the generation of nuclear energy in order to finance the costs
of a multigenerational disposal program. Along with 33 other
States, Oregon ratepayers fulfilled their financial obligations
under the law and paid the Department of Energy over $160
million to dispose of commercial spent nuclear fuel.
The Trojan nuclear power plant located in northwest Oregon
stopped producing electricity in 1993, with the expectation
that DOE would begin to remove the spent fuel in 1998, as was
required by law. However, that never happened and since the
plant's decommissioning activities were completed in 2007, only
spent nuclear fuel remains stranded at the site, hampering any
redevelopment efforts surrounding the site. This story is
repeated across the Nation, with States and communities waiting
for DOE to fulfill its obligations and dispose of the spent
fuel.
The Federal Government has recently been at an impasse in
efforts to advance our Nation's nuclear waste management
program. The consequences of this impasse are significant and
worsen our Nation's fiscal health. The costs to the American
taxpayer to pay for the Federal Government's delay in opening
the Yucca Mountain repository have nearly doubled to $30
billion since 2009 and that figure continues to escalate
rapidly.
A thoughtful and deliberate legislative process produces
good legislation. This subcommittee has received testimony from
over 30 witnesses to develop and inform this discussion draft.
Subcommittee Chairman Shimkus led a trip to the Yucca Mountain
site with our colleagues to see firsthand the remote site
adjacent to the isolated Nevada National Security Site. The
committee also sent numerous oversight letters to the
Department of Energy to seek information regarding approaches
to managing our Nation's nuclear waste and spent nuclear fuel.
While the previous administration was kicking the can down the
road and avoiding this difficult issue, we were working towards
a solution.
The time to fix this problem is now, and today's hearing on
the discussion draft will initiate the process of receiving
feedback from stakeholders on legislative language. I welcome
the testimony this morning and look forward to providing a path
forward to solve this significant national challenge.

Mr. Walden. I would now like to yield a minute to my
colleague from Tennessee, Mrs. Blackburn, and then I will yield
to Mr. Barton the remaining time after that.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I am
appreciative that each of you are here today before us. This is
an issue that we have looked at previously, and will return to.
Nuclear power does play an important component part in TVA's
overall electric generation capability, and because of that, we
in Tennessee are, indeed, concerned about this issue. And I
know that more than 30 years ago, Congress has started the
process of grappling with this issue. And while you can do on-
site storage, and that is safe, there needs to be permanent
storage. So for those of us that do rely on electric power
generation coming from nuclear power, we appreciate the
discussion and the ability to look at how we move forward with
safe, reliable nuclear power in this country. I yield back.
Mr. Walden. I yield the balance of my time to the former
chairman of the full committee, Mr. Barton.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let's see a show of
hands in the audience of people who have been born since 1982.
Raise your hand if you have been born since 1982. Now this is a
pretty graybeard audience, Mr. Chairman. But in 1982, I was a
White House fellow in the Department of Energy, and I played a
very minor, minor role in the drafting of what we now call the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982. It was my job as a White
House fellow to work with the technical staff in the Department
of Energy, and then explain to the Secretary of Energy, the
late Jim Edwards of South Carolina, what we were trying to do.
So, I had to read the language, understand from the
technical staff, and then try to explain to him what we were
doing. That was 35 years ago. And at that point in time, we
thought by now we would, somewhere, be storing high-level
nuclear waste permanently. That obviously has not happened for
a lot of reasons. The amendments that you are discussing today,
Mr. Chairman, the 2017--my phone is ringing.
Mr. Walden. They didn't have those in 1982, I would point
out.
Mr. Barton. They sure didn't. Didn't have the internet. Al
Gore hadn't invented it yet. In any event, the legislation that
we are going to discuss today, Mr. Chairman, finally cuts the
Gordian Knot, and I want to commend you and the full committee
chairman and everybody that has worked on this. For the first
time, it will allow interim to have a chance to be certified as
we look at the permanent repository.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Barton. Anyway, Mr. Chairman, I apologize for the phone
call. This is an excellent piece of legislation. I totally
support it, and we are finally going to solve it under the
leadership of this committee and this Congress.
Mr. Shimkus. The chairman thanks the gentleman. The Chair
now recognizes the gentlelady from California, Ms. Matsui, for
5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DORIS O. MATSUI, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
welcome our colleagues here today on this panel and also the
next panel also. This is such an important issue, and I think
for all of us here, it really does need a solution, so we are
hoping that we can move toward that. In my local public
utility, the Sacramento Municipal Utility District, maintains
the decommissioned Rancho Seco Nuclear Power Plant. So I have
been interested in spent nuclear fuel management issues for
many, many years now.
I support a comprehensive, long-term strategy for nuclear
waste disposal that includes an important role for consolidated
interim storage. Regardless of the status of permanent
repository, an interim storage facility is a necessary step in
the right direction for the management of our Nation's nuclear
waste. We have private consolidated interim storage applicants
that want to take spent fuel. I believe we can move forward
with the interim storage process, while at the same time,
addressing the issues surrounding a repository.
Regardless of the path we choose, it is important that
spent fuel from decommissioned plants receive first priority
under a waste management program. I would like, and all of us
here would like to move forward on this, and I believe with the
discussion that we have today, and we have been having, we are
going to be moving forward. But I believe we also should
understand that we have a lot of decommissioned nuclear power
plants waiting right now, and we would like to move ahead with
some interim-type storage so that some of these sites can
actually be used for other purposes.
So, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for having this
hearing here today. And I would like to ask my colleagues on my
side if there is anyone who would like the rest of the time? If
not, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady yields back her time. We now
conclude with Members' opening statements. The Chair would like
to remind Members that pursuant to committee rules, all
Members' opening statements will be made part of the record.
Now we want to thank our witnesses and first panel for
joining us today. I will recognize you each when it is time for
you to speak, and your full statement can be submitted for the
record. Now it is my pleasure to introduce my friend, sometime
combatant, the senior Senator from the State of Nevada, Dean
Heller. Sir, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. DEAN HELLER, A UNITED STATES SENATOR FROM THE
STATE OF NEVADA

Senator Heller. Mr. Chairman, thank you. And to the ranking
member, thank you also.
Mr. Shimkus. Are you close to the mic?
Senator Heller. Yes, it is on. Let me just get a little bit
closer. I want to thank the committee also and for the diverse
testimony that we heard already here, and I am very
appreciative of the opportunity to be here with most of the
colleagues of our delegation. I think it sends a pretty strong
message.
Having said that, Mr. Chairman, since 1987, Yucca
Mountain's Nuclear Waste Repository has been a thorn in
Nevada's side. Due to political antics, not science, Nevada
quickly moved to the Federal Government's number one targeted
location to permanently store all of the Nation's nuclear
waste. Our State has been fighting this misguided proposal ever
since, and we are not finished.
Although I recognize the role that nuclear power plays in
our Nation's long-term energy strategy, and the need to
properly store expired nuclear fuel, I remain strongly opposed
to any effort to reinstate Yucca Mountain. This ill-conceived
project would not only cause significant harm to the well-being
of my home State, it also poses a national security risk that
is too great to ignore. So, Mr. Chairman, my position remains
the same. It is that Yucca Mountain is dead.
It is time to move past failed proposals of the past and
look for solutions to the future. Mr. Chairman, while we both
disagree on the issue of Yucca Mountain, we are in agreement
that it is in the best interest of our Nation that a program to
dispose of and to store spent nuclear fuel and high-level
radioactive waste be implemented as soon as possible.
I appreciate your commitment to ensure that progress is
made on this issue. However, I do not believe the bill that is
before the committee today is the solution. Rather, I believe
it would only lead to more litigation on this issue, wasting
more taxpayer dollars while usurping States' air and water
permitting authority. Governor Sandoval has made it clear that
the State of Nevada will contest over 200 elements of any
application process.
Rather than attempting to force this project on the people
of Nevada, a State that currently does not have any nuclear
power plants of its own, taxpayer dollars would be better spent
identifying viable alternatives for the long-term storage of
nuclear waste in areas that are willing to house it.
Before I discuss the issue of consent-based storage, I
would like to first address the bill that is before us today,
and I have a test that I usually perform when evaluating
legislation. It is called ``More, Higher, Less.'' Does the bill
more competition, higher quality at less cost? And let me
address each of these categories with respect to the bill that
is before us today.
Does this bill provide more competition? Instead of
allowing the consent-based siting, this bill would make Yucca
Mountain the only repository. It also eliminates the current
requirement for progress on a second repository. This
legislation does, however, allow for more Federal Government
control over State permitting authority, usurping the State of
Nevada. Mr. Chairman, the preemption of the State water laws
and the States' authority to issue air permits is simply
jarring. Let me repeat that. The preemption of State water laws
and States' authority to issue air permits, in my opinion, is
absolutely jarring.
Next, does this bill provide higher quality? Not to
Nevadans. By eliminating the current capacity elimination of
70,000 metric tons of heavy metal, this legislation would allow
for the unlimited disposal of spent nuclear fuel and high-level
radioactive waste. Furthermore, by allowing the EPA
administrator to change the repository radiation protection
standards before final licensing by the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, you run the risk of eroding standards that were put
in place to protect public health.
And finally, by allowing thousands of nuclear waste
shipments to Yucca Mountain, you create a higher national
security risk, ignoring recommendations made by the National
Academy of Sciences and the Blue Ribbon Commission.
Will this bill provide less cost? The Federal Government
has already spent decades, wasted billions of dollars, to
design and permit Yucca Mountain without any, without any
rational hope that Nevada will consent to the project. And
Nevada never will. The State of Nevada will contest any license
application. This means years, years of litigation, while
progress remains stalled on how to dispose of spent nuclear
waste. But it doesn't have to be that way.
I come to the table with a bipartisan solution supported by
members of my delegation that join us today. I want to thank
Congresswoman Titus, Congressman Kihuen, and Congresswoman
Rosen for partnering with me to introduce the Nuclear Waste
Informed Consent Act. Our legislation would allow for the
construction of a nuclear waste repository only if the
Secretary of Energy has a secure written consent from the
Governor of the host State, affected units of local government,
and affected Indian Tribes. This is consistent with the
consent-based siting initiative to site waste storage and
disposal facilities initiated by the Department of Energy in
the late 2015.
Identifying communities that are willing to host for long-
term repositories, rather than forcing it upon States, is the
only viable solution to our Nation's nuclear waste problems. I
encourage the subcommittee to focus its efforts on that
worthwhile initiative. Failing to do so would just squander
more time and resources that would be better spent pursuing
viable solutions to this important public policy challenge.
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Tonko, thank you again for
the opportunity to appear before you, and I stand ready to
partner with you, to find a viable solution to this problem
once and for all.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Heller follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. We thank the gentleman. Now we will turn to--
now, we are always having this debate. We called your staff to
make sure we had the pronunciation right. We were told Kihuen.
Is that correct?
Mr. Kihuen. That is correct.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Very good. This is the first time we have
had a chance to meet, so I am glad to welcome you, a Member of
Congress representing the 4th District of Nevada, and you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. RUBEN J. KIHUEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF NEVADA

Mr. Kihuen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member Tonko and subcommittee members, for this opportunity to
testify before today's subcommittee hearing, and I am grateful
that you could accommodate my request despite the short notice,
so thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
I was disappointed to learn that the committee had
scheduled a hearing on the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 2017,
especially considering that there was no representation from
our State in this committee. As I mentioned in my letter, Yucca
Mountain is in my district, and my constituents and all
Nevadans have the right to have their voices heard.
They deserve to be part of the conversation, especially
when it concerns their safety and their security. To Nevadans,
it seems like the other people are just trying to pawn off
their problems by dumping nuclear waste in our beloved State.
For many Nevadans, this just feels like deja vu, and is
reminiscent of the passage of the 1987 law often correctly
referred to as the Screw Nevada Bill, that halted the study of
possible repository sites elsewhere in the country over the
vociferous objection of the State. Now, as in 1987, the idea
that Nevada should be of use as nothing more than a dumping
ground for the rest of the country's nuclear waste is opposed
by most Nevadans, an overwhelming majority of most Nevadans.
Democrat and Republican alike, Nevadans do not want this
project to move forward in their State.
Yucca Mountain is located less than 100 miles northwest of
Las Vegas, a metropolitan area of more than 2 million people,
more than three times the entire population of Nevada when this
bad idea was first passed in 1987.
The proposed nuclear waste repository site at Yucca
Mountain would pose a real threat to the economy of southern
Nevada. Our economy relies on tourism. With nearly 43 million
people visiting Las Vegas in 2016, any accident involving
nuclear waste in the area would lead to a massive, massive loss
in visitors, which, in turn, would have severe ripple effects
through the entire Nevada economy.
Many of you may not know this, but the area around Yucca
Mountain is seismically active, and an aquifer runs beneath the
proposed repository site. Additionally, placing a large amount
of nuclear waste in an unsuitable site, a site like Yucca
Mountain, could lead to numerous potential health issues.
Substandard care or the mere passage of time could lead to
leaking and leaching of nuclear material into the aquifer.
Rather than waste millions more on unnecessary nuclear
waste, we should look for ways to invest these funds in Nevada
more strategically. Plenty of Nevadans are still out of work.
Imagine what this money could do to help grow our economy. I
have toured Nevada's 4th Congressional District on multiple
occasions, and every time I visit, I see firsthand the need to
invest in infrastructure projects that could create jobs.
Dumping money into this project is a poor use of Federal funds.
Nevadans are strongly opposed to the construction of this
project. As a State with no nuclear energy facilities, it is
exceedingly unfair that Nevada is asked to serve as a dumping
ground for the rest of the country's waste at the great risk of
our citizens.
I ask each of you in the committee to consider this: If
this project was proposed in your district, near your family
and threatened your constituents' lives and jobs, would you
support it? If the answer is yes, then let's find a place in
your district. If the answer is no, as it surely is, you
cannot, in good conscience, vote to send a country's nuclear
waste to my district. I urge the committee to vote no and keep
this project dead and buried as it should be. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kihuen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The Chair
now recognizes Congresswoman Titus, the first one who corrected
me on how to pronounce Nevada versus ``Ne-vah-da.'' And I
always get it right after that. So with that, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. DINA TITUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE STATE OF NEVADA

Ms. Titus. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I
Ranking Member Tonko and members of the committee. I
unfortunately was born in 1982, and I think I have been working
on this project ever since. As you well know, Yucca Mountain
has been an issue of major importance for three decades dating
back to 1982 when President Reagan first signed the Nuclear
Waste Policy Act. The Screw Nevada Amendments of 1987 made the
matter even more pressing by singling out Yucca Mountain as the
primary focus for a permanent repository. In the years that
have followed, I, along with my colleagues, both Democrat and
Republican here in Congress, along with the Governor's Office,
the State legislature, Tribal and local government leaders,
have together, with business leaders, been leading the fight
against Yucca Mountain. We have been united and with just rare
exceptions, in vehement opposition to this proposal.
And it is not just Nevada that is going to be adversely
affected. Any waste coming to the site will have to travel
through virtually every congressional district in the country,
coming very close to homes, schools, churches, farms, and
factories.
Just yesterday, I received a letter signed by over 80
organizations from across the country in opposition to the
repository at Yucca Mountain, along with a letter from the
American Gaming Association, expressing opposition. And with
your permission, Mr. Chairman, I ask that these letters be
entered into the record.
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Titus. Thank you. Over the years, as you know, billions
of dollars have been wasted on this boondoggle, and still, we
are no closer to a solution. I agree with my colleagues that
this is bad for Nevada in general. But let's look at some of
the specifics of the legislation before us. It wasn't until the
Obama administration assembled the Blue Ribbon Commission on
America's nuclear future that included some of the most
respected experts in the field, that we released a list of
recommendations that could be used to guide us in this area.
One such recommendation, which goes to the heart of the matter,
is adopting a consent-based process by which repositories are
sited. That is why I recently reintroduced H.R. 456, the
Nuclear Waste consent Act, along with my colleague in the
Senate, Senator Heller, and here in the House. This legislation
codifies the Blue Ribbon recommendation that siting of a
repository be done not just in consultation with host States,
Tribes, local governments, but with their approval.
I was surprised to see, Mr. Chairman, that you adopted the
framework of this legislation in Section 143 of the draft
before us with regards to interim sites. They are now called
monitored retrievable storage. If we are to be successful in
addressing the concerns of communities like yours where nuclear
power plants are located, we should also have this same
consideration going forward with permanent sites. The draft
bill should afford the same consent-based provision that you
are offering interim sites to permanent storage facility.
Other ways that this bill goes in the opposite direction
from recommendations, the bill removes language from the
original law that requires progress, progress on a second
repository, thereby dictating that Nevada will be the sole site
for dumping of the waste. If that is not bad enough, it removes
the cap of 70,000 metric tons of nuclear waste, making way for
us to take as much as you can possibly find or generate, an
unlimited source. This is a significant change, which calls
into question the entirety of the licensing and safety
evaluation for the project. As NRC references in a number of
different provisions, including the license application, this
repository does not take into account unlimited increases in
dangerous waste, as is being proposed in this bill draft.
And finally, as you have heard from the Senator, this is
very important, especially to those of us from the West, you
need to be concerned about Section 202. That is the section
that usurps the State's right to control its own water. Now, I
know many of you were opposed to the Waters of the West rule
that came under the Obama administration, railing against it as
Federal overreach and outrageous power grab, and yet, that is
exactly what this bill does, takes that power to control water
away from the States.
These are just some of the serious issues that we have been
addressing for decades in Nevada. I ask that you give them
consideration yourselves as you attempt to move forward to
solve this solution. Nevada has done its share. We have still
got the scars from the mushroom clouds and the atomic tests in
the 1950s as we developed nuclear weapons. We didn't produce
this waste. We don't want it. We don't deserve it. We don't
have any nuclear plants, and we will continue to fight it. So
keep it where it is, and let's look for some reasonable
solution. And I thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Titus follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. I thank my colleague. The Chair now recognizes
another new Member of Congress, the Honorable Jacky Rosen from
the 3rd District. Ma'am, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. JACKY ROSEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF NEVADA

Ms. Rosen. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Shimkus, Ranking
Member Tonko, members of the subcommittee. I want to thank you
for the opportunity to testify, and I am here to make one thing
clear, that Nevadans wholeheartedly oppose become being the
Nation's nuclear dumping ground. In 1987, Congress amended the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act and targeted Yucca Mountain, located
less than 100 miles northwest of Las Vegas as the sole site for
our Nation's geological repository. For over 30 years, the
State of Nevada and local communities, including the
constituents that I represent, have rejected this project on
safety, public health, and environmental grounds. In fact, the
State has filed 218 contentions against the DOE's license
application, challenging the adequacy of DOE's environmental
impact assessments. Numerous scientific studies have deemed
Yucca Mountain unsafe, based on the fact that the site is
seismically active and sits above an aquifer. The repository
may not be able to prevent radioactive contamination for
groundwater for over 1 million years. That is a Federal safety
requirement.
Yucca Mountain would require transporting over 70,000
metric tons of radioactive waste, many of those routes right
through my district, through the heart of Las Vegas, a city
that attracts 43 million visitors annually, and generates $59
billion to our economy, according to the Las Vegas Convention
and Visitors Authority.
Severe transportation accidents, they threaten the health
and safety of tourists and individuals who live along these
proposed routes and would cause hundreds of millions of dollars
of damage in cleanup costs and related economic costs.
We are talking about shipping a total of nearly 9,500 rail
casks, which is equivalent to 2,800 trains, or 2,650 truck
casks over 50 years, which is bad enough. But eliminating the
second repository, your bill, increases those numbers to 6,700
trains, and over 5,000 trucks. This translates to roughly one
to three trains, or one to two truck shipments through Nevada
per week every week for 50 years, from 76 shipping sites across
the country. All those trucks would use the I-15 corridor,
known to be one of the most dangerous highway systems in the
country, according to the Nevada AAA. Do you honestly believe
that shipping over 5,000 truck casks of high-level nuclear
waste over a span of 50 years won't result in at least one
radiological accident?
And in the event of a radiological release, it is said to
be nearly impossible to determine the range of exposure, let
alone the long-term health effects for those facing exposure.
Cancer, genetic defects, asthma, they have all been related to
radiation. The victims of such negligent policy won't be your
constituents, Mr. Chairman, but rather the ones who live in our
districts. These are our friends, our neighbors, our children.
And yet, while any legislation must include and implement
the National Academy of Science's safety and security
recommendations, such as shipping older fuel first and full-
scale testing of the casks, this bill fails, it absolutely
fails to fulfill such requirements.
Any plan addressing nuclear waste storage must be based on
scientific analysis, as well as trust and agreement among
affected parties. In 2012, the Blue Ribbon Commission on
America's Nuclear Future issued its final report on nuclear
waste storage, recommending a consent-based process for
choosing a site. I am proud to be an original cosponsor, along
with my colleagues, of the Nuclear Waste Informed Consent Act--
a bill supported by the entire Southern Nevada delegation--that
would prohibit the dumping of nuclear waste in a State without
its consent.
I request that the text of this bill and two other
documents I have to be entered into the official record of this
hearing.
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Rosen. Your Nuclear Waste Policy Amendments Act ignores
the environmental, safety, and security concerns of Nevadans
who would be forced to store nuclear waste that they had no
role in creating. I urge the subcommittee to stop wasting
billions in taxpayer dollars by resurrecting a project that has
been dead for over 30 years, and instead identify viable
alternatives for long-term repository in areas that are proven
safe, and whose communities consent to storage. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Rosen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady yields back her time. The Chair
recognizes my colleague from South Carolina, Joe Wilson, for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOE WILSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA

Mr. Wilson. Chairman John Shimkus, Ranking Member Paul
Tonko, thank you for having me here today. I am grateful to
have the opportunity to testify before the Energy and Commerce
Subcommittee on Environment. I was grateful to serve as the
former Deputy General Counsel to the Department of Energy
during the Reagan administration, serving with Secretary Jim
Edwards. I know the Department has very competent personnel,
and we are fortunate with the new leadership of Secretary Rick
Perry.
In January, I introduced the Sensible Nuclear Waste
Disposition Act, and I appreciate that it has been included in
the Nuclear Waste Policy Amendments Act of 2017. The Sensible
Nuclear Waste Disposition Act is a commonsense legislation that
simply requires that the Nuclear Regulatory Commission make a
licensing decision one way or another about Yucca Mountain
before the Department of Energy can consider other options for
long-term disposal. I appreciate the concerns of Nevada. I am
also hopeful that we recognize that there should be a national
perspective when it comes to managing and storing nuclear
waste.
Today there are currently 121 communities across 39 States
that are grappling with the limitations of storing nuclear
waste while our country lacks a permanent geological
repository. Communities in my home State of South Carolina,
adjacent to our neighbors of Georgia, also in the chairman's
State of Illinois, the ranking member's State of New York, and
the home State of a majority of the members of this committee,
all store nuclear material. Each of the 121 communities has
been forced to store nuclear waste while they wait for the
Federal Government to honor its promise by providing permanent
storage at Yucca Mountain. Ms. Matsui has made an excellent,
good new point. These sites can be redeveloped for better use.
While the nuclear material is currently being safely stored
across the country, we are in desperate need of a long-term
viable solution. Having a single permanent repository for high-
level nuclear waste is critical for our national security.
Right now, in the absence of a permanent repository, nuclear
material is stored all over the United States, making it
difficult and costly to secure. Having a single location, 1,000
feet underground, is far more effective and secure for the
environment with one location instead of 121 sites across the
Nation.
Additionally, competing the licensing process for Yucca
Mountain is fiscally responsible. The Federal Government has
dedicated enormous resources to completing the nuclear storage
facility at Yucca Mountain. American taxpayers have invested
over $3.7 billion into Yucca Mountain. Additionally, energy
utility ratepayers from across the country have contributed
over $30 billion to the Nuclear Waste Fund that can only be
used toward the construction and operation of Yucca Mountain,
with citizens from South Carolina, Illinois, New York, having
put each State over $1 billion into the account. Starting over
with another project would cost billions for taxpayers and
ratepayers alike, and would take decades to complete, leaving
121 sites across the country as de facto dumping grounds for
nuclear waste.
We have a duty to work toward a permanent repository for
nuclear waste. The Nuclear Waste Policy Amendments Act does an
excellent job of strengthening the Nuclear Waste Policy Act and
advancing our shared goals of protecting National security and
promoting our national environment cleanup mission.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today.
Thank you for your time and attention, and the balance of my
testimony is being submitted for the record.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. So I want
to thank you all for your testimony. As you may know, it is
committee practice not to ask the Members questions following
their statements. So let me thank you again for taking the time
to present your important perspectives today, and we will sit
the second panel. Thank you very much.
We would ask our new guests to find a seat so we can get
the door closed and start with our second panel as soon as
possible.
We want to thank the second panel for appearing with us
today. I will introduce you one at a time when your time to
speak comes up. Your full statement is submitted for the
record. You will have 5 minutes. We will be very lenient on
that as long as you don't go 2 or 3 minutes over. And with
that, I would like to first recognize the Honorable Ward
Sproat. I mentioned him in my opening statement. Former
Director of the Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management
at the Department of Energy. I always beat on my staff not to
do acronyms, OCRWM, and make sure we know what that really
means. So we have worked together numerous times. It is great
to have you. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sproat. Good morning, Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member
Tonko.
Mr. Shimkus. Let's try to pull the mic closer. Make sure
the button is on.

STATEMENTS OF EDWARD F. SPROAT III, FORMER DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF
CIVILIAN RADIOACTIVE WASTE MANAGEMENT, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY;
ANTHONY J. O'DONNELL, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON NUCLEAR ISSUES
09WASTE DISPOSAL, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REGULATORY UTILITY
COMMISSIONERS; EDWIN LYMAN, PH.D., SENIOR SCIENTIST, GLOBAL
SECURITY PROGRAM, UNION OF CONCERNED SCIENTISTS; STEVEN P.
NESBIT, CHAIRMAN, BACK-END WORKING GROUP, UNITED STATES NUCLEAR
INFRASTRUCTURE COUNCIL; AND MARK MCMANUS, GENERAL PRESIDENT,
UNITED ASSOCIATION OF UNION PLUMBERS, PIPEFITTERS, WELDERS, AND
SERVICE TECHNICIANS

STATEMENT OF EDWARD F. SPROAT III

Mr. Sproat. Thank you very much for your invitation to
address the committee this morning about the proposed
legislation. I would like to make it clear to the committee
that the opinions I am going to express this morning are
strictly my own. In no way should they be construed as
representing my current employer, and are based on my
experience in running the Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste
Management at the Department of Energy from 2006 through the
beginning of 2009.
I appeared before this committee back in July of 2006, 11
years ago, and at that point in time, I made a commitment to
the committee to submit a quality license application for Yucca
Mountain by June 30 of 2008. I actually delivered that to the
NRC on June 3 of 2008, after the work of several thousand very
qualified, very smart people, both in the Department of Energy
and the National Labs who had worked for a very long period of
time to put that license application together.
The subsequent review by the NRC staff took almost 7 years,
and culminated with the issuance of the last of their five
volumes of their safety evaluation report, or their SER, in
January of 2015. Their review, the NRC staff's review,
concluded that the design met all the technical requirements,
including the million year postclosure radiation release
requirement that was set by the EPA.
However, in their evaluation, there were two issues left
that they said need to be addressed before the staff could
recommend to the full commission that a construction license
for Yucca Mountain be granted. One was permanent land
withdrawal, because the Department could not show that at some
time in the future, public access to the site would be
available. And the second was water. And in terms of the State
of Nevada, water engineers not permitting the Department
permits to make water withdrawals at the site.
So the next step in the NRC licensing process is to
litigate the well over 200 contentions that have been filed by
the interveners in front of the Atomic Safety and Licensing
Board. Both the NRC and the Department of Energy must be
adequately funded to litigate those contentions in front of the
ASLB, and we would expect that period of time to be at least 2,
probably 3 to 4 years for that litigation to occur before all
the contentions can be adjudicated, appealed, and a final
decision made by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission on granting
a construction permit or not on the Yucca Mountain license
application.
The other key thing that is very, very important on moving
forward is the Department of Energy, as the applicant, must be
a willing applicant to vigorously defend the license
application, and I think it would be pretty safe to say that
over the past 8 years, the past administration was not willing
to do that.
So I would like to move on and just quickly address a
couple of things about the issues that need to be addressed
with modifying and amending the Nuclear Waste Policy Act. First
of all, one of the first key issues is access to the Nuclear
Waste Fund, and this issue arose a number of years back when
the receipts being collected from the utilities around the
country were classified as mandatory receipts, but the
appropriations for the Department to build the repository are
classified as discretionary. As a result of that mismatch
between mandatory receipts and discretionary appropriations,
any appropriations for the repository is scored as negative
against the budget. So that needs to be fixed.
The issue of permanent land withdrawal, we have already
talked about a little bit. The issue of water permits at the
site, we have talked a little bit about. I just want to give
you one quick vignette. When we were trying to drill a small
well at the site to understand the seismic aspects of the site,
we needed water to cool the drill bits, and the State of Nevada
withheld those permits. So that is one of the issues of why the
issue of water rights is in this legislation.
The other issue that needs to be addressed is
transportation. Regardless of whether we are talking about an
interim storage site, a permanent repository, every site is
going to need to address the issue of transportation. When you
have high-level waste at 121 sites in 39 different States, it
doesn't matter whether you have local consent or not if you are
not able to get the material there, which means that getting
consent across those various political boundaries is going to
be a challenge without some kind of clear Federal direction on
their ability to direct that transportation to occur.
So in conclusion, it has been 35 years since the Nuclear
Waste Policy Act has been passed, and right now, we are
probably within 3 to 4 years of finally getting a decision on
whether or not the repository at Yucca Mountain is licensable
or not. Providing the necessary funding to the Department and
to the NRC to finish the hearings and finish the licensing
process, I think is really the right next step. To me, starting
over at this stage of the game, being this close to getting a
final NRC decision, makes no sense at all given the past
history of this project and how long it has taken.
And I guess finally, the last point I would like to make,
is regardless of the outcome of the NRC licensing process, new
legislation is going to be needed in order to address the
problems that I have outlined in order to get the spent nuclear
fuel and high-level nuclear waste from those 121 sites in 39
States to a central repository at some point in time in the
future.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sproat follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. We thank you for your service to our country,
and it is great seeing you again. The Chair now recognizes Mr.
Anthony O'Donnell, chairman of the Nuclear Issues Subcommittee
at the National Association of Regulatory Utility
Commissioners, which is NARUC. You are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANTHONY J. O'DONNELL

Mr. O'Donnell. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning and Ranking Member Tonko, both, and members of the
Subcommittee on the Environment. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify today on the Nuclear Waste Policy Amendments Act of
2017. My name it Tony O'Donnell. I am a commissioner on the
Maryland Public Service Commission, and I also serve as
chairman of National Association of Regulatory Utility
Commissioners, as you heard from the chairman, NARUC,
Subcommittee on Nuclear Issues and Waste Disposal.
As you know very well, this matter of the Nation's high-
level nuclear waste policy is a high-priority issue for NARUC
and its members. The electricity consumers in the United
States, often referred to as ratepayers in industry jargon,
have paid more than $40 billion in direct payments and accrued
interest into the Nuclear Waste Fund over the last 30 years. To
date, we have virtually nothing, repeat, nothing, to show for
this substantial tax on nuclear-generated electricity. In fact,
the collection of the fee to pay for the Federal nuclear waste
program is the only component of the program that has ever
worked as intended.
I am here today on behalf of NARUC to applaud the
subcommittee for its leadership, and support your efforts to
get this program moving once again. In our view, the discussion
draft that is the subject of today's hearing is a very positive
and welcome step forward to put the program on solid footing,
and to move the program to a point where decisions will be
based on the merits of the work performed and not based on the
politics of the moment.
I would like to very briefly address what we believe are
some of the highlights of the draft legislation and point out a
couple areas of concern.
We are very pleased that the draft aggressively addresses
the threshold issue of licensing. The draft requires a final
NRC decision approving or disapproving Yucca Mountain license
application before other major provisions can be implemented.
We commend the committee for making progress contingent on some
decision on a permanent repository license.
We are similarly pleased that the discussion draft
addresses how the current funds in the Nuclear Waste Fund will
be disbursed. The draft specifies that certain percentages of
the amounts in the waste fund on the date of the enactment must
be available to the Secretary on certain trigger dates. The
specification that those funds be made available, quote,
``without further appropriations,'' end quote, is an excellent
way to assure both confidence and progress in the program.
Please note that NARUC members will need to see the actual
percentages prior to providing unqualified support for that
section, 503. The discussion draft's revised mechanism assures
any fees collected going forward are immediately available to
the Secretary for the waste-related activities without
additional appropriations. If the NWF fee is restarted, this
provision is absolutely crucial.
With regard to restarting the fee collection, we believe
that expressly linking any restart of the NWF fee to a final
NRC decision on licensing repository is, again, the right
approach. The legislation would benefit from a specification
that is part of the annual assessment of the need for, or level
of, any fee. The Secretary included an analysis on whether the
annual interest on the corpus is sufficient to cover the
projected outlays for the repository and any other required
disbursements.
The draft contains a provision which NARUC supports, that a
cost benefit analysis is a prerequisite for any nonfederally
licensed storage facility. In Section 602 of the draft, the
Director of the Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management
is given a 5-year term. The subcommittee may wish to consider
increasing the term length to provide greater stability in the
program across successive administrations.
Finally, one area that has raised definite concerns is
Section 301's discussion of the requirement for DOE to take
title to waste. The discussion draft should clarify and/or
define what constitutes, quote, ``delivery and acceptance,''
end quote. The definition must assure that DOE cannot simply
take title of waste in situ, that is where it is currently
being stored, and claim they have met their contractual
obligations. Additionally, the definition must make clear that
any transfer of title to DOE includes removing the waste to a
different NRC licensed storage facility.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony today, and I will
be pleased to take any questions that the members may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. O'Donnell follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back the time. Thank you
very much.
Now, I would like to turn to Dr. Edwin Lyman, senior
scientist of the Global Security Program at the Union of
Concerned Scientists.
Sir, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF EDWIN LYMAN

Dr. Lyman. Yes. Good morning. And on behalf of the Union of
Concerned Scientists, I would like to thank Chairman Shimkus
and Ranking Member Tonko and the other distinguished members of
the subcommittee for the opportunity to provide our views on
this very important subject.
UCS has more than 500,000 supporters united by a central
concern that we need sound, scientific analysis to create a
healthy, safe, and sustainable future. In addition, we are
neither pro- nor antinuclear power, but we have served as a
nuclear power safety and security watchdog for nearly 50 years.
And in that respect, we believe it is critically important that
spent fuel be managed safely and protected from a terrorist
attack until it can be buried irretrievably in a geologic
repository. But in addition, the sustainable nuclear waste
strategy must also have broad public acceptance.
So to this end, we appreciate the interest of the authors
of the discussion draft in moving the ball forward in nuclear
waste disposal, but we do disagree with the draft bill's
limited scope and its Yucca Mountain-centric approach. We need
a comprehensive strategy that addresses all aspects of the
problem, including security and safety of transportation and
storage both at and away from the actual sites. And we do need
to find--at least try to find--an approach for a repository
siting that could facilitate local and regional cooperation
rather than heighten already entrenched opposition. And I think
we have already seen the discussion draft is going the wrong
direction by attempting to resolve disputes by overriding State
authority instead of promoting dialogue and cooperation. And
the State of Nevada, predictably and justifiably, is crying
foul.
We strongly support the development of geological
repositories for direct disposal of spent fuel. We do not have
the geological expertise on staff to assess the technical
suitability of Yucca Mountain or any other potential site. But
with regard to political suitability, we do believe that the
Blue Ribbon Commission report was correct that the process by
which Yucca Mountain was selected was flawed and has
contributed to the erosion of trust that caused the program to
stall.
And so we believe Congress needs to pursue a different and
less adversarial approach that would be more likely to lead to
selection of sites that are both technically suitable and
publicly acceptable. And once such a process is in place, Yucca
Mountain could and then should compete with other repository
proposals on a level playing field.
One cannot underestimate the technical problems associated
with building repository to effectively isolate nuclear waste
from the environment for hundreds of thousands of years. The
foundation of such an effort is good science. And one of the
best ways Congress could improve the prospects for any
repository is to fully support the scientific work needed to
establish its technical basis.
In the case of Yucca Mountain, there are nearly 300
technical contentions that would have to be adjudicated, and we
think the viability of Yucca Mountain depends critically on
their resolution. And we do note that technical members within
DOE have no doubt moved on to other things since the Yucca
Mountain was terminated. So DOE, even if it gets all the
resources it needs now, it will take time to reconstitute that
expertise and to attempt to successfully defend its
application.
A comprehensive strategy for waste management must address
safety and security of spent fuel at reactor sites. Even if
Yucca Mountain received a license tomorrow, there would be a
lot of spent fuel at reactors for many decades to come.
So we believe, in principle, it can be managed safely and
securely at reactor sites, but the NRC has failed to take steps
needed to remediate a very dangerous situation that exposes
millions of Americans to needless risk, and that is the
potential for fires and dangerously overloaded spent fuel
pools. An earthquake or terrorist attack could cause a pool to
lose its cooling water, releasing a large fraction of
radioactive contents into the environment. The impact on the
American economy would be profound, more than likely far worse
than the estimated 200 billion damages caused by the much
smaller release of radioactivity from the Fukushima Daiichi
accident.
These consequences could be greatly reduced if nuclear
plants transferred more of their older spent fuel to dry
storage casks onsite, but the NRC has refused plans to do so
insisting that the current risk is tolerable, and the industry
will not voluntarily spend the money to do so if they are not
forced to do so. So we urge Congress, as part of any nuclear
waste management reform package, to address this risk either by
requiring or creating strong incentives for plants to move more
of their spent fuel to dry cast storage, and this requirement
would also add good jobs in the dry cast storage construction
industry.
The risk does not go down to zero even after the fuel has
moved to dry casks. They have to be protected adequately from
sabotage. And I would note that the NRC has suspended a
rulemaking which would address additional vulnerabilities for
sabotage of dry casks either in transit or in storage that need
to be addressed.
With regard to consolidated interim storage, we do believe
that a strong linkage needs to remain between licensing a
repository and allowing consolidated interim storage to go
forward because of the potential for derailing the momentum for
geological repository. So we note that the discussion draft in
allowing the DOE to move forward, even if NRC says no to Yucca
Mountain, would be the wrong outcome and that there would be no
other alternatives. So we believe we need to start looking for
new geological disposal sites, and the time is to start looking
for them now.
And I am already going over, so I will just conclude.
We think the U.S. can afford to allow the NRC to take its
time in reviewing the safety of Yucca Mountain and to locate
and characterize other possible repository sites provided that
plants thin out their high-density spent fuel pools and other
necessary upgrades are carried out. So there is no urgent need
to rush forward with a less than optimal solution for the long
term.
Thank you for your attention, and I would be happy to
answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Lyman follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
The Chair now turns to Mr. Steven Nesbit, chairman of the
Backend Working Group at the Nuclear Infrastructure Council.
You are recognized for 5 minutes. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN P. NESBIT

Mr. Nesbit. Good morning. On behalf of the United States
Nuclear Infrastructure Council, I thank you for the opportunity
to appear and offer testimony on the Nuclear Waste Policy
Amendments Act of 2017.
I appear before you today discouraged by the country's lack
of accomplishments in the area of used fuel management over the
past three-and-a-half decades but encouraged by the opportunity
to make real and lasting progress over the coming months and
years.
Let me start by emphasizing the urgent need to successfully
manage the back end of the nuclear fuel cycle in this country.
The used fuel impasse is costing U.S. taxpayers billions of
dollars. In addition to the mounting costs, failure to bring
closure to the back end of the nuclear fuel cycle adversely
impacts nuclear energy as a vital component for reliable,
affordable, and clean electricity and energy independence,
jobs, exports, and competitors.
Speaking from the standpoint of my employer, Duke Energy
Corporation, nuclear power has been a remarkable success story
for our customers in North Carolina and South Carolina. Duke
Energy operates 11 nuclear power reactors in these two States,
and these nuclear plants generate about half of the electricity
the company provides to its Carolinas' customers reliably,
economically, and with minimal environmental impacts. Used fuel
management, however, continues to be a costly and time-
consuming burden for Duke Energy and other utilities, as
described in more detail in my written remarks.
While nuclear power plants store used fuel safely and
securely, extensive onsite storage of used fuel is a
distraction from the plant's primary mission of producing
electricity, and it has cost U.S. taxpayers billions of dollars
to date with tens of billions to follow. There is an imperative
need for action.
In a recent issue brief--it is attached to my testimony--
the United States Nuclear Infrastructure Council made six
recommendations on how to break the used fuel logjam. In
particular, USNIC believes the Government should carry out its
mandate under the Nuclear Waste Policy Act and complete the
initial licensing process for geological repository at Yucca
Mountain.
Yucca Mountain is located in a remote arid region of the
country on federally owned land, and its suitability for
disposal of used fuel has been confirmed by decades of
scientific study involving the Nation's national laboratories
and most recently a favorable safety evaluation by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission. It is time to follow the law and
complete the regulatory review of Yucca Mountain.
USNIC applauds the Nuclear Waste Policy Amendments Act of
2017 as a significant positive step toward a more effective and
sustainable used fuel management program for the country. Let
me highlight some key points.
The discussion draft provides for necessary Federal actions
to support completion of the licensing process at Yucca
Mountain. It encourages a dialogue with the State of Nevada and
its citizens about impact assistance and benefits that might be
made available in return for hosting a geological repository.
It provides a legal framework for a consolidated interim
storage program for used nuclear fuel. It addresses funding,
perhaps the most challenging aspect of this issue facing the
Federal Government.
The draft legislation establishes a framework for accessing
the existing balance in the waste fund as well as preserving
future receipts, if any, for the purpose for which they were
collected.
Finally, the discussion draft reestablishes and strengthens
the Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management, or OCRWM,
within the Department of Energy as the entity responsible for
fulfilling the Government's obligations related to used fuel
management. Of course, simply reestablishing OCRWM requires no
authorizing legislation. And I would be remiss if I did not
point out that DOE should act immediately to do so.
In addition, Congress should appropriate funding to DOE and
the NRC to restart the Yucca Mountain licensing process,
another action already authorized by Federal law.
In closing, I want to reiterate my thanks to your
subcommittee for considering this important issue, and in
particular, to Chairman Shimkus for his unswerving advocacy for
an effective Federal program to manage used fuel and high-level
waste in a manner that is consistent with Federal law. It has
been said many times that used fuel disposal is a political
problem, not a technical one. Nevertheless, it is an issue that
must be addressed, and the nuclear industry which has
consistently fulfilled its obligations under the Nuclear Waste
Policy Act stands ready to work with the Government to do so.
I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nesbit follows:]
[[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman returns the balance of his time.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Mark McManus, the general
president of the United Association of Plumbers, Pipefitters,
Welders, and Service Techs of the United States and Canada.
Sir, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Thanks for being
here.

STATEMENT OF MARK MCMANUS

Mr. McManus. Good morning. Chairman Shmikus and Ranking
Member Tonko and members----
Mr. Shimkus. Let's do that again. Shimkus.
Mr. McManus [continuing]. Shimkus and Ranking Member
Tonko--not Tomko--Tonko and members of the Subcommittee on the
Environment. Thank you. Thank you for your invitation to appear
before the committee today to discuss the state of the nuclear
energy industry and the economic impacts to our country.
My name is Mark McManus, and I serve as general president
of the United Association of Union Plumbers, Pipefitters,
Welders, and Service Techs. We represent 340,000 of the hardest
working, highly trained men and women in the piping industry.
When it comes to nuclear power, our members are at the
forefront ensuring we deliver safe, clean energy to consumers.
However, the nuclear industry is in dire crossroads in America.
To remain viable, we must recognize nuclear energy as a key
component to our energy future and be actively committed to its
overall success.
This hearing could not have come at a more important time.
With many recently announced closures and other plants on life
support, the time to act is now. As the best method of
generating electricity without producing greenhouse gases,
expanding nuclear power must be a top priority. In fact, most
scientists agree that the world cannot sufficiently battle
climate change without serious commitment to expanding our
nuclear fleet.
Nuclear power currently makes up roughly 20 percent of the
energy mix in the United States. Our current fleet, which
stands at 99 reactors, is facing severe difficulties due to
intense pricing pressures from natural gas. Natural gas alone,
while less carbon intensive than coal, is simply not enough to
meet our overall reduction goals. To be successful, it is
critical that we not only keep our current fleet of nuclear
reactors open, but we also expand the nuclear power industry in
the United States.
Consider the following: One, nuclear power produces 70
percent of our carbon-free electricity today. In contrast, wind
and solar produce only 2 percent of the electricity and only 6
percent of our carbon-free electricity. Nuclear energy also
produces none of the air pollution that comes from burning
fossil fuels.
Two, American nuclear reactors operate all day, all night,
every hour on the hour, making nuclear a most reliable source
of electricity. Renewable energy is intermittent with power
available only when the wind blows or the sun shines, which is
only about a third of the time.
Three, according to the National Academy of Sciences,
nuclear energy can produce electricity at or below the cost of
wind, solar, or coal with carbon capture. Renewable sources may
seem cost effective, but only because they are subsidized with
billions in Government subsidies. At the current rates, the
Government and taxpayers would have to pay 170 billion to
subsidies for the 186,000 wind turbines necessary to equal the
outfit of 100 nuclear reactors.
Nuclear power is also vitally important to the American
economy and job creation. The vast majority of nuclear reactors
generating carbon-free power in the United States have been
successfully maintained by the United Association members and
our union contractors.
Each nuclear facility in our country employs 400 to 700
workers per 1,000 megawatts of power capacity. A new reactor
like AP1000 currently under construction in Georgia will employ
thousands of our members for nearly a decade. When construction
is complete, our members will handle the refueling and
maintenance of these plants for 60 to 80 years. This is truly a
long-term employment.
The same can also be said for the next generation of
reactors. Small modular reactors, SMRs, are in various stage of
developments. As it stands now, the first SMR that will be
deployed in the United States is a reactor being built by
NuScale for the Utah municipal authority on the Idaho National
Lab site. This project includes the installation of over
150,000 linear feet of piping, 2,500 pieces of equipment, and
4,500 valves. These numbers represent thousands upon thousands
of man-hours for our members. This offers them the opportunity
to provide for their families and sustain the middle-class life
they worked so hard to have.
The economic benefits reach beyond the project construction
and maintenance. Consider the tax revenue generated for the
local schools, hospitals, and impact on local businesses that
rely on the workers and their families' patronage. These
projects create valuable communities for our citizens.
When a nuclear plant closes, it jeopardizes the ancillary
jobs and the economies that support the plant. Communities that
are left devastated are much like when we saw the auto
manufacturing plants close. The nuclear industry needs your
assistance. It is no secret that the Westinghouse bankruptcy
has cast a cloud over the future of nuclear power in the United
States.
Over the next month or two, we hope to have a clearer
picture on the long-term ramifications. But even before the
Westinghouse situation, the United States was rapidly losing
ground to countries like China and India who are outpacing us
on development. As is happening with infrastructure in our
country in general, we are falling behind others civilized
countries. We must do more to become a world leader in this
industry.
Hearing all this makes nuclear energy sound like a no-
brainer. So why are we falling behind? Why won't we push
forward? Why? Because despite of the environmental benefits and
job creations, we see reactors closing. Short answer is
politics and public misperception.
Yucca Mountain is a prime example. It has been 30 years
since Congress designated Nevada's Yucca Mountain as a secure
site for our Nation's nuclear wastewater. Since then, $11
billion later, Yucca Mountain sits empty. Yucca Mountain is in
a remote section of Mojave Desert and the secure storage
facility is located 1,000 feet underground.
A case study released by the NRC in 2014 concluded that the
design met all the agency's requirements. They stated the
proposed repository and design will be capable of safely
isolating used nuclear fuel to the higher radioactivity waste
for 1-million-year period specified in the regulations.
There are currently 79,000 tons of existing nuclear waste
in America right now. It is stored in smaller facilities
scattered across the country. These facilities are much less
secure and much more less permanent than the long-term solution
of Yucca Mountain. Each one of these smaller sites, 34 in all,
require constant maintenance and vigilance from safety to
security.
Mr. Shimkus. You have to wrap it up pretty quickly.
Mr. McManus. In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, United
Association--I believe the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 2017
offers a great first step in revitalizing the nuclear energy
and putting people back to work.
On behalf of the United Association, I apologize for going
over my time. Thank you for hearing me.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McManus follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank you
for your testimony.
I want to thank you all for your testimony. And I will move
to the question-and-answer portion of the hearing and recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
First of all, Ward, I want to thank you for coming. I know
you are retiring May 4th. I know you jumped through hoops to
make sure you were here. I personally appreciate it. Again,
thank you for your service.
Let me turn to you, Mr. Sproat. During your tenure as the
director of DOE's Yucca Mountain office, you oversaw the
development of a project scheduled for, and I quote, ``Best
case scenario to get the repository open and operational.'' In
2006, you testified before Congress that certain provisions
included in this discussion draft were critical to moving
forward expeditiously.
Will you please--I know you mentioned this in your opening
statement--will you please clarify which of these provisions
are the most critical to successfully move forward with the
repository?
Mr. Sproat. I would say, Mr. Chairman, the very first or
top priority is about getting the issues associated with the
nuclear waste fund fixed. You are talking about a major capital
project that will stretch over decades. And anybody who has
been involved in running a major capital project, whether it is
building a repository, building a power plant, knows that the
first thing you need is to be able to hold somebody accountable
for the costs and schedule that is needed to deliver that
project is a source of funding that is predictable so that you
can actually plan the project to meet that source of funding.
So getting the issue around the nuclear waste fund and the
mismatch between the mandatory receipts and discretionary
appropriations, I would say, is probably the top priority.
Because without getting that fixed--when I went back and looked
at some of my older testimony in front of the Senate Budget
Committee about what we anticipated we would need during peak
construction of the repository, it was between 1\1/2\ to 2\1/4\
billion dollars a year during that peak construction period
where we are buying canisters and building a repository. And at
$750 million a year of receipts in the nuclear waste fund when
the Government was collecting those receipts, that had to be
made up out of the nuclear waste fund. So I would say that
would be number one.
Mr. Shimkus. I appreciate that. And just going off script,
so we are talking about a big infrastructure plan for the
country, and the President has mentioned $1 trillion. Well,
this could be 100 billion over 100 years.
Mr. McManus, that would probably employ a lot of your
members, don't you think?
Mr. McManus. I do think so, and I think it is much needed,
sir.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Again, back to Mr. Sproat. Section 503 of the discussion
draft would make certain portions--and this is kind of what you
were talking about--the balance of the corpus of the nuclear
waste fund available for DOE if the Department reaches certain
milestones over the course of the 120-year construction,
operation, decommissioning, and postdecommissioning monitoring
phases.
Mr. O'Donnell, how would this approach benefit your
ratepayers?
Mr. O'Donnell. Thank you for the question, Mr. Chairman.
Clearly, it will give confidence and continuity to the program.
In other words, it won't be up to the whims of when these funds
will be available. But it will give the Secretary the
discretion and the program the confidence that it is going to
be funded going forward. And I think that is essential to the
central component from NARUC's perspective on this draft
legislation.
Mr. Shimkus. And we haven't seen, historically, how
political whims have derailed projects before, have we?
Mr. O'Donnell. I know that is a rhetorical question, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Mr. Sproat, how would this provision assist with DOE's
ability to properly plan and budget for certain milestones for
a multigenerational capital infrastructure project?
Mr. Sproat. I don't profess to fully understand the intent
of the wording, but I will say that in terms of maybe some of
the implications of trying to implement it, the very first
thing it would be is reestablishing the revenue coming in from
utilities. And one of the things I would like to point out to
the committee is that when we we, the Department, looked at the
adequacy of the nuclear waste fund the last year I was there in
2008, we concluded that the nuclear waste fund corpus and its
earnings through interest would be adequate to build and
operate the repository. It would not be adequate to build and
operate the repository and interim storage assuming even at
that point in time that the Department had full access to the
corpus and the revenue coming into the fund. So it is one thing
for the committee to consider in terms of adequacy of the fund
going forward.
Mr. Shimkus. I am going to sneak one more in, and I am
going to shorten it.
In 2007, the Department of Energy submitted a legislative
proposal that intended to clarify whether RCRA applied to the
disposal material on Yucca Mountain. Why is this clarification
necessary?
Mr. Sproat. The reason that clarification is necessary is
that--and by the way, I am no expert on RCRA--but, however, in
talking with Department attorneys and some of my experiences
post employment with the Department, EPA has basically
delegated an amount of regulation to the States, I think
appropriately so, for regulating what gets buried and how
various materials are disposed of in their State. In this case,
the RCRA would allow the State of Nevada to regulate the burial
of material at the site. And, for example, the waste canisters
and the waste packages that are evaluated as part of the NRC
license application where they have determined there is
adequacy to meet the design of their repository, the State
could make a determination that those materials won't be
allowed to be buried in their State.
So that issue of RCRA and the State ability to regulate
various aspects of the buried material and the operation of the
repository is something, I think, at least needs to be
recognized and addressed appropriately.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much. And RCRA, for the laymen,
is Resource Conservation Recovery Act. I don't like to use
acronyms, but I tried to be quick.
So the Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It is my understanding that there are over 200 contentions
with the Yucca license application. Does anyone on our panel
have an estimate on how long or expensive it will be to resolve
these issues? Are we talking years? What kind of dollar
amounts?
Mr. Sproat. Mr. Tonko, based on my experience in the
commercial nuclear sector where I was involved with licensing
one of our nuclear power plants back in the 1980s where we had,
I think, probably--I forget the exact number--it was maybe
about 16, 17 contentions, and that litigation in front of the
Atomic Safety and Licensing Board took a little over a year.
It is not beyond the realm of possibility that with these
number of contentions--and the licensing board has the ability
to combine those contentions together. They don't need
necessarily to be litigated each one individually, but I would
expect--and I think in my written testimony I said two to
three. It could be as many as four, depending on how that--
because not only does the Atomic Safety and Licensing Board
make an initial determination, there is an appeals board also
if any of the parties want to appeal that before it goes to the
Commission.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Anyone else? Dr. Lyman?
Dr. Lyman. Sorry. Yes. I was involved in a few NRC
adjudications, and there was one that took 10 years to resolve
two contentions. I just thought I would put that in.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Mr. O'Donnell?
Mr. O'Donnell. Thank you, Ranking Member Tonko. I think it
is also important to note at this juncture that there is a cost
that needs to be factored in of inaction. And the cost of
inaction comes in from the judgment fund payments. About $800
million a year coming out of the judgment fund payments. Up to
this point, DOE has already paid $6.1 billion in damages, and
that is the cost of inactivity. So the cost of inaction is very
tremendous, about $2\1/2\ million a day, and that is important
to note.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Mr. Nesbit, did you want to say something?
Mr. Nesbit. Mr. Tonko, I would like to agree with Mr.
Sproat. And I would add that several years to resolve this
number of contentions I don't think is unreasonable. I don't
think you should expect that any repository anywhere would not
have contentions. So it is not like going somewhere else would
save the time.
Moreover, we need to reestablish the infrastructure at the
Department of Energy to be, as Mr. Sproat puts it, a willing
applicant. And that is why I strongly recommend that we
immediately reestablish the Office of Civilian Radioactive
Waste Management.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
So I am hearing a number of years before construction and
then transportation can even begin. And that may not fully take
into account, I would believe, the State of Nevada's continued
opposition, potential litigation, and appropriations issues
here in Congress.
So with that, Dr. Lyman, given the timeframe to construct
the long-term repository, waste will continue to accumulate at
given sites. Should more be done to enhance safety at spent
fuel pools?
Dr. Lyman. Yes. Thanks for the question. As I said in my
written testimony, we don't think that the NRC is doing enough
to assure the safety and security of spent fuel at reactor
sites and also at consolidated interim storage sites, should
they be built.
One issue I raised was the potential for a spent fuel pool
fire, which is a result of the dense packed storage policy at
U.S. plants which, in part, is a legacy of the failure to go
forward with a U.S. plan to take title and take spent fuel away
from sites, but nonetheless, does not require that option to be
mitigated, because you can expedite a transfer by taking most
of the inventory of fuel out of the spent fuel pools, you can
greatly reduce the risk of the spent fuel pool fire. And so
that is one issue that I raised.
And there is no question that spent fuel will be onsite for
many decades, especially since some reactors may be getting
license extensions for up to 80 years. And as long as they
operate, they are going to need onsite spent fuel storage.
Mr. Tonko. Well, with its given powers, can NRC require
greater safety procedures, or is it something that Congress
should consider legislating?
Dr. Lyman. Well, NRC to date has not--they have considered
these issues and not taken any action. So, really, it is up to
Congress. At this point, until the composition of the
Commission changes and their direction changes, there is room
for some congressional action on this I think.
Mr. Tonko. OK.
Mr. Nesbit, Duke Energy has paid 2.5 billion from customers
into the nuclear waste fund. And Duke Energy has also been paid
out significant sums from the Federal Government. Obviously, we
don't know the specifics, but generally speaking, given the
option for interim storage, would Duke Energy or utilities in
similar situations consider it a potential alternative while
the Government continues to work on a long-term solution?
Mr. Nesbit. We support consolidated interim storage. We
think that the country should move forward with that, and
particularly focusing on fuel that is currently stored at
shutdown plants. Because those plants do not have the--if it
were not for the used fuel onsite, they wouldn't have to
maintain the infrastructure in terms of security, safety,
emergency planning, radiation protection, et cetera.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. I yield back. In fact, I have
exhausted my time, so----
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes Congressman Joe Barton, former
full committee chairman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. And I have handed both my phones to my staff so
I won't be interrupted.
Mr. Shimkus. Good job.
Mr. Barton. It was her suggestion, so I have to give her
the credit.
Mr. Sproat, what would happen, in your opinion, if we were
to reopen--and I am not advocating this--but if we were to
reopen the site selection process for a permanent repository?
Would we have a different outcome?
Mr. Sproat. Mr. Barton, that is a very good question. I
will just tell you, my own personal opinion is the answer to
your question is no, we won't. If you go back and take a look
at the history--and, by the way, the staff put together a very
good history on the Nuclear Waste Policy Act and its evolution
and the activities that followed attached to the hearing
notice. And we have attempted at least once, I think twice,
going to various States and looking for a willing host
community. We went to I think it was 31 or 32 Governors that
turned us down back in the 1970s or early 1980s, and then we
had the nuclear waste negotiator whose job it was to negotiate
a willing site, and they failed also.
My personal opinion, based on what happened about that
history as well as what happened with privatized spent fuel
storage, was that you could have a willing host community. Nye
County in Nevada have said they want the repository. However,
the surrounding units of Government and the surrounding States,
because any place we are going to place a site, material is
going to be transported through those local government
jurisdictions will have a say. And quite frankly, I think the
political opposition will occur if not in the host community,
in the surrounding host communities and the transportation
routes no matter where we put it.
Mr. Barton. So it is really not feasible, in your opinion,
to reopen the permanent site selection process? Personal
opinion.
Mr. Sproat. Unless the Commission rules that the Yucca
Mountain site cannot be licensed under the current regulatory
regime, then we have to do something else.
Mr. Barton. The staff brief--the majority staff brief for
this hearing says that the Yucca Mountain site has passed all
technical and safety reviews and has been found safe to store
high-level nuclear waste for a million years. Is that correct?
Mr. Sproat. That is correct.
Mr. Barton. What is the half-life of high-level nuclear
waste, radioactive half-life?
Mr. Sproat. Depending on--why don't you ask Dr. Lyman that
question? No. Depending on the radionuclides we are talking
about, it varies quite a bit. But if you went and took a look
at the license application and some summaries of it, you will
see a distribution of what the projected radioactive releases
from the repository are out to a million years. And as I think
Chairman Shimkus talked about at the very beginning, it was
less exposure than a cross-country airline flight.
Mr. Barton. Well, a million years puts it beyond my tenure
in this Congress. I mean, we are----
Mr. Shimkus. We can only hope.
Mr. Barton. Love that love you just gave me, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to ask Mr. O'Donnell this question: How many
sites do you think will vie for the temporary repository if
this bill becomes law? How many States?
Mr. O'Donnell. I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman, Congressman
Barton. I really don't know. It would be hard for me to
anticipate how many States might. I know that there are States
that have interests. We have seen that. So----
Mr. Barton. One is my State.
Mr. O'Donnell. Of course. And there is your neighboring
State as well, in New Mexico, I believe. So there is some
interest out there, but it is hard for me to predict how many
others may decide it is in their interest moving forward.
Mr. Barton. Is your association supportive of this pending
legislation that requires, for the temporary repositories, that
the States have to affirm that they will accept it?
Mr. McManus. We believe that those provisions for the
temporary facilities are good. And we also believe that forward
progress on any other opportunities to go forward are
contingent on the licensing decision at the NRC, and NARUC
believes it is very, very important.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your courtesy. I
yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
California, Mr. Peters, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
the topic coming up in the subcommittee today.
It is interesting to hear that representatives from Nevada
testify, obviously, nuclear fuel, what we do with it affects a
lot of congressional districts around the country. Just on the
edge of San Diego County is the San Onofre Nuclear Generating
Station, one of the more recently shutdown locations. We have
about 3.6 million pounds of spent fuel in need of safe storage.
I think my constituents assert, and I agree, that the current
property is not optimal. I also understand that our options to
move it are limited.
I know that one of the ways to improve the situation is
with the preferred location interim storage that allows us to
consolidate some of the onsite storage. Seventy-eight sites in
34 States with spent fuel waiting, many in substandard storage
with a number of--growing number of nuclear facilities shutting
down. Since 2012, nuclear plant owners have closed or announced
the closure of 14 facilities, that includes San Onofre, which
hasn't produced electricity since 2012.
So moving spent fuel from these sites, especially shutdown
sites, is not a new idea, but obviously in need of some new
momentum, probably. So I had a couple of questions. And maybe,
Mr. Sproat, jumping ahead to when Yucca Mountain would be open,
say. There is obviously a capacity issue already with it. There
is probably not enough space in Yucca Mountain to deal with a
lot of the waste that we are dealing--we are talking about
moving. How would you prioritize what gets put in? A number of
factors you might look at to weigh areas with the most fuel,
largest concentration of people in the surrounding region, most
dangerous environmental hazards, facilities that have already
shut down, have been waiting the longest, nature of the field.
How would you decide what gets in and what doesn't?
Mr. Sproat. Mr. Peters, actually, within--and my memory
here is a little vague. I can't remember whether it is in the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act or whether it is in the implementing
regulations in the Department of Energy, but there is something
called the queue. And it has been in the law from the very
beginning, which is oldest fuel gets moved first.
Mr. Peters. OK.
Mr. Sproat. And when the liability of the Federal
Government for not complying with the spent fuel removal
contracts that all the utilities signed, that contract required
the beginning of moving of that fuel in 1998 from the oldest
plants first. The courts have held that the liabilities that
the Government has is based on when that fuel should have moved
based on the plant spot in the queue.
Mr. Peters. OK.
Mr. Sproat. So, in terms of the format and the regulations,
I guess I would say, regarding what gets moved first, that has
already been determined in terms of oldest fuel first. So San
Onofre 1 would be very high in that queue, for example.
Second point I would just like to make about the capacity
of the repository. The Nuclear Waste Policy Act set a limit of
72,000 metric tons heavy metal for that repository. But when
the Department did the environmental impact statement, we
evaluated a higher level, and my notes said it was 120,000
metric tons. So the license application is submitted based on
what the law currently says is the legal limit. However, in
terms of the EIS, the environmental impact statement, we
evaluated 120,000 metric tons, ,which showed we could take more
if that was permitted by law.
Mr. Peters. Thanks for your help.
I had another question that no one is raising. Maybe a
little out of my comfort zone here, but I understand that the
next generation nuclear we have talked about a little bit
purports to be more effective at spending more of the fuel,
leaving less residual behind to dispose of. Is there any chance
that the material we are talking about disposing of today would
be useful in that next generation process?
Mr. Sproat. There is--it is very interesting. That topic
keeps coming up over and over again over the past couple of
decades about taking the spent nuclear fuel and reprocessing it
and generating more fuel. I will tell you my personal opinion
based on what I know.
Number one, it doesn't make economic sense. The business
case for doing that doesn't exist. It is very expensive. And,
number two, the older fuel at this stage in the game probably
doesn't have enough residual energy in it to make it worthwhile
anyway. So, while it is--I would believe--I think a number of
people would say it is scientifically and engineering possible
to do that, I don't think it makes any economic sense.
Mr. Peters. When you say it doesn't make economic sense,
are you comparing it to the use of new fuel? I understand that.
But are you considering the costs that we are incurring to get
rid of it? Is that part of the calculus?
Mr. Sproat. Yes, it is. Because even if you were to follow
the reprocessing process and reprocess some of that fuel, you
still have, in some cases, some high level but a lot of medium
level of radioactive waste left over that has to be disposed
of. So it doesn't all disappear.
Mr. Peters. Right. OK.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes my vice chairman, Mr. McKinley,
from West Virginia, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Maybe you can follow
up back on that line of questioning. I visited the recycling
facility in La Hague in France, and they told us there that the
cost of the recycling was very expensive and would require
substantial subsidization if we were to--if we were to embark
on that. It is costing the French Government quite a bit of
money to do that. But I know the technology there is very, very
expensive to do that. So thank you for that.
But I also just want to congratulate our chairman on this.
I am a Scotch Irishman. We are pretty stubborn on some things.
But I thought this guy is even more stubborn than I am because
he has endured this for the last 6 years that I have been in
Congress, pressure. He has wanted to talk about this. He has
wanted to be able to move this and advance this ball down the
pike, but because of the previous administration we weren't
able to do it. And I admire the chairman for his not blinking.
Because if nothing else, he has been able to educate a whole
new group of Congressmen that have come in in the last 6 years
to understand the merits of this program. So I really do admire
him for being able to do that. Because, you know, we know,
facts are stubborn things, and I think we are going to follow
the science as we go down through this.
So, Mr. Sproat, if I could ask a question, as you have
just--my comment is that our country lost a substantial amount
of time in getting this--getting the licensed decision on Yucca
Mountain after the administration shut the program down. Some
opponents of the Yucca Mountain project suggested it will be
too time consuming or costly to resume this licensing process.
Do you agree with that? Based on your experience, would you
expect it to be cheaper to continue or we start all over again?
Mr. Sproat. Well, the way I view it, Congressman, is we
have a 35-year-plus investment in this process that the Nuclear
Waste Policy Act laid out and specified how this whole process
was to evolve. And we are now within 3 or 4 years of concluding
it. And when I talk about that, I mean getting a final decision
from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission on acceptability of the
Yucca Mountain site and design.
There is no way, I believe, that that is going to be more
expensive than starting over again at this stage of the game. I
just--I can't be convinced of that.
Mr. McKinley. Won't we--in this process, if we advance
this, if there are questions, isn't that the purpose of the
licensing decision process to find out, to ferret out any issue
that we need to address? Isn't that what this is all about?
Mr. Sproat. It absolutely is. And the license application
for Yucca were in three-ring binders about this wide and the
five safety evaluation reports that the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission staff issued where they evaluated the design is
probably about this big. So, in terms of the amount of time and
effort spent by some people a lot smarter than me who figured
out and evaluated all the technical issues associated with the
repository, that is a huge investment, and I believe is worth a
final determination by the NRC of whether or not to move
forward or not.
Mr. McKinley. Just to finish it now.
So, Mr. O'Donnell, do you believe it would be cheaper and
quicker to complete the licensing process and follow where the
science leads us or the issues, or do you think we should start
all over again?
Mr. O'Donnell. Congressman, I appreciate the question.
Clearly, I don't think we should start over again. The
ratepayers in this country have already made a substantial
investment, $40 billion, for this process to continue. And as a
commissioner and regulatory commissions across this country,
all 50 States, the District of Columbia and the territories,
that is what we do. We get presented with an application. We
take a look at that application and allow it to have the due
process and make that decision on the merits of that case. That
is what we do day in and day out. That is how our system works.
And yet in this particular process where the ratepayers have
paid $40 billion, that due process is being denied because the
application is not allowed to go forward through a merit-based
evaluation, and that should stop. We should not restart this
process. Thank you.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you.
Mr. Nesbit, the same question to you. Your thoughts?
Mr. Nesbit. I do not think there is any way it would be
quicker, faster, and cheaper to start over and start looking
around for another site. Not on this planet, sir.
Mr. McKinley. OK. I am just thinking from a common sense
thing, finish the job, find out what the facts are. The facts
will lead us to the final decision. And I don't think we should
be intimidated, and I hope we stay with the science rather than
let politics come into play. Let the science lead us, get the
decisions, and then we can make a decision. If it leads
properly, that is fine.
Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mr. Shimkus. Spoken like a true engineer. So thank you. The
gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you and the
ranking member for holding this hearing.
I have had the opportunity over a number of years ago to go
with the Chair to Yucca Mountain. I also, last fall, went and
visited our South Texas nuclear plant that--we have two nuclear
plants in Texas, and interim storage is sitting there on those
properties.
Decisions were made in the 1980s that none of us ever were
a part of. But like my colleague from West Virginia, somewhere
along the way we have to do something. And I know in Texas we
already have an interim storage--potential facility for interim
storage in West Texas. So that is the frustration that we have,
that, you know, we have this 72,000 metric tons of spent
nuclear energy held at plants both active and retired across
the country today.
Mr. Nesbit, does the U.S. Nuclear Infrastructure Council
support the development of interim storage facility?
Mr. Nesbit. Yes, we do. We think that interim storage is a
component of an integrated used fuel management program for the
country that could be very beneficial. However, we think the
primary focus of that program needs to be on a geologic
repository for ultimate disposal of the material.
Mr. Green. Well--and I don't disagree, because the bill
would actually prohibit going forward on interim storage, I
understand, without some decision on the permanent storage. But
somewhere along the road, we have to have both. You can't ride
a bicycle--well, I guess you could ride a bicycle with one
wheel, but we need to have both of them.
What are the advantages of opening interim storage
facilities provide?
Mr. Nesbit. I am sorry, sir?
Mr. Green. What is the advantage of opening an interim
facility?
Mr. Nesbit. I think the primary advantage would be to allow
the consolidation of used fuel from shutdown plants, and I am
referring to those sites around the country where the reactor
is shut down and no longer producing power. And in many cases,
there is nothing there except a dry storage facility for used
fuel. It really doesn't make sense to maintain safety,
environmental, radiation protection infrastructure at these
scattered sites around the country. We do it, we can do it
safely. But it really makes sense to consolidate the material
in one place so we can maintain it there a lot more cheaply.
And I think the ongoing cost to the U.S. taxpayer would be much
lower.
Mr. Green. And I agree that opening an interim facility
should not preempt the completion of the licensing of an
underground permit repository. An interim facility cannot
become the de facto permanent repository like the sites are
now, as you said.
Do you believe that the licensing and opening of an interim
facility can be contingent on licensing of Yucca Mountain?
Mr. Nesbit. That is a decision for the Congress when it
authorizes the legislation. I would like, personally, to see--I
think we can walk and chew gum at the same time, sir.
Mr. Green. OK.
Mr. McManus, I want to welcome you to the panel. Coming
from Houston, I obviously have both the pipefitters and the
plumbers local. But when I visited the nuclear power plant in
South Texas, it was mostly IBEW members. I assume there were
plumbers and pipefitters on the site in almost all of the
nuclear power plants.
Mr. McManus. Yes, I think we have jurisdiction on about 90
percent of the nuclear power plants in the United States.
Mr. Green. OK. About how many members of the plumbers,
pipefitters or the UA work in the nuclear industry?
Mr. McManus. It varies from outage to outage. We have
340,000 members. About 60 percent of our man-hours are on the
energy sector in the country, and they break out the nuclear
industry per power plant, 400 permanent, 500 permanent jobs on
average from there.
Mr. Green. And those are permanent jobs at the power
plants?
Mr. McManus. Permanent jobs. New construction of a nuclear
power house would probably peak out at about 2,500 to 3,000
members on the construction of new nuclear power plant.
Mr. Green. And the average wage at those plants for----
Mr. McManus. Well, it certainly varies from South Texas to
northern, central California to New England. I would say the
average wage would be $60 an hour, everything in.
Mr. Green. OK. I know our committee also has jurisdiction
over pipelines. And we had some issues about there were
temporary jobs to build pipelines. These are not temporary
jobs?
Mr. McManus. Temporary jobs built the Golden Gate Bridge
and the Empire State Building. And where we are sitting here
today, sir, it built every hospital. Our members are proud to
work on temporary jobs. We take it as a badge of honor. We move
from one job to another job. So the issue of temporary jobs is
something I am passionate about, my membership is passionate
about. Temporary jobs built this country, sir.
Mr. Green. I agree. And, of course, after they finish one
pipeline, they can go to another pipeline.
Mr. McManus. Absolutely.
Mr. Green. I yield back my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Murphy, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am glad my friend,
Mr. Green of Texas, pointed out--by the way, we are also temp
employees. We are just on a 2-year contract, some more than
others. Some more temporary than others is what it comes down
to.
Anyway, thanks for being here. First of all, Mr. McManus, I
want to thank you for being here. I have got Local 27 in
Pittsburgh, some just great men and women who work there, and I
am proud to know many of them.
I want to talk about some of the aspects here if we don't
build nuclear power as well. Of course, we also have
Westinghouse in Pittsburgh, which has its own problems right
now. But nonetheless, we know its value.
And what I want to talk about here is the economic impact
of employment tax revenue, another aspect of maintaining and
building power plants. I mean, a recent media story said that
the termination of Yucca Mountain project resulted in a 2,500
job loss in Nevada, 14 million lost revenues for the host
communities. But what is the impact upon communities then
around the Nation, too, not only with regard to building and
maintaining power plants, but if we are talking about dealing
with spent nuclear fuel and preparing it and sending it around,
do you have some ideas the impact of jobs on that are?
Mr. McManus. I would be guessing on direct numbers there,
but every closure of a nuclear power plant or of Yucca Mountain
is an economic impact on not only the construction workers that
maintain, build, and look after the places, it is everything
that is surrounding the community as well, from the barber
shops to the downtown communities that we all live and grown up
in, from Pittsburgh to New England. Yankee closed up in New
England, and it is a devastating effect to the community, every
one of the closures.
Mr. Murphy. I appreciate that. And also I appreciate your
comments too with regard to the nuclear fuels 24/7. It doesn't
rely on wind and solar as it goes on. And I want to make sure
we are maintaining that.
Anybody else want to comment on that economic impact of
power plants and closures?
Mr. Nesbit?
Mr. Nesbit. Yes, sir. I will say that our plants are,
basically, economic engines for their local communities. We
provide a number of dependable, high-paying jobs. We spend a
lot of money to run those plants. Most of the cost associated
with running a nuclear power plant is in the people and money
that goes back to the local communities in terms of not just
tax dollars but businesses that support those plants and the
workers there. So we spend hundreds of millions of dollars a
year on O&M costs for those plants, and that money goes right
back into the local communities.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I want to ask a little more
technical question now with some members here. Maybe Mr.
Nesbit, Mr. O'Donnell, or someone else can answer this. Refer
back to section 602 of the discussion draft which clarifies
that the Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management is the
sole office in the Department of Energy to carry out activities
required by the Nuclear Waste Policy Act.
Following President Obama's decision that Yucca Mountain
was unworkable--and those are in his words--DOE closed that
office and transferred all of the DOE responsibilities to the
Office of Nuclear Energy, DOE's office that manages civilian
nuclear energy research and development activity. So for any of
the witnesses, do you support reconstituting this office to a
single dedicated office to manage DOE's nuclear waste disposal
activities, particularly in the near term while NRC's review of
Yucca Mountain's license application is being completed? Who
would like to comment on that?
Mr. Sproat. If I could, Mr. Murphy, the--I would--I do
support that. I would say having run that organization for 2\1/
2\ years, it was made up of a number of people who spent a
significant portion of their career trying to execute the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act and trying to move forward with
solving the spent nuclear----
Mr. Murphy. By ``execute'' do you mean kill or execute----
Mr. Sproat. Actually--no. To actually enable it, I guess is
the right word to use.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Mr. Sproat. And a number of those people have moved on, but
a number of those people are also still in the Department. And
in order to successfully defend the license application and
litigate the contentions in front of the Atomic Safety and
Licensing Board, that needs to be one organization with one
purpose that is not divided among different loyalties and among
different missions. It needs to be single focused to get the
license application approved.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Mr. O'Donnell. Mr. Murphy, may I add something to that?
Mr. Murphy. Yes, Mr. O'Donnell.
Mr. O'Donnell. I think it is important to note that in my
oral testimony and written testimony that the office was given
a 5-year term. And NARUC is suggesting that the committee and
the Congress may want to consider a longer term of office there
as an insulator from the political whim so that should things
change, we have some continuity in this very important program
that is in the Nation's interest.
Mr. Murphy. I appreciate that. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back the time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the chairman for holding this,
and I thank the panelists for testifying this morning.
This is an important issue. I mean, I don't care how you
feel about nuclear power, but we need a comprehensive Federal
policy to deal with this issue in the long run.
I would like all the panelists to answer with a simple yes
or no. Would you be able to support the current draft
legislation with only minor modifications?
Mr. Sproat?
Mr. Sproat. Yes.
Mr. McNerney. Mr. O'Donnell?
Mr. O'Donnell. That is a difficult question. I know you
want yes or no, but we have not evaluated all----
Mr. Shimkus. Look at your staff behind you real quick.
Mr. O'Donnell. OK. The right answer is yes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Dr. Lyman. No, Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Nesbit. Speaking personally, yes.
Mr. McManus. Yes, sir.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Sproat, in answer to Mr. Peters' question about the
priority list for waste to be removed, should that list--you
said that there is a priority list. Should that list be
revised?
Mr. Sproat. Again, personal opinion, I would say no. And
the reason I say no is because that, essentially, the Federal
Government has contractual obligations to remove spent fuel
from the oldest plants first, and that's been in place for
decades. And I think if we tried to modify that or change it at
this stage in the game, that would open up another whole round
of litigation that would be quite costly and just delay things.
Mr. Nesbit. Mr. McNerney, could I add some clarification?
Mr. McNerney. Sure.
Mr. Nesbit. We have contracts as utilities. We have
contracts with the Department of Energy for the removal of the
used nuclear fuel from our sites, and those contracts specify
what Mr. Sproat referred to as the waste fuel. I do not believe
that needs to be revised. And I will point out that the
contracts contain a provision that allows the DOE, at its own
discretion, to go pick up fuel from shutdown plants first if it
deems it to be necessary and appropriate. So I think the
current contracts are adequate in that regard.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
And I thank the chairman for the extra 2 minutes you are
giving me here.
Mr. Shimkus. Just keep going on this line of--these
questions.
Mr. McNerney. Mr. Sproat, you mentioned that the water
rights, but that was with respect to getting water to cool
drill bits. What about the water--I mean, I am from California.
We have a little water contingent--you know, issues. What about
the water rights for areas that are nearby nuclear waste sites?
Mr. Sproat. If I understand your question right, Mr.
McNerney, this issue that I mentioned is strictly about at the
Yucca Mountain site itself. In terms of if the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission, from a technical standpoint, determines
that the design of the repository is adequate, the site is
adequate, and it gives the Department permission to build the
repository, today, the State of Nevada, you know, can tell the
State water engineer not to grant any water permits to the
Federal Government to allow that repository to be built or
operated.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I guess I was just trying to make a
point that we need to consider what is going to happen to water
rights for people that draw water near repository sites.
Mr. Lyman, you recommended gaining public support for
storage sites. Absolutely obvious to me. How would you
recommend--what steps would you take to get public support? And
would that be--is there any chance or any hope of getting that
support in the Yucca site?
Dr. Lyman. You called my bluff. Yes. Obviously, the how is
difficult. The Blue Ribbon Commission had a proposal. The
Department of Energy presented one. The Nuclear Waste Technical
Review Board have all come up with schemes by which you could
have a process that would have a more formalized staged
approach to getting consent.
Now, I think probably it all comes down to benefits. And
the question is, is everyone going to benefit who may
potentially be at risk from this? And the answer may be a
quantity of benefits which may be, you know, unsustainable in
the future, but we need to do at least something for the spent
fuel that has already been generated and then decide whether
this is an approach that is going to work for the future.
Mr. McNerney. So I mean, complete utter transparency has
got to be part of it.
Dr. Lyman. Yes. Certainly, there has to be a framework in
place where the technical aspects of the repository are
considered independently. So you need site-independent
technical criteria as a prerequisite so that at least any
community will know that the process is not being gamed to
force something just because that is what is available. And I
think that is the situation we have now.
Yucca Mountain is the only site that has undergone, you
know, enough characterization, that has gone through part of
the licensing process, and that has a lot of momentum behind
it, but it also has a lot of technical flaws and there are
unresolved technical issues. And so we don't want to see that
political pressure short circuiting the consideration of those
technical issues. That is one thing, actually, which this
discussion draft would seem to do in some of its provisions.
So you need to start with the science, with technical
criteria, and you need to have multiple candidates. To put all
the eggs in the Yucca Mountain basket could be a problem if you
get to the end of the process and the NRC says no, and then you
are left with no other candidates. That is why we think there
need to be alternatives starting now.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired, long
expired.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I take back my compliment for giving me
those extra 2 minutes, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. I still got a minute and a half more.
So the Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Tennessee,
Mrs. Blackburn, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all
for your time today.
Mr. Nesbit, I think I want to come to you and kind of pick
up on what Mr. McNerney was talking about with transportation.
You know, with TVA, we have loved watching and really
appreciated the work that has gone into Watts Bar 2. And I had
the opportunity to visit that facility just as it was finished.
And, of course, we know that it was project number one coming
into this century.
But talk to me just a minute about what your assessment is
of the situation surrounding future transportation of the spent
fuels in the cask. I know there is concern that has been
raised, but we look at this and say there has to be a solution.
And so we have touched on transportation. Let's just kind of
close that loop, if you will.
Mr. Nesbit. Thank you very much for the question. There are
a couple of things I would like to say. First of all, if you
are going to solve the issue of what you ultimately do with
nuclear waste, you have to transport the material. So simply
being opposed to transportation of nuclear waste for some
ephemeral reason is not grounds for opposing Yucca Mountain.
I heard a lot of concerns expressed about transportation
this morning. I want to point out that transportation of used
nuclear fuel is one of the safest endeavors in the history of
mankind, and I don't say that lightly. Used fuel is transported
in strong, robust waste packages that are designed to withstand
a number of things: Impact, fire, immersion. They are regulated
by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and by the Department of
Transportation. There is careful planning and security involved
with all shipments.
From the experience of my company, Duke Energy Corporation,
we have transported more than 5,000 used fuel assemblies
between our sites in the 1970s through the 2000s. We
transported----
Mrs. Blackburn. Hold on just a minute. Reiterate that
number again.
Mr. Nesbit. Over 5,000 used fuel assemblies.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Without incident.
Mr. Nesbit. Without incident.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. Nesbit. We transported them across State lines. We
transported them by rail. We transported them by truck. We did
not have a problem doing it. And that just reflects the larger
worldwide experience.
There has been extensive transportation of used fuel and
high-level waste around the world, particularly in Europe. It
has happened for decades. No one has ever been hurt as a result
of radiation released during transportation of this material.
So I think it is important that we put that into context.
We should also note that the number of transportation
activities in any given year for Yucca Mountain is not that
large. It is in the hundreds. It is not this great
transportation campaign that will be taking over the entire
country or something like that.
But you don't have to take my word for it. There have been
a couple of very important studies that put transportation risk
in context. In 2006, the National Academy of Sciences did a
report that is called ``Going the Distance: The Safe Transport
of Spent Nuclear Fuel and High-Level Radioactive Waste in the
United States.'' More recently, in 2016, the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory published a report, ``A Historical Review of the
Safe Transport of Spent Nuclear Fuel.'' Both of those showed
that this is an endeavor that can be done safely and securely.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you.
Mr. O'Donnell, I wanted to see if you could touch on
section 402, and the better agreements and how the
modifications made in section 402 will incentivize stakeholders
to better work with the Federal Government in the Yucca
Mountain project. And then as you touch on it, talk about how
you support those changes or do not support those changes, what
your approach to it is.
Mr. O'Donnell. I am trying to get to 402, so I apologize
for that.
Mrs. Blackburn. It is the benefits agreement.
Mr. O'Donnell. OK. We did not take a position on that.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. O'Donnell. We didn't testify on it, and we are still
evaluating. Because we have a short window to evaluate a lot of
the aspects of this, we haven't evaluated that piece yet. So I
would be glad to make sure that we get our position----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Why don't you submit that to me in
writing.
Mr. Nesbit, I am coming back to you then. How about the
Nuclear Infrastructure Council, do you support the provision?
Mr. Nesbit. The U.S. Nuclear Infrastructure Council
believes that ultimately the Yucca Mountain repository should
be and can be a win-win for the State of Nevada, the local
residents around the repository, the nuclear power industry,
and the Nation as a whole. I will point out, as has been
mentioned earlier, that the county around Yucca Mountain, Nye
County in which the repository resides, favors the development
of a repository there as long as it meets the regulatory
requirements for safety and environment.
I think that the legislation makes constructive changes to
the benefit structure in allowing an open dialogue between the
Federal Government, the States, and the counties, and I think
that should facilitate that win-win that we are looking for.
Mrs. Blackburn. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady yields back.
If I may, just to talk about the benefits package, what
this really is is an effort to open the door again to the State
of Nevada because they previously said no. So, under the
current law, they don't get any benefits. They can't negotiate
the benefits. So what we are doing in this language, saying
even though you said no, we are still willing to negotiate with
you on benefits for the State of Nevada. So just to make sure
we clarify what that provision is.
And I would like to turn to my colleague from Texas, Mr.
Olson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair. And welcome to our experts.
Yucca Mountain is a 20-year story of raw politics, State
versus State, Republican versus Republican, Democrat versus
Democrat. I support Yucca Mountain for one simple reason: Yucca
Mountain ensures that America is more secure from attacks by
terrorists with radioactive weapons.
It doesn't have to be a big thermonuclear explosion, a
mushroom cloud. It can be a simple dirty bomb, a conventional
bomb that scatters radioactive material across a city like
Houston, Texas.
As you all mentioned, we have 130 sites across America that
high-level radioactive waste is stored. That sounds like a lot,
but I have been told if you had that waste on a football field,
it would go from goal line to goal line, 100 yards, sideline to
sideline, 53 and a third yards, and 10 feet high, 3 and one-
third yards. Look around. That is probably enough waste to fill
two rooms this size. This is not some big pile. It is bad
stuff, but not some massive pile of radioactive waste.
I worry, as I mentioned, about terrorists picking out the
weakest site of these 131 sites and grabbing that material and
hitting my home. And that is why I support Yucca Mountain. Now,
that is my wish. Let's talk about what is happening right now.
My first question is for you, Mr. McManus. For every piece
of red tape that holds employers back, there is also the
problem of lack of certainty. Can you talk about why it is
important for us to get a path to permanent storage of spent
fuel? Why do this now?
Mr. McManus. Why do it now? As you opened up, Congressman,
it has been 20 years' worth of a political football. If not
now, the question is when. Uncertainty is one of the biggest
challenges of any construction industry, builder, owner, end
user, for performance of work.
I also agree with your comments about the safety and the
security of the Nation. So the red tape that we see on regular
construction jobs, from the pipelines to this, is always a
hampering of the industry. I congratulate the administration,
the current administration, to try to cut through some of the
red tape. Quite frankly, if not now on Yucca Mountain, when?
Mr. Olson. Thank you, sir.
My next question is for you, Mr. Nesbit. Your group
supports the development of an interim storage option. As you
know, as the chairman knows, there are some Texans and others
who want that option. Under current law, can we give a contract
for a non-Federal entity to serve as an interim storage
facility? Does this discussion draft give you that authority?
Mr. Nesbit. Sir, it is my understanding that it does. And
the U.S. Nuclear Infrastructure Council supports the use of
private entities to the maximum extent possible in the
management of used fuel and high-level waste.
Mr. Olson. This bill, Title I says we can't go forward with
that until we have a final decision on Yucca Mountain license.
Is that correct?
Mr. Nesbit. Yes, sir.
Mr. Olson. Great. Again, I support Yucca Mountain. As I
mentioned, I was in the Navy for 9 years. And they teach you if
you are fighting defensively and protecting a sacred part of
your infrastructure, you want your forces concentrated and you
want to control the battlefield. So that means Yucca Mountain
is the best place to do that. We have our forces there. Instead
of 130 places all across the country, right there, one big
repository. And the terrain, we control all the terrain. Again,
as I mentioned, I am so concerned about this material getting
in bad people's hands and having some sort of radiological
attack on our towns.
One more final question about interim permits. While
waiting for Yucca Mountain to be actually--the license approved
first, how will those delays impact these interim storage
facilities? Good, bad? How long will they wait for their
permits? Any idea?
Mr. Nesbit?
Mr. Nesbit. It is hard to tell, because for the past 6
years, the country has been doing essentially nothing in the
realm of used fuel management. We believe at U.S. Nuclear
Infrastructure Council that both a repository at Yucca Mountain
and consolidated storage are desirable elements of an
integrated program, and we think that they will be additive. We
think that one will help the other if both are pursued with
vigor.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity and thank our panel for joining us today.
Section 203(h) of the discussion draft makes the EPA the
sole permitting authority for air quality permits exclusively
within the defined Yucca Mountain site withdrawal area, and
only for the purpose or support of activities to site,
construct, or to operate a repository.
So, Mr. Sproat, will you describe what sort of activities
that EPA would permit within the designated site?
Mr. Sproat. Within any major construction site, whether it
is the repository or any other major construction site, there
are a number of air permits that are required, whether you are
running a--and they are called source permits. So, if you are
running a boiler for steam, whether you are emitting exhaust
from a diesel generator, all of those require air permits,
source air permits. And in most cases, those are provided by
the State.
So in this case, the State of Nevada would have the ability
to block air permits needed for both the construction and the
operation of the repository.
Mr. Johnson. Well, but I asked you about the EPA. So what
would the EPA do? If the State holds that authority, what does
the EPA do?
Mr. Sproat. I believe the reason that wording is in there
is because under current regulations today, those air emission
permits are regulated at the State level. And what this
legislation is saying is, for the repository site itself, that
is to be regulated by the Federal Government.
Mr. Johnson. So is the EPA still obligated to conduct the
same review of all permitting documentation as Nevada would be?
Mr. Sproat. Yes. And those emissions would have to meet all
of the same guidelines that would be normally required.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Section 202 of the discussion draft names
the Yucca Mountain project beneficial to interstate commerce
and in the public interest. This provision was previously
proposed by the Department of Energy due to the State of Nevada
objecting to providing access to water at the Yucca Mountain
site.
So, Mr. Sproat, again, will you please provide some context
regarding how much water is necessary and what sort of
activities the water is used to support.
Mr. Sproat. It has been a long time, Congressman, and I
certainly can't remember the exact quantities of water. But in
the environmental impact statement that the Department
submitted for the repository, those quantities are in that
analysis. But as I mentioned before in I think my opening
statement, the reason this was in here was because--and where I
became personally aware of some of the difficulties associated
with the State permitting was that, as part of putting the
license application together, we needed to do an exploratory
drill of the subsurface to be able to do the seismic analysis
for the buildings. And we needed water, a very, very small
quantity of water to cool the drill bits, and the State water
engineer was basically directed from the Governor's office not
to give it to us.
Mr. Johnson. OK. So how did DOE manage the operations
previously when Nevada turned off the spigot?
Mr. Sproat. We basically trucked water in.
Mr. Johnson. You trucked it in, OK.
Does the State of Nevada issue water permits for the Nevada
National Security Site or other Federal facilities, such as
military bases located in the State, that you know of?
Mr. Sproat. I have been told they do not, but I don't know
that personally myself.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Based on your experience at the
Department, would enactment of this language that we are
talking about today help satisfy the NRC's requirement that the
Department has access to the required level of water for
repository operation?
Mr. Sproat. I believe it would.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
All right, Mr. Chairman, I yield back 38 whole seconds.
Mr. Shimkus. The chairman thanks you.
And the Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Hudson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the panel for taking your time today for
this really important discussion.
Mr. Nesbit, why shouldn't the country develop a separate
defense repository or deep borehole disposal?
Mr. Nesbit. Thank you for the question. It is one that is
raised by the fact that in 2015, the previous administration
made a determination that, in fact, the country should do that.
I look at these things rather simplistically because I am an
engineer. We have a fair amount of material that needs to be
disposed of, used nuclear fuel, but also high-level waste
residing at defense sites around the country, including the
Savannah River site in the State of South Carolina.
And there are many different kinds of waste, but the
challenge so far in this program has been to find a site to
dispose of it in a geologic facility. If you were to develop
separate repositories for different kinds of materials, then
that would just compound the difficulty of finding multiple
sites. Deep borehole disposal has been hypothesized. It has not
been carried out, so there is no regulatory structure to cover
it. So it would require an extensive program to qualify that
method as well, so that would be additional cost. And
ultimately, I think what makes sense is if you are going to dig
a big hole in the ground and put waste there, you might as well
make it big enough for everything.
Mr. Hudson. It makes sense to me too.
Mr. Sproat, kind of tie this all together for me. What
should DOE be doing to restart this Yucca Mountain project?
Mr. Sproat. At this stage of the game, it is extremely
important to be able to, number one, reassemble a small group
of experts, both from the national labs as well as the
designers of the repository as well as the key Department staff
as well as some outside legal counsel that is very familiar
with NRC regulatory law, and to bring that team together and
begin the adjudication of the contentions in front of the NRC.
And that would require, basically, adequate funding to the
Department to do that, to bring those people back together. In
a lot of cases, those people either moved on or retired. But I
can tell you--I know a number of them personally--they would be
more than happy to come back on a part-time basis and defend
the work they have done and they spent the majority of their
career doing. So that is really what needs to happen next.
Mr. Hudson. I appreciate that.
For the panel, in addition to DOE, are there steps that
should be taken by the EPA and the NRC? What would be the next
steps to get us jump-started? I would open it up to anybody
that wants to jump in.
Mr. O'Donnell. I will take a stab at your previous question
first, and that is, there is an additional benefit to a
combined repository, because it reduces the burden paid by the
ratepayers. So the ratepayers in your district and across this
country have already paid $40 billion, and having DOE and a
combined facility actually helps.
With regard to the next step, NARUC believes that this
particular discussion draft is the most important next step
before us. It is a very good first step and it moves the ball
forward. So, from our perspective, we believe this is the right
way to head.
Mr. O'Donnell. I appreciate that.
Dr. Lyman. Can I throw in one thing?
Mr. Hudson. I am about to run out of time. I am sorry. I
want to get one more question in to Mr. O'Donnell.
Dealing with section 501, adequacy of Nuclear Waste Fund,
current law requires the Secretary of Energy to conduct a fee
adequacy analysis to evaluate the estimated program cost
required by the Nuclear Waste Policy Act. NARUC successfully
challenged DOE's most recent analysis which resulted in the DC
Circuit Court of Appeals prohibiting further collection of the
annual fee. Do you believe that DOE must conduct a new fee
adequacy assessment prior to resumption of the fee collection?
Mr. O'Donnell. We do. And we believe that that analysis on
the corpus of the money that is already there ought to
determine and instruct whether a new fee is necessary or the
interest from that corpus can pay for the activities going
forward. And additionally, if you do need a new fee, at what
level it should be set. And we don't understand how you could
ever set a new fee or start a new fee without analyzing it.
Mr. Hudson. I appreciate that.
Mr. Nesbit, back to you. Should the statutory requirement
for DOE to conduct a life-cycle cost analysis remain?
Mr. Nesbit. Yes, absolutely. Any project should have an up-
to-date and maintain total life-cycle cost analysis.
Mr. Hudson. Mr. Sproat, you conducted the life-cycle cost
analysis for Yucca Mountain project. Will you describe the role
of that analysis and the Department's assessment of the
adequacy of the Nuclear Waste Fund?
Mr. Sproat. It is a fundamental input to that fee adequacy
assessment. And the one thing I would like to point out is, so
when we did that, the last one that I am aware of in 2008 had a
number of assumptions regarding the number of plants that would
life extend and when the repository construction would start
that are no longer valid, so it needs to be redone.
Mr. Hudson. OK. Mr. Chairman, thank you. My time has
expired.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Flores, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to say the ultimate solution to a lot of these
issues is to continue basic research investment in newer
technology, including small nuclear reactors, reactors that
haven't even been thought of, also in terms of reprocessing. I
think nuclear energy is an essential component of a clean
energy future, particularly because, as Mr. McManus pointed
out, it provides base load power on a low emissions basis.
Prior to asking my questions regarding funding for our
Nation's nuclear waste management disposal program, I would
like to make a point. And I think this follows onto something
Mr. Nesbit said earlier, and that is that every day the Federal
Government does not act increases the long-term cost on the
American taxpayer for nuclear waste disposal. Last year, the
American taxpayers paid out over $2 million every single day
because the Federal Government is allowing spent nuclear fuel
to sit scattered around the country.
Now I would like to discuss a couple reforms to move
forward and fix this problem, and they follow Mr. Hudson's
questions from a minute ago. The first one, Mr. Sproat, your
testimony notes that DOE does not have access to funding from
the Nuclear Waste Fund, as envisioned when the fund was created
by the Nuclear Waste Policy Act.
Title V of the discussion draft, the current discussion
draft, seeks to address this challenge by allowing the fees to
be used as offsetting receipts, which would permit Congress to
more easily prioritize nuclear waste management activities in a
budget-constrained environment, while preserving the portions
of the previously collected fees for DOE activities over the
life cycle of the Yucca Mountain project.
So three questions real quickly. Are the provisions, these
provisions an important improvement from the existing funding
mechanism?
Mr. Sproat. Yes.
Mr. Flores. OK. And what further recommendations would you
make to ensure necessary and proper financial resources are
available to the Department?
Mr. Sproat. Whatever the legislation that is required to be
able to give the Department access to the corpus of the fund as
well as the interest being generated on the fund in a manner
that meets the construction, the optimum construction
expenditure profile, needs to be figured out how to do that.
Mr. Flores. OK.
Mr. O'Donnell, let me ask you this: In your view, would the
current discussion draft help enable a program to properly fund
nuclear waste management activities?
Mr. O'Donnell. It certainly would, Congressman. By
determining that the Secretary shall have available on dates
certain certain portions of the fund, that is tremendously
important. It gives continuity and it tells you that the money
is going to be there. The milestones are defined. And NARUC
wants to look at the percentages on those milestones, but we do
believe that, without further appropriations, the language is
an improvement in this draft discussion, and we think that you
are heading in the right direction here.
Mr. Flores. Thank you.
Mr. Nesbit, same question. In your view, would the current
discussion draft help enable a program to properly fund nuclear
waste management activities?
Mr. Nesbit. I believe it would, sir. I do not couch myself
as an expert on the intricacies of congressional funding, but I
think that this would be an improvement
Mr. Flores. There are several Members of Congress that
don't either. Not me, I am a CPA, I got it.
The discussion draft removes activities to support a
centralized interim storage facility from unauthorized use of
the Nuclear Waste Fund. How would opening up the Nuclear Waste
Fund to pay the cost associated with an interim storage
facility potentially impact the overall adequacy of the fund?
Mr. Sproat. What I can say is, based on the fee adequacy
study that we did back in 2008, with the assumptions that went
into that, in terms of the revenue stream and the interest
rates that the fund would generate----
Mr. Flores. Yes, sir.
Mr. Sproat [continuing]. We had enough--the fund at that
point in time under those assumptions was adequate to design
and build and operate the repository and get it to closure.
Nothing else.
Mr. Flores. OK. Thank you to the panel for testifying
today, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now recognizes the former vice chair of the
subcommittee, Mr. Harper, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to each of you for being here today on this very
important topic.
And so, Mr. Sproat, how close did I come on pronunciation
there?
Mr. Sproat. Perfect.
Mr. Harper. All right. Look, I am sure you have visited the
Yucca Mountain site on a number of occasions and viewed that.
Is that safe to assume?
Mr. Sproat. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Harper. Will you please describe the ownership and
management of lands identified in the withdrawal description
around the Yucca Mountain site.
Mr. Sproat. Right now, the Yucca Mountain site is part of
the national security area that was part of the Nevada test
site. And so the Department of Energy has responsibility for
managing that site.
The issue that I mentioned in my opening testimony that was
one of the issues that the Nuclear Regulatory Commission staff
identified is that as under the regulations for the repository,
the Secretary of Energy needs to show that that land cannot be
used any time in the future for other public use, that it will
be isolated from public use going forward, which means that
land needs to be permanently withdrawn from public use by the
Congress, and that hasn't been done yet.
Mr. Harper. So just so that I am clear then, the land
withdrawal didn't just transfer land from a few Federal
agencies to the Department of Energy. Is that correct?
Mr. Sproat. I can't speak to the legal aspects of land
withdrawal and how that works, but what I can say is that what
I do remember is that it requires an act of Congress to
permanently withdraw that land from future public use.
Mr. Harper. Got it. The discussion draft would assure that
the land withdrawal sections are effective if the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission approves the issuance of the construction
authorization for the repository. Do you believe that this will
fulfill the necessary NRC requirements to demonstrate DOE's
permanent ownership of the Yucca Mountain site?
Mr. Sproat. Yes.
Mr. Harper. All right. With that, Mr. Chairman, I will
yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia,
Congressman Carter, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank all of you for being here. It is certainly an
important subject, certainly something that all of us need to
be concerned with.
I know we are concerned in the State of Georgia. You see,
our ratepayers have paid over a billion dollars, over a billion
dollars into the Nuclear Waste Fund to dispose of commercial
spent nuclear fuel, yet the Department of Energy hasn't
fulfilled its legal obligations and hasn't been disposing of my
State's spent fuel. So, you know, I am going home and my
constituents are asking me, where did our billion dollars go?
What are we getting out of it? And quite honestly, I don't know
what to tell them, except we are not getting anything out of
it. And they are tired of it, just like I am. I mean, you know,
we want to do our part, but when we are told we are going to
get something and we don't get it, then obviously we are upset
about it.
Upstream from my district--I represent the entire coast of
Georgia. I start in Savannah and go all the way down to the
Florida State line. Upstream from my district is the Savannah
River plant, and that is where, of course, we have the storage
of nuclear waste that is created as a byproduct of our Nation's
national defense program. And under the provisions of the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act, the American taxpayers have
specifically paid for a portion of the Yucca Mountain project
to dispose of this Department of Energy waste.
I want to ask you, Mr. O'Donnell, if I could, when
President Obama reversed this, and whenever the policy to
dispose of defense waste in a single repository with commercial
spent fuel, as we have talked about during this time, that kind
of put at risk almost $3.7 billion in investment that we had.
Would you agree with that?
Mr. O'Donnell. I would agree with that. And I would say
that that investment from the Department of Energy helps
mitigate the exposure and the burden needed to be carried by
the electricity consumers in this country. And so it is a
positive contribution to the infrastructure, and putting that
at risk increases, in my opinion, the liability and exposure of
the electricity ratepayers in the country going forward. And
NARUC is very concerned about that.
Mr. Carter. And I am assuming, and I think correctly so,
that all of you have read the proposed draft and that you are
familiar with section 205. So section 205, which tells us that
we will be able to do that, or at least the Department of
Energy will not have to separate the two.
What kind of ramifications, Mr. O'Donnell, do you think
that will have?
Mr. O'Donnell. One thing it will do is it will make clear
that it is the policy of the United States, through the
Congress, that combining these facilities going forward is a
possibility and that it is restated in the law, which is to be
disregarded at all of our peril.
Mr. Carter. And the impact that that would have on
ratepayers. Again, I allude to what I led off with, and that is
that I am having to answer to these people. They want to know
where their billion dollars went, billion with a B.
Mr. O'Donnell. I agree. NARUC agrees strongly. We know the
Georgia Legislature recently passed resolutions in this regard,
and that is very important. And NARUC is in strong agreement
with you, Congressman, that we need to move forward and we need
to realize the benefits that the ratepayers have already paid
for, in my State, in your State, in all of our States.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Nesbit, real quickly, he just mentioned a
resolution that the Georgia State Senate passed just last month
dealing with this. Your group that you represent, how do you
feel about the 205 provision?
Mr. Nesbit. We are very much in favor of it. I think it is
a win-win for both the customers of nuclear-generated
electricity, the burden that they bear, and the taxpayers who
bear the burden of funding the disposal of so-called defense
waste. Very much in favor.
Mr. Carter. All right. I want to shift gears real quick
with the minute that I have got left.
Mr. McManus, I know that you have somewhat of a different
approach, because you look at the economic and the jobs that
come out of this and the economic impact and the economic well-
being of your members. And, as you know I am sure, the industry
is doing a lot of work down in Georgia. And I wanted to just
get your input on the thousands of jobs that these construction
sites, that they generate. And what kind of jobs are they? Are
they highly skilled, highly paid jobs?
Mr. McManus. They are highly skilled jobs. The United
Association, we spend $250 million a year every year. So in 4
years, that is a billion dollars in training, all privately
funded from our own union, to have the changing technology of
going forward. That is just not only apprenticeship training;
that is continuing journeyman training of the new technologies
coming. So we are highly skilled. These are good middle class,
middle-of-the-road-paying jobs that people can sustain a
family, sustain a lifestyle in the good State of Georgia. And
Georgia is a fantastic State for us concerning nuclear power.
Mr. Carter. Absolutely. And thank you.
And I yield, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Walberg, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the panel. I wish I could have heard more.
Due to a markup, I couldn't be here for the whole time. But
having a nuclear power plant in my district that sits on the
shores of Lake Erie storing spent fuel now in casks, this is of
great interest to me for many reasons.
Mr. Nesbit, section 503 of the discussion draft would make
certain amounts of money available to DOE for activities
associated with Yucca Mountain construction, operation,
decommissioning, and postdecommissioning activities.
Does the NIC support this model as a way to assure DOE has
funding available for the 120-year capital infrastructure?
Mr. Nesbit. The U.S. Nuclear Infrastructure Council hasn't
conducted a thorough evaluation of this particular aspect of
the legislation, but it appears to be a positive step forward
in terms of assuring that the money will be available to carry
out the various phases of this very long project.
Mr. Walberg. That being the case, would you describe how
current operating nuclear power reactors budget to assure that
funding is available over the course of a reactor and to pay
for certain decommissioning activities?
Mr. Nesbit. Yes. We have requirements to set aside moneys
in what we call the decommissioning fund, a certain amount each
year to make sure that we are funded to a level such that when
we do ultimately shut the plant down, we will be able to carry
out the decommissioning activities, dispose of the radioactive
materials, et cetera.
The one part of the equation that we can't handle when it
comes to decommissioning is the disposal of the used fuel, and
that is what we look to the Federal Government for.
Mr. Walberg. OK. Mr. O'Donnell, section 501 of the
discussion draft would limit the amount collected by the
Federal Government to 90 percent of the appropriated level for
nuclear waste management activities. Is this modified
collection method an improvement from the existing statute? And
secondarily, does NARUC have additional recommendations to
modify the fee collection?
Mr. O'Donnell. Two things. We do believe it is an
improvement because it more closely matches the collection with
the appropriations, as Mr. Sproat testified to earlier, and we
think that is a good direction to head.
In terms of additional fee collection conditions, we would
simply say--and I recall this in my testimony. You will see
where I say that we think an evaluation of the ability of the
interest on the corpus that has already been collected to fund
the activities is essential before any new fee or any fee level
is set. We have to understand how that works before we can set
the fee level. So we believe strongly in that, and I hope that
helps your understanding.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
And we want to thank our panel.
Seeing no other Members present--for what purpose does the
gentleman----
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Chair, if I could please respectfully ask
for unanimous consent for a letter dated April 26, 2017, from
NRDC be submitted for the record.
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Shimkus. And I have a whole list here. I was going to
thank our panel before I adjourn.
I also would like to ask unanimous consent for the
following letters: The letter to Representative Titus from the
American Gaming Association; a letter from Governor Brian
Sandoval; a letter from Senator Dean Heller; a letter from
Board of County Commissioners in Nye County, Nevada; a letter
from the Nevada section of the American Nuclear Society;
editorial by the Albuquerque Journal Editorial Board; editorial
by the Chicago Tribune Editorial Board; article from the Los
Angeles Times, March 2017.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Shimkus. Pursuant to the committee rules, I remind
Members that they have 10 business days to submit additional
questions for the record. If you get those, I would ask you to
submit those back to the committee within 10 business days.
Without objection.
Again, we want to thank you all for, obviously, spending a
lot of time with us this morning.
And the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:43 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding today's hearing on
draft legislation to amend the Nuclear Waste Policy Act (NWPA).
Unfortunately, we are having yet another legislative
hearing without any Executive Branch witnesses--appointee or
career--to provide perspective on how this legislation would be
implemented. This is now the sixth legislative hearing this
year in our committee, and not one has had agency witnesses to
discuss the legislation under consideration. The glacial pace
at which President Trump is nominating individuals for agency
positions is historically slow and it's impeding our ability to
get the detailed perspective we need from the agencies that
implement the legislation in our jurisdiction.
It has been 30 years since Congress significantly revised
the NWPA. Unfortunately, during that period little has been
accomplished to address the disposition of the spent nuclear
fuel that is a byproduct of electricity generation at nuclear
power plants. At the same time, ratepayers have seen their
contributions to the nuclear waste fund used more for debt
reduction than storage or disposal, while taxpayers have had to
foot the bill for damages stemming from the Department of
Energy's (DOE) failure to take title to waste.
I believe we must find a long-term solution to the issue of
nuclear waste. With more and more nuclear power reactors
scheduled to shut down in the coming years, surrounding
communities are realizing that the nuclear waste currently
sitting in dry casks and spent fuel pools at these sites will
be stored there indefinitely when the plant closes, absent a
workable national solution.
In New Jersey, the Oyster Creek Nuclear Generating Station
is scheduled to shut down in 2019. It will soon stop providing
power, but will continue to provide a home to spent nuclear
fuel long into the future unless we come together to fix this
program. I know that many of my colleagues here today face
similar circumstances in their communities.
Without a functioning Federal nuclear waste program, we are
failing both the ratepayers who have paid into the waste fund
over several decades, and the taxpayers who are paying damages
through the Judgment Fund administered by the Justice
Department.
These factors, coupled with the increase in plant
retirements, underscore the need for interim storage solutions
to bridge the gap until a permanent repository is licensed and
constructed, wherever that may be. I commend Chairman Shimkus
for producing the draft before us yet I worry that it does
little to move interim storage forward. By explicitly stating
that interim storage cannot be approved until the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission makes a final decision on a permanent
repository, I fear that we are not providing certainty for
interim storage or permanent disposal. In fact, under the bill
as currently drafted, it is difficult for me to see how any
private entity could obtain financing to construct interim
storage.
I also have a specific concern with section 202 of the
discussion draft, which undercuts the basis used by the State
of Nevada to deny DOE's water rights application for the Yucca
Mountain site. For many years, the Federal Government has given
deference to State water rights laws, but this provision seems
to strong-arm Nevada by deeming the water use at the site to be
beneficial and in the public interest. I don't see any need for
Congress to insert itself at this time into what is surely a
legal matter.
My concerns aside, I do appreciate having a proposal from
the chairman. Most of us here today can agree that we need a
solution to address the storage and disposal of our Nation's
spent nuclear fuel. I remain committed to working with my
colleagues and stakeholders to develop a workable solution for
our country's nuclear waste program and look forward to hearing
from our witnesses, particularly my colleagues.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
