- EXAMINING THE EXTENSION OF SPECIAL NEEDS PLANS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE EXTENSION OF SPECIAL NEEDS PLANS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 26, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-50

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

27-071 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2018

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            GENE GREEN, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                   Massachusetts
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             TONY CARDENAS, California
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           RAUL RUIZ, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia

Subcommittee on Health

MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
Chairman
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas                    ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DORIS O. MATSUI, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Massachusetts
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TONY CARDENAS, California
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York                  officio)
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     3
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, prepared statement.....................................    62
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, prepared statement........................    62

Witnesses

Chris Wing, Chief Executive Officer, SCAN Health Plan............     4
Prepared statement...........................................     7
G. Lawrence Atkins, Ph.D., Executive Director, National MLISS
Health Plan Association........................................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Melanie Bella, Independent Consultant and Former Director,
Medicare-Medicaid Coordination Office, Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services..............................................    25
Prepared statement...........................................    27

Submitted Material

Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, the Special Needs Plans
Reauthorization Act of 2017....................................    63
Article of June 29, 2017, ``Fixing the 5 Percent,'' by Karen
Weintraub and Rachel Zimmerman, The Atlantic, submitted by Mr.
Green..........................................................    88
Joint statement of SCAN Health Plan and Avalere Health, April 2,
2012, submitted by Mr. Burgess.................................    99
Letter of July 26, 2017, from Joseph White, Interim President and
CEO, Molina Healthcare, to Mr. Burgess and Mr. Green, submitted
by Mr. Burgess.................................................   102
Memo of March 30, 2012, from Dianne Munevar and Edward Drozd,
Avalere Health, to Peter Begans, SVP Public & Government
Affairs, SCAN Health Plan, submitted by Mr. Burgess............   103
Slide presentation, ``Dual Eligible Population Analysis for SCAN
Health Plan: Hospitalizations and Readmissions,'' Avalere
Health, March 2012, submitted by Mr. Burgess...................   111
Statement of the Bipartisan Policy Center, July 26, 2017,
submitted by Mr. Burgess.......................................   135
Letter of July 26, 2017, from Mary R. Grealy, President,
Healthcare Leadership Council, to Mr. Burgess, submitted by Mr.
Burgess........................................................   138
Letter of March 28, 2017, from Christian L. Soura, President, and
Judy Mohr Peterson, Vice President, National Association of
Medical Directors, to the Honorable Orrin Hatch, et al.,
submitted by Mr. Burgess.......................................   140
Letter of July 20, 2017, from AIDS Healthcare Foundation, et al.,
to Mr. Walden, et al., submitted by Mr. Burgess................   145
Statement of America's Health Insurance Plans, July 26, 2017,
submitted by Mr. Burgess.......................................   147
Letter of July 24, 2017, from Margaret A. Murray, President and
Chief Executive Officer, Association for Community Affiliated
Plans, to Mr. Walden and Mr. Pallone, submitted by Mr. Burgess.   152
Letter of July 25, 2017, from John G. Lovelace, President,
Government Programs and Individual Advantage, UPMC Health Plan,
to Mr. Burgess, et al., submitted by Mr. Burgess...............   155
Editorial of February 7, 1997, ``Making the Budget Bearable,''
New York Times, submitted by Mr. Burgess.......................   157
Excerpt, Congressional Record--Senate, December 22, 1995, pages
S19184 to S19185,submitted by Mr. Burgess......................   158

EXAMINING THE EXTENSION OF SPECIAL NEEDS PLANS

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 26, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:15 a.m., in
Room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Michael C.
Burgess (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Burgess, Barton, Shimkus,
Murphy, Blackburn, Lance, Griffith, Bilirakis, Long, Bucshon,
Brooks, Mullin, Hudson, Collins, Carter, Green, Schakowsky,
Butterfield, Matsui, Castor, Schrader, Kennedy, Cardenas,
Eshoo, DeGette, and Pallone (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Costello.
Staff present: Paul Edattel, Chief Counsel, Health; Jay
Gulshen, Legislative Clerk, Health; Katie McKeough, Press
Assistant; Jennifer Sherman, Press Secretary; Josh Trent,
Deputy Chief Counsel, Health; Jeff Carroll, Minority Staff
Director; Rachel Pryor, Minority Health Policy Advisor;
Samantha Satchell, Minority Policy Analyst; Andrew Souvall,
Minority Director of Communications, Member Services, and
Outreach; and C.J. Young, Minority Press Secretary.
Mr. Burgess. Very well. I will ask all of our guests and
Members to take their seats. The Subcommittee on Health will
now come to order. The Chair recognizes himself 5 minutes for
an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Today the committee moves forward with its work in regular
order to examine extending and improving the Medicare Advantage
Special Needs Plans. Special Needs Plans enjoy bipartisan
support because of their successful record in providing
comprehensive coordinated care to two million Medicare
beneficiaries.
This committee is especially interested in understanding
how we can help improve Special Needs Plans for dual eligibles,
since the majority of Special Needs Plans
enrollees are dually eligible beneficiaries who are
enrolled in both Medicare and Medicaid. Dual-eligible
beneficiaries often have multiple chronic conditions, physical
disabilities, and cognitive impairments. Yet, too often, these
very beneficiaries are forced to navigate two Government
programs with benefit structures, rules, and incentives that
are often less than simple or intuitive.
Today, we embark on our process to try to not only extend
the Special Needs Plans, but improve the tools that States and
plans have to help these beneficiaries. So in addition to
hearing from our three experts before us, we also invite
stakeholders' feedback on a bipartisan discussion draft
recently released. The goal is simple. We want detailed
feedback from stakeholders on the policies and specific
language in this draft. We all share the goal of helping
improve health outcomes, enhance quality, and improve the
patient experience for Special Needs Plans enrollees who are
some of the most vulnerable, high-need beneficiaries in
Medicare.
As a starting place, the discussion draft includes a number
of provisions including reauthorizing the Institutional Special
Needs Plans permanently, and extends the dual-eligible Special
Needs Plans for 5 years. It streamlines Medicare and Medicaid
benefits through one process so it is easier for duals to
navigate their benefits. It improves access to supplemental
benefits for patients with chronic illnesses through the
inclusion of a bipartisan proposal supported by various
members, including the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Lance. It
enhances quality by directing HHS actions and holds us
accountable for results, by requiring a number of studies so
Congress receives appropriate feedback on policy changes.
I hope members will thoughtfully engage in today's
discussion, examine the policies carefully, and provide
feedback to committee staff as we move forward.
Thank you to each of our witnesses. We certainly look
forward to hearing from each of you this morning.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Michael C. Burgess

The subcommittee will come to order.
The chairman will recognize himself for an opening
statement.
Today the committee moves forward with its work in regular
order to examine extending and improving Medicare Advantage
Special Needs Plans (SNPs). SNPs enjoy bipartisan support
because of their successful record in providing comprehensive,
coordinated care to about 2 million Medicare beneficiaries.
This committee is especially interested in understanding
how we can help improve SNPs for the dual eligibles--since the
majority of SNP enrollees are dually eligible beneficiaries who
are enrolled in both Medicare and Medicaid. Duals often have
multiple chronic conditions, physical disabilities, and
cognitive impairments such as dementia, developmental
disabilities, and mental illness. Yet, too often, these very
beneficiaries are forced to navigate two Government programs
with benefit structures, rules, and incentives that are often
less than simple and intuitive.
Today, we embark on our process to try to not only extend
SNPs, but improve the tools that States and plans have to help
these beneficiaries. So in addition to hearing from our three
expert witnesses before us, but we want to invite stakeholder's
feedback on a bipartisan discussion draft we released. Our goal
is simple: we want detailed feedback from stakeholders on the
policies and specific language in this bill. We all share the
goal of helping improve health outcomes, enhance quality, and
improve the patient experience for SNP enrollees who are some
of the most vulnerable, high-need beneficiaries in Medicare. As
a starting place, this discussion draft includes a number of
provisions, including:

Reauthorizes Institutional SNPs permanently and
extends D-SNPs and C-SNPS for 5 years;

Streamlines Medicare and Medicaid benefits through
one process so it is easier for duals to navigate their
benefits;

Improves access to supplemental benefits for
patients with chronic illnesses through the inclusion of a
bipartisan proposal supported by various members, including Mr.
Lance;

Enhances quality by directing HHS actions;

Holds us accountable for results, by requiring a
number of studies so Congress receives appropriate feedback on
policy changes.
I hope Members will thoughtfully engage in today's
discussion, examine the policies carefully, and provide
feedback to committee staff as we move forward.
Thank you to each of our witnesses. We look forward to
hearing from each of you.

Mr. Burgess. I would yield to the gentleman from Kentucky,
but he is not here. Let me yield back my time, and I will yield
to the gentleman from Texas, the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Green, 5 minutes for an opening statement,
please.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to our
witnesses for being here this morning. We are here to discuss
the extension of the Special Needs Plans that serve some of our
most vulnerable and highest need Medicare beneficiaries. The
Medicare, Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act
of 2003 established a new Medicare Advantage coordinated care
plan, options specifically for individuals with special needs.
This type of MA plans known as Special Needs Plans, or SNPs,
are authorized to target enrollment to one or more types of
individuals with distinct healthcare needs. Specifically,
institutional SNPs, or I-SNPs, are largely enrolled
beneficiaries who live in nursing homes; dual-eligible SNPs or
D-SNPs, enrolled beneficiaries who are eligible for both
Medicare and Medicaid; and Chronic Condition SNPs, or C-SNPs,
enroll beneficiaries with certain severe and disabling chronic
conditions like end-stage renal disease.
Since the enactment of the Affordable Care Act, all new and
expanded D-SNP plans are required to have contracts with the
State Medicaid agencies to coordinate and deliver benefits and
the ACA created a subset of D-SNPs known as fully integrated,
dual-eligible, FIDE SNPs.
Mr. Chairman, we have to keep up with all these short-term
things.
More than 2 million Americans are enrolled in 600 SNPs
nationwide. There is a great amount of variety across SNPs and
how they work in each State. Since the ACA, SNPs have been
extended four times, more recently in the Medicare Access and
CHP Reauthorization Act or MACRA in 2015. Authorization of the
program is currently set to expire at the end of the calendar
year. Discussions about SNP reauthorization has largely focused
on duration of the authorization, with a growing number of
stakeholders advocating for permanent authorization.
Today, I look forward to learning more about the advantage
of long-term or permanent authorization of SNPs and I am also
interested in how we can address challenges to integrating
benefits and providing high-quality care for complex patients
with health and socio-economic needs. The SNP extension is an
opportunity to complement other efforts in Medicaid to
integrate the delivery of benefits and improve care
coordination and quality.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge the debate going on
now in the Senate and actions the House took earlier this year
will cast a shadow on the total discussion. The American Health
Care Act and the Better Care Reconciliation Act both devastate
Medicaid, ultimately cutting funding by 35 percent. Medicaid
cuts will harm the ability of States to integrate in SNPs and
other long-term services and support offering. Cuts in Medicaid
will undermine these successes and harm our most frail
citizens.
While Medicare provides critical benefits, Medicaid wraps
around that coverage and fills in the gaps. I hope my
colleagues will abandon the pursuit to return to meaningful
bipartisan work to improve our health system, like improving
and extending SNPs.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to today's
discussion, and if anybody on my side wants my last minute and
50 seconds? No. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Green. Sure.
Mr. Burgess. So I have been contemplating introducing a
bill that would modify or perhaps prohibit TLAs of the future.
Three-letter acronyms. Does anyone else on the majority----
Mr. Green. I would be glad to co-sponsor it.
Mr. Burgess. Does anyone else on the majority side seek
time for an opening statement? Anyone else on the minority side
seek time?
The Chair apparently concludes with opening statements. The
Chair would like to remind Members, pursuant to committee
rules, all Members' opening statements will be made part of the
record.
We do thank our witnesses for being here today, taking time
to testify before the subcommittee. Each witness will have the
opportunity to give an opening statement, followed by a round
of questions from Members.
This morning, we will hear from Mr. Chris Wing, the CEO of
SCAN Health Plan; Dr. Larry Atkins, President, National MLTSS
Health Plan Association; and Ms. Melanie Bella, who has been to
this committee before, I believe, consultant and former
Director of the Federal Coordinated Health Care Office, Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
We appreciate all of you being here this morning. Mr. Wing,
you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement, please.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS WING, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, SCAN HEALTH
PLAN; G. LAWRENCE ATKINS, PH.D., EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
MLTSS HEALTH PLAN ASSOCIATION; AND MELANIE BELLA, INDEPENDENT
CONSULTANT AND FORMER DIRECTOR, MEDICARE-MEDICAID COORDINATION
OFFICE, CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES

STATEMENT OF CHRIS WING

Mr. Wing. Chairman Burgess, Ranking Member Green, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you very much for the
opportunity to testify today.
When it comes to SNPs, SCAN covers the waterfront. We are
the only fully integrated dual-eligible SNP in California. We
have an Institutional SNP in California. We also have three
chronic illness Special Needs Plans in California.
Like patient advocates, SCAN supports permanence for all
SNPs. SCAN does come at the subject from a special vantage
point. SCAN was a Social HMO for 22 years before the
demonstration project evolved into SNPs. We have seen over 3
decades how tailoring care to meet the special needs of seniors
with complex conditions is the right approach. The care is
better for the beneficiaries and the cost is less.
Let me give you one example. Several years ago, SCAN asked
the research firm Avalere Health to compare SCAN's dual-
eligible population in California to fee-for-service duals.
Using the CMS' five percent sample, Avalere found 5,500 fee-
for-service duals in California who had similar risk
characteristics as our 5,500 duals. We tracked them for over 2
years. We called it a Doppleganger study.
What did it find? Hospital admissions were 14 percent less
for the SCAN population. And re-admissions were 25 percent
less. Not only did the extra care provided by SCAN provide
better care for the beneficiary by eliminating hospitalizations
and re-hospitalizations, but it saved the Government a
significant amount of money.
It is clear that duals, who are the system's most in need
and most expensive group of patients, are significantly helped
by fully integrated D-SNPs. That is why SCAN supports
permanency for D-SNPs.
We also strongly support moving all D-SNPs on an expedited
schedule toward full integration.
C-SNPs have also succeeded in giving patients better care
through added benefits and specialized networks. We think C-
SNPs have also earned permanency.
We are happy that the committee is proposing to make I-SNPs
permanent as well. However, let me point out one flaw with the
current I-SNP structure.
SCAN runs an Institutional SNP in California, meaning that
we strive to keep our nursing home eligible beneficiaries in
their own homes in the community and not in the nursing home.
However, our plan has shrunk dramatically because we are not
allowed by law to give beneficiaries the home and community-
based services they need to stay in the community and lead
independent lives. To get those long-term services and
supports, they have to spend down their assets and go on
Medicaid and being dually eligible.
To rectify that, we strongly urge the committee to consider
including bipartisan legislation introduced in the last
Congress by Representatives Leonard Lance and Kurt Schrader,
here on Energy and Commerce, as well as Representatives Linda
Sanchez and Pat Meehan on Ways and means. It would create a
demonstration project to target a limited amount of Medicare
funding toward frail individuals who are in the cusp of
spending down their income and becoming dually eligible. It
would allow them to receive home and community-based services,
which is now allowed today. This demonstration would allow
these individuals to stay in their homes, where they and their
families want them to stay, preserving their dignity and
comfort and would be a first step towards cost savings and
entitlement reform.
Finally, we want to strongly support the provision in your
bill which grants increased flexibility to all plans, not just
SNPs, to use supplemental benefits for nonmedical services.
We appreciate you folks very much. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wing follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentleman. Dr. Atkins, you are recognized for 5 minutes for
an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF G. LAWRENCE ATKINS

Dr. Atkins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Burgess,
Ranking Member Green, and members of the subcommittee, thank
you for the opportunity to testify on reauthorizing the Special
Needs Plans.
My name is Larry Atkins and I am the Executive Director of
the National MLTSS Health Plan Association which I am sure the
chairman will be happy to know does not fit into a three-letter
acronym. Association members are the managed care plans that
contract with States to manage long-term services and supports.
Member plans are in 18 of the 22 States that have MLTSS and
enroll nearly a million members in MLTSS plans and 175,000 in
duals demo MMPS, the Medicare-Medicaid Plans.
Managing LTSS focuses on helping individuals with
functional needs and their families, attain their goals by
obtaining the assistance they need either in institutions or in
their homes and communities. We partner with our States to
achieve shared objectives of rebalancing from institutions
toward more home and community-based settings and integrating
beneficiaries in the community and managing Medicare
expenditures.
SNPs, in particular, SNP for dual eligibles, the D-SNPs,
improve our success with dual eligibles through opportunities
to engage in fully integrated programs where we can bring
Medicare's medical benefits together with the MLTSS benefits
that we provide to provide a fully integrated and coordinated
care for the individual.
We fully support SNP reauthorization and urge the committee
to consider a permanent reauthorization at this time. The cycle
of repeated reauthorizations since 2003 has created uncertainty
about the future of SNPs that deters plan investment and
beneficiary enrollment in SNPs.
D-SNPs, in particular, are a critical building block for
integrating plans.
Why is integration so important? Managing care for people
with the most complex care needs is the key to controlling
healthcare spending overall. Only six percent of Medicare
beneficiaries use LTSS. They account for 43 percent of the
spending, much of it medical in Medicaid.
Providing better support in the home and community can
prevent the failures that trigger unnecessary and expensive
hospitalizations and institutional admissions that make up a
lot of our healthcare spending. To do that, plans need to be
able to manage both medical and nonmedical resources to
communicate and share information between care managers and
LTSS and medical providers and to capture savings on the
medical side that can support the necessary services on the
LTSS side.
For duals, this means combining Medicare and Medicaid and
right now, only a small proportion of duals are actually in
integrated plans.
We need an aggressive effort to expand integrated plan
availability and enrollment. A barrier to integration is the
difficulty of aligning Medicare and Medicaid coverage, that is,
enrolling an individual in the same organization's Medicare and
Medicaid plan. Most States auto-enroll Medicaid participants in
their Medicaid managed care plan. On the Medicare side,
beneficiaries choose. And in the SNP program, it allows for
monthly decisions about election of plans' coverage. And they
often remain in traditional Medicare or in another
organization's Medicare plan which limits the MLTSS plan's
ability to manage and coordinate care and share information
among provides.
The fully integrated dual SNP, the D-SNP, the FIDE SNP, and
the MMPs, put the two plans together and offer them to
beneficiaries as a single package. Only a handful of States
have opted for either of these models to date. The problem is
they use voluntary enrollment or passive enrollment with an opt
out, either of those two approaches, which is actually acting
to keep integrated models from reaching a large share of the
duals' population.
We urge the committee to permanently authorize SNPs. We
support the effort to expand FIDE SNPs in more integrated
approaches and we recommend that the Congress allow States to
require duals that are in an MLTSS plan to be enrolled in an
aligned MA plan.
For the future, we propose adopting a common legislative
and regulatory framework for plans that integrate Medicare and
Medicaid to try to get around some of the alphabet soup that we
have. To this end, we support creating a unified appeals and
grievance process for integrated plans. We also support
expanding the authority of the Medicare and Medicaid
Coordination Office to encompass oversight of all integrated
plans.
Finally, we thank the committee for moving quickly on SNP
reauthorization. SNPs alone though cannot drive the expansion
of coverage under integrated plans. We look forward to
continuing to work with the committee on strategies to bring
the benefits of fully integrated plans to a larger portion of
the population in need of LTSS. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Atkins follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman. Ms. Bella, you
are recognized for 5 minutes, please, for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MELANIE BELLA

Ms. Bella. Chairman Burgess, Ranking Member Green, members
of the committee, thank you for having me this morning. My name
is Melanie Bella. My background is in Medicaid and duals. I
have been fortunate to serve as a Medicaid Director and more
recently ran the Office of Duals within CMS.
Today, as you know, there are a little over 11 million
people who are eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. We spend
about $350 billion annually on their care. The majority of
those individuals are not in programs that integrate their
Medicare and Medicaid. However, there are promising models that
bring those two programs together.
Three such models are the Special Needs Plans that we are
talking about today; Medicare-Medicaid Demonstration Plans, and
the PACE program. Of note, PACE is the only permanent program.
This means that for all of our 11 million dual eligibles, we
have 1 option that is permanent to integrated clinically and
financially the Medicaid and Medicare programs.
We need to do more. We have an opportunity to do more and
one such opportunity is before you today with the permanent
authorization of Special Needs Plans. My remarks today will
focus on the dual-eligible plan specifically.
There is three things I want to kind of plant in your mind
today. Number one, is that this takes investment. This is an
active choice to make an investment of time and resources, and
there is an opportunity cost to choosing this path that is
pretty complicated over others. It is much easier to make
investments in things when they are stable. So authorizing
this, giving permanency to this program, allows States, plans,
and even beneficiaries who are choosing to be in these programs
the assurance they need that they are not going to worry every
few years, that the program might be going away.
The second is that full integration is really difficult.
There is no doubt that the bar should be high and that if we
want to have Special Needs Plans and dual-eligible Special
Needs Plans, we should have an expectation that there is full
integration of Medicaid and Medicare. But what that means is
that we have to help State Medicare agencies get their long-
term supportive services and behavioral health services into
managed and integrated products so we can pair those together.
So what we should be doing is continuing to break down any
barriers that stand in the way of doing that.
In my written testimony, I have included examples of areas
where the Duals Office within CMS could be given authority to
break down many of those barriers, largely administrative, that
make it really difficult for States and plans to bring those
two worlds together.
Lastly, we have to talk about States. States have to be our
full partners in this. They are already resource constrained,
and so they need incentives and capacity to be able to do these
things. They also need tools to ensure that if we have these
aligned programs that people are actually in them. So today,
there are a few States where you have fully aligned programs,
where Medicaid and Medicare are available, say if I am the
dual-eligible beneficiary. But large numbers of people aren't
in those plans. And so there are tools that we could be using
to help facilitate those choices. One example where CMS could
be very helpful just today would be to lift the moratorium on
something called seamless conversion which is something that
allows States and plans to ensure that people are getting their
services from the same entity.
So to reiterate an earlier point, States are in the same
bucket of wanting assurance that this program is going to be
stable and it is not going away which is another reason in
support of permanency for these programs.
In closing, this is I think my favorite subject in the
world, so I would like to thank the committee for taking it on.
This is a really important step. There are many more we could
take, but the opportunities here really are ones that lend
themselves very well to, I think, areas where we could have
bipartisan agreement, so I appreciate the opportunity very
much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bella follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. The Chair
thanks all of the witnesses for your testimony. We will move
into the Members' questions portion of the hearing. I want to
begin by recognizing the gentleman from Illinois, 5 minutes for
questions, please.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome. This is
an interesting topic.
And Ms. Bella, you mentioned, I have listened to all of the
testimony, but my first question was going to be on seamless
conversion which you talk about, but I was going to direct to
Dr. Atkins and then Ms. Bella, you can follow up.
The question is on the seamless conversion, can you tell us
how this helps ensure coordinated care for beneficiaries and
whether you think or not, I know Ms. Bella thinks this is
something we should address or will be involved in the
legislative fix.
Dr. Atkins. The seamless conversion operates on the
Medicaid side that States can move beneficiaries because the
beneficiaries are automatically enrolled in Medicaid managed
care plans in most States. States can reassign them to a
different plan, but it aligns with a D-SNP.
Arizona, for example, has had a pretty aggressive program
to realign their Medicaid beneficiaries with their D-SNP
coverage. The problem is that they can still move, the
beneficiaries can still change their coverage on a monthly
basis on the Medicare side. So the fact that as long as there
is this complete flexibility and freedom of choice on the
Medicare side, it is very difficult to achieve full alignment.
Mr. Shimkus. So, and I can ask anyone, so is this something
that you think we should try to address legislatively and fix
on the Medicare side?
Dr. Atkins. Yes.
Mr. Wing. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Ms. Bella?
Ms. Bella. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. OK, good. Let me go to, I think Mr. Wing and
Dr. Atkins again, and of course, Ms. Bella, if you want to
chime in. So the Medicaid CHP Payment and Access Commission,
because I don't like these acronyms, especially, can you
imagine somebody listening to these opening statements and not
knowing what any of these terms are? They would be thinking we
are talking in a foreign language.
The Medicaid CHP Payment and Access Commission noted that
dual eligibles may often be enrolled in up to three health
plans, a SNP, a Medicaid plan, and a limited benefit plan such
as behavioral health or long-term services and supports. While
we know how that has evolved, I think that the discussion here
is that integrated care should be integrated care. And it is
kind of silly financially to have to go through, for the
individual consumer very confusing.
Can you speak to the degree to which the committee's draft
legislation addresses this issue of the possibility of three
different plans and whether there are additional steps the
committee should take?
Mr. Wing. We believe in full integration. And we still have
a lot of work to do. SCAN has been dealing with dual eligibles
for 40 years, as I mentioned. One of the areas, and you
mentioned one, is behavioral health. Thirty years ago, the
industry made a mistake about separating the medical component
of care from the medical component of care and we now have
pilots, especially if we have permanence, it makes a lot of
sense. We are not a not-for-profit, but we have to be diligent
with our capital deployment. But we now have a pilot in
anticipation of either a 5-year permanence and we have a pilot
in Riverside where we are actually coordinating bringing a
telephonic Skype-based telemedicine that is focused exclusively
on behavioral health. So from SCAN's perspective, we need to
integrate this so it is totally seamlessly integrated for the
beneficiaries, for the State and for the plan.
Mr. Shimkus. Dr. Atkins?
Dr. Atkins. I think the legislation helps. It creates much
more of a push toward FIDE SNPs which is really the only full-
integrated approach. And then you know, I think the challenge
is that in many States you don't have the managed LTSS or you
don't have managed behavioral health to be able to integrate
with the D-SNP. So you can't get everybody into a FIDE SNP if
you don't have the managed LTSS and behavioral health.
And then I think you spoke to the issue of a managed
Medicaid plan, just generally, and then often these separate
MLTSS or behavioral health plans, but I think if the States can
be moving more directly to integrating on the Medicaid side,
then I think the challenge comes down to trying to find a way
to get that alignment to happen on the Medicare side.
Mr. Shimkus. Ms. Bella, do you want to add anything to
this?
Ms. Bella. I would say it is an important incremental step.
It is taking us one step further. It is still not getting us to
a point where we have one program fully integrated without all
the incentives, but to do that, we have a lot of enrollment and
other financing issues to tackle. So it is an important step.
It is not the end game.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentleman. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas,
Mr. Green, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Bella, you noted
that the clinical and financial integration are both critical
to actually achieving true coordination between Medicare and
Medicaid. As part of your testimony, you also highlighted that
even in States where fully aligned plans are offered, sometimes
beneficiaries do not enroll in these plans. You mentioned
specifically that improved enrollment processes and enhanced
outreach to promote aligned plans could address some of these
issues.
Ms. Bella, can you provide an example of what you mean by
improved enrollment processes?
Ms. Bella. Sure. I think part of the challenge is these are
difficult programs to explain to people who are eligible for
them. And we make it more difficult with having a different set
of requirements for Medicaid and a different set of
requirements for Medicare that complicate.
We also have different processes for reviewing and
approving those materials, so the end result is to talk to real
people. The information isn't as clear as it could be. So it is
sort of one set of things around materials and processes. It is
another set of things around and this is probably more detailed
than we have time to go into today, but the Medicaid program
looks at people one way and has one set of eligibility rules,
and the Medicare rules look at that exact same person a
different way. And so we have conflicts in terms of how people
are enrolled, how long they are enrolled, when and how often
they can make enrollment choices and all of those things just
they create problems for people and they really just erode a
continuity of care and being able to keep people in a plan.
Mr. Green. Do you have any examples of how we can improve
that outreach?
Ms. Bella. Yes, there are examples. There are examples of
how you can coordinate member materials, so requirements on the
Medicare-Medicaid side around summary benefits, annual notice
of coverage. So some of that is being tested in the
demonstration States and in Minnesota right now, tested well.
There are examples of how you can have joint review of
those materials. What was just discussed about seamless
conversion, allowing that to proceed, lifting the moratorium on
that would be important. So I would be happy to present some
more explicit examples outside of the hearing, but there are
definitely concrete things, many of which are being tested
today.
Mr. Green. If you would give that to us so we could include
it in the record, I would appreciate it.
Ms. Bella. Sure.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Ms. Bella. Finally, there are certain
States that Congress should look to as models that have been
very innovative and promoted integration between Medicare and
Medicaid. Do any of the panelists have thoughts on certain
States that we might look at, whether it be Minnesota or
someone else?
Dr. Atkins. Well, there is certainly, you know, there are
the States that started first with full integration.
Massachusetts, Minnesota, Wisconsin were the early States. And
Massachusetts is another State to look at for their FIDE SNP.
They have a senior care options program for the seniors, and
they are in the duals demonstration for the under-65
population.
But I think a lot of the States now who have gone either to
adopt MMPs or have pushed more on integration, there are a lot
of States out there that I think coming at it from very
different perspectives have done a great deal in this space.
The ones that are now sponsoring FIDE SNPs are an example.
Mr. Green. Ms. Bella, I have another question. It seems
like there is a menu of options available to dual-eligible and
chronically ill beneficiaries. I think we need a basic review
of the system of care as it stands for these beneficiaries so
that we better understand how the pieces fall together.
What are the options a dually eligible or chronically ill
beneficiary is available to them in any given State? For the
record, what is a D-SNP, a FIDE SNP, and what is a duals demo
and the PACE program and how do all these different care
options fit together.
Ms. Bella. Are you asking what each of them is for the
record?
Mr. Green. Yes, for seeing how they all fit together.
Ms. Bella. I think of it as sort of menu of integration. So
you start with sort of--your goal is to get to full
integration, which means Medicare-Medicaid benefits are
delivered by one entity, and they have financial integration,
too. So the financial alignment duals demonstrations integrate
the services, the payment. One entity gets a set amount of
money every month to provide that care.
One step down from that are the FIDE SNPs, the fully
integrated, dual-eligible SNPs. so they have a contract with
Medicare as a Special Needs Plans. They have a contract with a
Medicaid agency for long-term care and behavioral health. They
manage those two separate contracts. They get two separate
funding streams, but they are still responsible for everything,
just not quite as integrated as the Medicare-Medicaid Demo
Plan.
One step down from that is a regular dual-eligible SNP, so
they have contract with Medicare as a SNP. They may or may not
have a contract with Medicaid and so they are not quite as
integrated as the FIDE SNP, because they are not managing the
long-term care and the behavioral health benefit.
And then one step down from that would be a regular MA plan
because there are many duals that are in regular MA plans. They
have no relationship to Medicaid at all.
And I erred by saying PACE should be over here beyond the
MMP plan, because PACE is completely clinically and financially
integrated with both Medicaid and Medicare.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
Dr. Atkins. Is it all right if I comment on that? I think
PACE has a lot of features that would be beneficial for other
integrated plans and the other thing is that the MMPs have a
three-way contract between the State, the Federal Government,
and the plan. And that actually is the plans have reported, and
I think the State and Federal Government feel the same way,
that that has enhanced the level of communication that goes on
between the three entities and it is really moved to a much
higher level of coordination. So I think the three-way contract
is another interesting piece.
But we advocate for eventually a single kind of overarching
design for integrated plans and to try to allow these different
modalities, but to bring them in under a kind of a common
architecture because I think they are really are there because
that is the way they have evolved. They are not there because
that is the way that makes the most sense.
Mr. Green. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
the information as we look at this legislation.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentleman. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Murphy, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This just sounds like
one of the biggest Rube Goldberg messes the Government could
come up with. So let me try and peel back a little bit here.
Mr. Wing, I was fascinated by what you talked about with
some of these patients through telemedicine. I am assuming you
have some sort of telepsychiatry consult. We know that people
who have a chronic illness or acute illness doubles their risk
for mood disorder, depression. When that is untreated, it
increases their costs.
Who does that, the work that you talked about in your plan,
who actually does those teleconsults?
Mr. Wing. Actually, right now we have a pilot. I am under a
nondisclosure agreement, but we have a pilot.
Mr. Murphy. I don't mean what the group does, I mean is it
a psychiatrist, psychologist, social worker?
Mr. Wing. Well, actually, it is everything above. I can
discuss the intervention.
Mr. Murphy. Briefly.
Mr. Wing. I came from a physician group that did a really
good job, DaVita Medical Group. But diagnosing opioid abuse,
substance abuse, and depression is easier said than done. So in
this modality, the primary care physician is given an iPad and
when he even suspects that there is opioid abuse, substance
abuse, or bipolar disease, put the patient in a private exam
room, give them an iPad that is connected to Skype to a
specialized geriatric nurse practitioner. She is the one that
does the better assessment and then she can then connect the
patient through telehealth through a national network in
behavioral health.
Mr. Murphy. Let me ask a couple of things that would make
it even worse. Are you aware that even in that, that primary
care physician because of a regulation put forth in the Nixon
administration, if that person is already in treatment or
receiving methadone or Suboxone, that doctor may not have
access to the records and therefore may prescribe an opioid for
his pain or the treatment, they don't even know that person is
in treatment because of this thing called the 42 CFR Part 2.
Are you aware of that?
Mr. Wing. Yes.
Mr. Murphy. It is another mess that we have to fix. Plus,
we also have a strange thing that even those psychologists may
do the work, they have to bill through the psychiatrist and so
which adds administrative costs and takes the psychiatrist away
from their work. So it is another expense that we add to the
system. So let us continue to build on Rube Goldberg.
And in this, too, I want to ask all of you, if you are
aware, too, what we find is that a true coordinated care model
is the physician can really understand we have a complex case.
You have a person, dual eligible, so they already are having
multiple problems. And we even know, when you have got the flu
it is hard to manage your flu. But when you are dealing with a
chronic illness and perhaps mental illness on top of that,
behavior and physical medicine have to be integrated together,
but that requires a lot of work. But even in that context, I
want to make sure I understand, because my understanding is
Medicare doesn't pay for these services that are needed. For
example, responding to a patient's phone call about a symptom
or problem may not be paid for; or communications between the
primary care physician and specialists to coordinate a care
isn't paid for. Communicating between community physicians and
emergency room isn't paid for or providing proactive telephone
outreach to high-risk patients to say we want to make sure we
see how you are doing, be aware of these symptoms, etcetera,
how is your medication going, not paid for. Spending time with
a patient in shared decision making to map out a game plan for
them isn't paid for. Hiring nurses or another staff member to
do education, patient education on medication, treatments,
anything else isn't paid for. Providing palliative care isn't
paid for. And even such things as getting the patient to the
doctor's office. I have heard of one program in Miami that
actually does this. They actually bring the patients to the
doctor's office and deliver medication and guess what? Patient
compliance goes way up.
So is it your understanding, too, or am I getting this
right, in a coordinated care plan with these very, very
difficult cases, these things aren't paid for, but we know that
those things save money.
Dr. Atkins. Can I comment on that? I think this is a
critical issue because Medicare actually is much more
restrictive about what can be covered and not covered than
Medicaid is. Medicaid is more flexible, but neither one of them
is particularly flexible. And when you put the two together,
you still have to deal with limitations on coverage, coverage
restrictions and things that are built in the statute.
So what we would advocate for is that as we go toward these
more integrated models, that in the context of an integrated
system where you are fully capitating across all of these
services and supports, behavioral health, long-term services
and supports and the medical, that you give the plans the
flexibility to be able to provide the services that make the
most sense in the case that they are dealing with,
understanding that they are financially at risk for the overall
cost of care for that patient. But if they see the possibility
of providing a service, whether it is a counseling service or
whether it is an inhome service that would help to reduce the
medical costs on the medical side, they have the opportunity to
do that.
Mr. Murphy. So this goes back to eliminating Rube Goldberg
and saying if we empower the physicians to work closely with
the patient and make some determines what they need and work
more directly with that, and have a system of payment that is
designed to cover that patient, let the medical practice decide
what is best, we can actually save a lot of money and it is
quite frankly, I believe more compassionate and works toward
better healthcare.
Dr. Atkins. And I would urge you to include the fact that
it is just not medical because for a lot of these people, the
more significant services for them really are the services and
supports that help to reduce medical expenditures.
Mr. Murphy. Yes, I add to that also psychological
behavioral services. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman
yields back. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Florida,
Ms. Castor, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you very much for calling this
hearing, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to our witnesses for your
expertise here.
You all, based upon your testimony you say that not enough
dual eligibles are enrolled in the Special Needs Plans,
correct? And you have made recommendations to improve that,
remove barriers, work with States to improve the enrollment
there.
Do you all agree that as we move in this direction, the
Government could see substantial cost savings?
Mr. Wing. This is Chris Wing. The answer is yes. In our
fully integrated D-SNP, we actually have two products. We have
more of an ambulatory program for the aged, blind, and disabled
dual eligible. It is called Connections.
We have another program in California. These members have
to meet the California standards for being certified for
nursing home eligible. In our program, for the seniors that in
that Connections at home, all of them nursing home certifiable,
we keep 96 percent of them, 96 percent in the community and
outside of nursing homes. And if you do the math, this isn't a
DRG where it is $12,000 or $14,000. This could be a 7-year
length of stay and $4,000 or $5,000 a month. The savings to the
system are very, very profound, coupled with a better quality
of life, better quality of care for beneficiaries.
Ms. Castor. And I am going to ask you a little bit more
about that, but do you all agree?
Dr. Atkins. Yes, if I could just reinforce that. HHS
released a study this spring of the MSHIL program in Minnesota
which is a fully integrated program and it was a comparison of
the people who were in the MSHIL program to people who were
just in MLTSS alone without the integration with Medicare. They
found a very substantial reduction. I don't know the figure on
top of my head, but there is a very substantial reduction that
is possible.
Ms. Castor. And Ms. Bella, do you agree? And then how do we
keep track? What measures are in place? How do we keep track of
cost savings over time so we are investing where we need to
invest?
Ms. Bella. Well, I do agree there is cost savings, but they
are not immediate and they accrue more immediately on the
Medicare side for things like hospitalization, readmissions,
better prescription drug management. It takes more time to see
on the Medicare side and that is part of the problem is that we
have a mismatch between when the savings happen and how the
payers benefit. And so that is why you haven't seen as much
take up of some of these so that is one of the things we need
to address. We track that by looking at outcomes, the hard
utilization outcomes that are measurable around key utilization
areas that are driving costs, around all the inpatient buckets.
And then on the Medicaid side it services all the long term
care and how much of that can be moved into home and community-
based settings and how are we seeing those shifts. So there is
ways of tracking.
Ms. Castor. And that is the responsibility of CMS?
Ms. Bella. It needs to be the responsibility of CMS and the
States, but also MedPAC and MACPAC also play an important role
because they can bridge those data together and help do some of
the academic pieces of that that the governments aren't
necessarily staffed to do.
Ms. Castor. So we are really struggling with the escalating
cost of prescription drugs all across the board and all kinds
of insurers. Is this a way where we can realize cost savings as
well for prescription drugs paid by the Government under Part D
and Medicaid and how would that work?
Ms. Bella. Certainly, prescription drugs is an area that
when the two programs aren't talking to each other, the costs
can go up because there is no coordination, there is no one
managing the meds, and there are all of those things. So the
integrated program where you have one entity responsible who is
seeing everything that that person is getting, yes, they have
an opportunity to improve the medication management and
presumably drive costs down.
Ms. Castor. Are there incentives in place to do so?
Ms. Bella. The health plans have incentives. I mean the
health plans are fully capitated have incentives to make sure
that the dollars are being used wisely. Those incentives don't
always flow back to the States and the Federal Government, and
so again, there is sometimes mismatches in where investments
are being made and where savings are being recouped, but the
health plans have incentives across the board when they have
responsibility for both pots.
Ms. Castor. Did you want to comment on that, too?
Mr. Wing. The answer is that we have the risk. We are going
to work with our providers to profile aberrant prescribing
patterns and also try and work with the patient to make sure we
understand what their desires are, what their goals are, we
meet their desires so they will be more compliant.
Dr. Atkins. There is also, I think, an issue of medication
adherence which is that very often we have spent a lot of money
in this country on prescriptions that people either don't take
or don't take properly and they really don't have the effect
that they need to have. So one of the advantages of an
integrated program is that there is a lot of emphasis on
medications.
Ms. Castor. And there has also been increased recognition
of the importance of social determinants, things like social
supports and an individual's physical environment and that is
how we can help create positive outcomes and cost savings and
this is something that Medicaid has worked on for a while and I
am glad to see Medicare learning from Medicaid here.
Mr. Wing, SCAN, I understand, has been very innovative in
its thinking about social determinants of health and how
nontraditional services and interventions can help. Tell us a
little bit more about that.
Mr. Wing. You know, we were founded to focus on complex
seniors especially dually eligible. And it is amazing what
small things can really make a profound difference.
I came from DaVita Medical Group, and doctors do a great
job, but oftentimes they don't know what is going on in the
home. So we have a program where we put social workers and care
navigators into the home to take stock, do an HRA, but take
stock as far as the whole social determinants of health, and
report back to the doctor. We don't only provide the
transportation back to the doctor which often is a barrier for
dually eligible, but oftentimes we have a care navigator go
with a patient and make sure the doctor knows the social
determinants and everything else that is going on in the home.
One case--if I can--about 2 years ago, we videotaped a
member who was socially isolated, living by himself, a Latino
gentleman. He already had Parkinson's, but he had glaucoma. Our
community health navigator, not a high cost, in the home
identified--the member was doing the best he can to put the eye
drops in, but couldn't do it. A $12 wrist guard, a $12 wrist
guard. The doctor thought the member was doing his best, but
did not know he couldn't do it. A $12 wrist guard, all of a
sudden this patient now can slow the delay of the glaucoma and
fast forward in 5 years, if he had gone blind, had Parkinson's,
if he showed up in ER, he is going to get admitted. But that is
not the worst outcome.
The worst outcome is when he was about to be discharged. He
is not going to be discharged back to the community. He is
going to go to custodial care the rest of his life. So these
social determinants probably predict anywhere between 20 to 80
percent of health outcomes. And when you are totally integrated
like SCAN is for a fully integrated D-SNP, we have all the
incentives to work with the doctors, but also make sure we are
in the home and we know everything that is going on with that
patient, their care givers, and their family situation.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Mr. Burgess. The gentlelady's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Lance, 5 minutes
for questions, please.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As the chairman
indicated, I am one of the sponsors in the bill that would
enable expanded supplemental benefits to meet the needs of the
chronically ill, Medicare Advantage enrollees.
I want to work with the entire panel on this issue. New
Jersey has struggled with behavioral health and substance abuse
issues. Dual eligibles who are in the program, we have in New
Jersey, try to address the whole person, both physical and
mental health.
In the panel's opinion, does this kind of dual payment
integration foster clinical integration?
Mr. Wing. Again, the answer is yes. You know, for our
Medicare Advantage plan, not for our SNPs, we are prohibited
from offering nonhealth type of services. Let us take the
individual who needed a $12 wrist guard, boy, would that make a
difference in somebody who is in a Medicare Advantage
population? Yes.
We all know about the hip fractures for seniors often lead
to bad outcomes, whether it is nursing home care, institutional
care, but if we could provide solid grips in the bathrooms, by
the toilets, that would make a profound difference. But right
now, Medicare Advantage plans cannot offer, by law, Medicare
benefits to a Medicare Advantage only audience.
Mr. Lance. Well, thank you. And I want to continue to work
with the panel on this and other issues because I think this is
an incredibly important area and I commend those on the other
side of the aisle, including Congressman Schrader, who is
working with me on this issue and it is to be continued.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentleman. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
California, Mr. Cardenas, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member.
I would to thank you for holding today's hearing and allowing
the committee to shine a light on a program that is helping to
improve the lives of so many medically vulnerable Americans.
Too often in these discussions, we lose track of the real-
world effects of our decisions. The conversation today is not
about some obscure policy provision. It is about real people
with real needs.
One of those real people lives in my district. Let us just
call her Cassandra. Cassandra is 73 years old and has several
chronic conditions including congestive heart failure,
diabetes, and hypertension. For anyone unfamiliar with diabetes
testing, a blood glucose test, or an A1C score above 8 is
considered uncontrolled. This can lead to range of negative
health effects including amputations, kidney failure, and loss
of vision.
Before joining the Special Needs Plans, Cassandra had an
A1C reading of 12. This is dangerously high. This, along with
her other poorly controlled conditions, led to at least seven
hospitalizations over the course of just 1 year. Cassandra
joined an SNP in 2014 and today her A1C level is just 7.6.
Cassandra has also only been to the ER once since her
enrollment and has only been hospitalized for one scheduled
surgery. Cassandra's care is coordinated by her care team and
she has regular meetings with her primary care provider and
nutritionalist to keep her conditions under control.
For the first time, Cassandra is getting healthier as she
gets older, and her quality of life is much, much better.
Cassandra is just one example of the millions of people
benefitting from these specialized plans. We owe it to these
patients to provide the certainty that these plans will be
there for them in the future and that is why I believe it is so
important to reauthorize them permanently to make them more
effective and more efficient. Bottom line, better quality of
care.
One of the many populations that are treated through
Special Needs Plans and are end-stage renal disease, otherwise
known ESRD patients, so I have a question for Mr. Wing. 21st
Century Cures took the first steps in developing ESRD specific
quality measures for ESRD C-SNPs. As you know, not all quality
measures are applicable to such a specialized patient
population due to the uniqueness of the ESRD patient population
and the type of specialized care they receive.
So Mr. Wing, do you believe ESRD C-SNPs could better
measure the quality of care provided if more specialized
measures were developed?
Mr. Wing. The answer is yes. And actually we have an ESRD
Special Needs Plans in Riverside with DaVita Medical--
actually, DaVita, the parent. And it is amazing here. Not just
we have the quality metrics. We can always improve quality
metrics. We think the stars measures have fundamental changed
the conversation between health plans' providers because there
is the economic incentives now. We always think there is
improvement. Well, boy, when you talk to the nephrologists,
when you talk to the patients, when you talk to the nurses
about the care that dialysis patients get, ESRD Special Needs
Plans, the savings are there, but again, the beneficiary
satisfaction, the patient satisfaction is there as well. So the
answer is we do applaud the current measures, but we can always
improve upon them.
Mr. Cardenas. Mr. Wing, I have been listening to your
answers today and I really appreciate you sharing your
expertise with us. But one of the things that seems to be the
common thread in all of this that you have been explaining and
that is the communication between human beings. I mean we have
all been incredibly impressed with the technology and the
advances and the efficiencies of being able to be more accurate
when it comes to seeing what is really going on with a patient
down to the molecular level, but at the same time it seems like
every single one of your answers seems to point toward we need
to make sure that our human beings are actually able to
communicate with each other and share information and that
seems to be the driving factor to having much, much better
results. Would you agree?
Mr. Wing. I would agree. Hopefully, I am not a one-trick
pony, but I think there is two tricks, integration and risk-
bearing entities will always strive to innovate for better
care, better quality and better financial outcomes. But I am
always amazed, when we put people into patients' or
beneficiaries' homes to find out what is going on, the doctors,
as good as they are, as committed to quality as they are, they
don't know what is going on in the home. We have to have eyes
and ears in the home to translate to the doctors. So
communication and risk-bearing entities I think are a large
part of the solution for this type of population.
Mr. Cardenas. And unfortunately, in this modern world, the
human element seems to be in so many systems that want to get
eliminated. This one we have to be very careful to understand
how important that that human touch is. Thank you so much. I
yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman
yields back. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Missouri,
Mr. Billy Long, for 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Dr. Atkins, in your
testimony you discussed fully integrated, dual-eligible Special
Needs Plans. The uptake by States has been slow and enrollment
has been relatively low, yet you state Congress should commit
to advancing models that can fully integrate Medicare and
Medicaid benefits.
There is a concern that if we move too quickly, we are
trying to force rather than facilitate integration. How do you
respond to this concern?
Dr. Atkins. Well, you know, the difficulty with the uptake
has been just that we have a lot of States that don't have
managed MLTSS and behavioral health. So trying to integrate,
and you can't really do a FIDE SNP if you don't have
integration--managed care on both sides. So that is one of the
challenges.
And then, you know, I think the enrollment issue has been a
substantial challenge in both the MMP program and the FIDE SNP
program. It is either voluntary enrollment that people
voluntarily choose to enroll as beneficiaries in the combined
plan or in the case of MMP, there has been passive enrollment
with an opt-out and so people find themselves in the plans,
don't really know quite how they got there and often are
persuaded either by their physician or by an LTSS provider to
opt-out of the plan without really understanding what the
choice has been.
So I think the challenge has been to address these
questions about enrollment because what we find is that when
people do enroll in these plans, the level of satisfaction goes
ways up. So in the disability community, for example, in the
younger disability community, there has been some resistance to
going into managed care. So there has been some resistance to
going into these integrated plans, but a lot of that is built
on a lack of understanding about what is going on in these
plans. And when beneficiaries get in, they report they are much
more satisfied with this experience. So I think it is going to
be a lot of education.
I think in many cases, the MMPs were launched in the State
without adequately communicating in advance what these plans
were. And then when you look at the beneficiaries who get
assigned to these plans, often these are very hard to reach
beneficiaries and when they get into an MMP, it is the first
time anybody has ever shown up and had contact with them about
what is going on with their healthcare or what are their
services and supports. And so it has been very difficult to
kind of get to everybody and get the information out there, but
I think that we need to have some strategies around how do we
get more people to enroll in these plans.
Mr. Long. All that being said and talking about enrollment,
could this lead to fewer comprehensive plans being offered?
Dr. Atkins. I am sorry, I didn't understand the question.
Mr. Long. I said could this lead to fewer comprehensive
plans being offered, forcing rather than facilitating?
Dr. Atkins. If we go to a FIDE SNP, for example? I mean I
think a FIDE SNP is incredibly----
Mr. Long. Trying to move too quickly, is that going to----
Dr. Atkins. Oh, if we go too quickly, are we scaring people
away? Well, I think in each State where these products get
launched, the State has to do the work initially. It may take a
year or more to work with all of the groups that are affected.
Just as an example, in Kansas when they brought managed
LTSS to the IDD population, intellectually and developmentally
disabled population, which has been carved out of most of these
in many States, at first blush, there was a lot of resistance
because the State had not communicated what was going on to the
population. The plans had to spend the first year just
communicating with the advocacy groups, working with the
service delivery system that was there, getting them to
understand what was going on before they actually started to
launch services and enroll people. So those are the things that
just have to happen because there is so much lack of
understanding.
Mr. Long. I have got one more question, it is again for
you, Dr. Atkins. You also state in your testimony that
facilitating full integration will only be possible initially
in States that enroll dual beneficiaries in Medicaid managed
plans, yet enrolling dual eligibles in managed care requires a
waiver, and the process of retaining a waiver can often be
long, challenging, and uncertain.
How can we, as a committee, facilitate integration, while
not relying on States to get waives from CMS?
Dr. Atkins. Do you want to answer that?
Ms. Bella. Depending, there are ways that States can have
their beneficiaries in managed care. They don't require--they
are not 115 waiver process. They can do it through a State plan
process. And so, depending on the path the State takes, there
are more or less complex ways of doing that.
If you are asking are there ways that we could make it
easier for States who want to do integrated programs----
Mr. Long. Right, as a committee, how can we assess?
Ms. Bella. Yes, there are ways to do that. They are
somewhat State-specific, depending on how the States structure
their program, but there are always ways that we can simplify
and making these two programs work better together.
Mr. Long. OK.
Dr. Atkins. But I will say that there is a very strong
movement in this country right now toward managed LTSS. We have
got three more States coming in this year. We have a number of
States lined up starting the process for next year and beyond.
And so we have expanded the number of States already that are
involved in MLTSS and that movement is pretty strong because it
is really to the States' advantage in trying to manage these
costs to do these managed care contracts because they can
really get their arms around trying to figure out how to keep
the population that has been in institutions or is headed
toward institutions really stabilized in the community.
Mr. Long. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I have no time left, but
if I did, I would yield it back.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair appreciates the gentleman's offer.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Colorado, Ms. DeGette,
5 minutes for questions, please.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank Chairman Walden and Ranking Member Pallone for having
this hearing on SNPs, and you, too.
I am really happy that the SNP Reauthorization Act includes
this bill that I have been working on with Representatives
Lance and Kennedy and also our colleagues on Ways and Means,
Congressman Meehan and Congresswoman Sewell.
What this bill does, H.R. 3044, it expands supplemental
benefits for chronically ill Medicare Advantage enrolless. What
it does, under the bill, both traditional Medicare Advantage
plans and SNPs, would be able to offer individualized benefits
that meet the specific healthcare needs of chronically ill
enrollees. And I know you have all been talking about this
today.
Supplemental benefits could include services that are not
traditionally covered by health plans like meal delivery, as
long as there is a reasonable expectation that such services
will maintain or improve health. For example, somebody
mentioned today that the new flexibility would allow plans to
purchase air conditioning for COPD or asthma patients who
couldn't otherwise afford it. Now even though that is not a
traditional healthcare service, such a change in a patient's
living environment could have huge health benefits. I think
that this common-sense legislation will lead to better health
outcomes and improve quality of life, including in my own
State, 273,000 seniors.
And I just really want to thank the committee on a
bipartisan basis for including our bill in this broader bill
that we are considering today. And so I hope we can continue to
work in a bipartisan basis to reauthorize the SNP program and
include this common-sense bill that we have.
Mr. Wing, I was really struck by your testimony about the
gentleman who had Parkinson's and glaucoma and how all you
needed to get was a wrist band for him so he could put his eye
drops in. This is true with so many seniors and what we end up
doing, and part of it is because Congress doesn't really know
how to look at budgeting for prevention and management. And it
is very frustrating for our constituents. This is something
that Chairman Burgess and I have actually been working on for a
long time, trying to figure out how to incentivize prevention
through the budget process, rather than just paying for more
and more emergency services and whatever.
And so, I am just wondering, I know in your testimony, you
said you strongly support provisions in the SNP Reauthorization
Act that grant increased flexibility to use supplemental
benefits of nonmedical services. Do you have some other
examples that you can share with the committee today?
Mr. Wing. Sure. Thank you for the question. I mentioned
that the fall often necessitates a hip fracture and a hip
fracture necessitates not only a hospital admission, but
oftentimes long-term facility admission. Oftentimes, if you
have just grips in the toilet, the shower, and solid flooring
in the kitchen, solid flooring in the bathroom, you can negate
the fall that precipitated the hip, and again, knowing what is
going on in the home.
Oftentimes, a doctor is going to look for medical
solutions, but oftentimes there is a social solution. Maybe a
little bit of inhome support, a low-level person coming in and
helping with food, with bathing, with activities of daily
living for a member that is in a straight MA plan. We prevent
them from having an ER visit, a hospital visit, and since we
are at risk for the Medicare benefits want to give us the
flexibility to prevent that and provide better care for the
beneficiary and reduce costs for the system.
Ms. DeGette. Doctor, I see you nodding your head. Did you
want to add to that?
Dr. Atkins. I think it is a very important move forward and
given this flexibility in MA. Because we have to keep in mind
that the only benefits we provide on long-term services and
supports in this country are under Medicaid. And so we are
serving a very small portion of the population that has fairly
substantial LTSS needs. The more we can do to create more
flexibility in the Medicare Advantage program in cases where
the services that we are going to authorize the plans to
provide actually help reduce the overall costs of the plan
anyway.
Ms. DeGette. Right.
Dr. Atkins. So it is really improving outcomes and reducing
costs. I think that is really important to try to explore as
much of that as possible. And I know you are familiar with the
Bipartisan Policy Commission. In fact, Council's report
recently about other ways to do that.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Ms. Blackburn [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back. Mr.
Carter, you are recognized 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Well, thank you all for being here, certainly
an important subject.
I want to start off with something that is bothering me. I
get the SNPs. I get the Institutional in I-SNPs. I was a
consultant pharmacist in a long term care setting for over 25
years. And I can understand and see how they work. And I can
see the benefit of that. I can see the chronic, the C-SNPs. I
can see the benefit there. I have witnessed that through my
practice in retail pharmacy. I have seen how they are
beneficiary.
What I struggle with and I have always struggled with is
the dual eligible. Explain to me why we have to have dual
eligible? Explain to my why we can't introduce legislation that
says you have to be one or the other. You are not going to be
both. I mean just simplify it for me.
Dr. Atkins. Well, one of the critical things is that
Medicare doesn't really cover anything but medical expenses and
for many of the people we are talking about who have very
complex care needs, being able to address their nonmedical
needs can have more impact on their overall health than the
cost of care for them than spending the money on the medical
side. So Medicare is limited in its capacity to serve this
population completely.
For those people who are in Medicaid and have the long-term
services and supports covered in the Medicaid program, they
have those services available to them. Where you have dual
coverage----
Mr. Carter. Then why don't you just let them be Medicaid?
Say you are going to be Medicaid. You are not going to be
Medicare.
Ms. Bella. In 1965, the then Congress created two programs
with two separate titles. These folks qualify under both title.
So the only way to get rid of it is to have a new title that
encompasses the medical----
Mr. Carter. OK, I want to introduce a new title, and it is
going to be you are one or the other. Just explain to me. I
just struggle. I have always struggled with it.
Ms. Bella. The challenge with this population is they,
right now, they are eligible to get their medical needs met
through Medicare and their long-term supports and behavioral
health and wrap-around services met through Medicaid. So you
can't really put them in one or the other because they--right
now, the system gives them both. And so if you want to make a
choice, then you have to make them ineligible for one or the
other because today, they are eligible for both and they need
both types of services, medical and nonmedical.
Are they delivered in the right way? No. Is it efficient to
have them delivered this way? No. Do we need a new title? Yes.
Are these things that we are talking about today, are they
important steps? They are, if we can align incentives which is
part of what we are talking about today to put things together,
give the money to one entity and start to fix some of these
problems that have kept having accountability.
Mr. Carter. Is that what your PACE program is?
Dr. Atkins. Yes, that is what PACE is.
Mr. Carter. So that is the answer I am looking for here. Is
we need PACE.
Dr. Atkins. Well, PACE needs to be----
Ms. Bella. They are two separate titles.
Mr. Carter. So we are just going to create another title.
Dr. Atkins. The only thing I would suggest, I think there
should be a category of integrated plans and they should have
their own statutory and structure and regulatory structure. But
to get away from having two sources of money coming into these
programs, one from the Federal Government and one from the
combination Federal and State government, the Federal
Government would have to be willing to essentially take the
Medicare money for these people and give it to the States to
serve that population.
Mr. Carter. And what would be wrong with that?
Dr. Atkins. Nothing.
Mr. Carter. Listen, the source remains the same.
Dr. Atkins. Right.
Mr. Carter. Whether it is Medicare or Medicaid, guess where
it is coming from originally. It is coming from here, whether
it is administered through the State.
Dr. Atkins. Right. In the MMP program we have a three-way
contract with the Federal Government and the State and the plan
all work together. If the Congress so chose, they could take
that Medicare money and just essentially hand it to the States
and let them run the contract, if that was what people wanted
to do. But that would be a major shift from where we are today.
Mr. Carter. I can't imagine. I just have struggled with
this for many years to understand this, why we can't simplify
to it where you are on one or the other. And I get it. I know
that people who are eligible for Medicare who are lower incomes
need that safety net program to help them because there are
services that are not covered, but still, I don't understand
why and maybe I need to understand the PACE program. I have got
20 seconds left. Can you tell me how it is going to benefit and
how it would help with this?
Ms. Bella. Both PACE and what he is referring to as the
MMP, which is Medicare-Medicaid Plan, give an entity the
payment for both Medicaid and Medicare services. There is one
contract. So you are not kind of fighting two different
regulators. You attempt to align the administrative
requirement. So they are the closest things we have to sort of
having it be seamless that there is really two programs behind
it. So they are the models that you would use if you were
trying to get away from having two separate programs that are
constantly at odds with each other.
Mr. Carter. OK. My time is up. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Burgess [presiding]. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
The gentleman yields back. The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Oregon, Mr. Schrader, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate that. Dual eligibles is really the absolute gold
standard by which I think healthcare delivery in this country
will be judged if we are going to make improvements. They are
the most expensive population, require the most attention, to
my good colleague's comments earlier, the fact that we have got
two different programs dealing with a complex population with
many needs is confounding.
I would take a slightly different approach. I like what I
was hearing from Mr. Atkins about, you know, starting over, an
integrated model with overarching rubric that the States could
play into that combined the better aspects with one set of
criteria, not two, with Medicaid having one set of eligibility
requirements and Medicare having another. It seems like the
time has come with the SNP programs, the MMP programs, come up
with some sort of way that we could have a common standard by
which the monies get delivered to one spot, however much money
that is, and then the States again, under some overarching
rubric, come up with a better way, more efficient, more
coordinated way that would be maybe up front a little costly,
but over the long haul yield measurable, better outcome results
that would decrease the cost for these very difficult patients
going forward.
That would be fun to work on. I think based on the
testimony I have heard so far, I think you would find a lot of
willing participants, both sides of the aisle, across the
political spectrum to do that.
Currently, the money that comes into these MMPs or the SNP,
the dual SNP programs, is it the--I am a little ignorant here
also in terms of how the money flows. Is it always a case that
the full Medicaid payment and the full Medicare payment come
into these programs and are utilized by whatever program
delivery system is there, Mr. Atkins?
Dr. Atkins. Well, yes, I would defer to my colleague who
actually ran the program to be a little bit better informed on
how the mechanics work. But go ahead.
Ms. Bella. Sure. The Medicare-Medicaid rate, the Medicare-
Medicaid Plans, the Federal Government and the States set the
rate, and they give Medicare and Medicaid money to the plan,
and it encompasses the full set of Medicare and Medicaid
benefits.
In the arrangements where you have Medicare managed care
and a SNP or a FIDE SNP, it varies by State. In the most
integrated products, the same plan is getting capitated amount
for all the Medicaid benefits and Medicare benefits?
Mr. Schrader. So how does the overall amount of dollars
compare to the two separate payments that are out there?
Ms. Bella. In the MMP products, the two payers, we took
those factors into account and assumed benefits of coordination
and reduced duplication and took cost savings off the top of
that.
Mr. Schrader. I think that has a lot of appeal to members
on both sides of the aisle. Instead of having two big payments
that add up to X plus, we have one that adds upto X or X minus
because of that coordinated care. I think you a lot of willing
participation.
Dr. Atkins. Yes, and one of the other issues is just when
you are dealing with a very frail or a population with a lot of
very complex care needs is the risk adjustment that goes into
the payment to make sure that it adequately reflects the social
factors that are binding on these populations as well.
Mr. Schrader. And risks gaming the system a little bit, not
that anyone would do that, but everyone then would be
compensated for the degree of risk that they are incurring
given the complex needs of their particular people going
forward.
I guess the other point I would make that Mr. Wing touched
on a little bit is that there is a very fantastic bill out
there that Mr. Lance and myself have to keep people from
falling into, hopefully, the dual-eligible situation, i.e.,
making sure low income Medicare patients can access some of the
advantages of this integrated approach and I would hope that
there is an opportunity as we go forward to include this type
thing. Again, we are thinking of cost savings rather than
having someone have to spend themselves down into Medicaid to
be able to take advantage of the dual-eligible MMPs or PACE or
whatever the program is. We could start giving some of these
inhome, community-based services earlier on and save a ton of
money from having to pay for these very same people on a more
institutionalized or more expensive setting going forward.
So I would hope the Chair and ranking member would look
forward to working with us on this, maybe going forward and see
if we can't continue to improve a very good system that seems
to be developing here. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman
yields back. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Hudson, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Hudson. I thank the chairman and thank you, panel, for
being here today. It is very helpful helping us grapple with
this very complex issue. You have touched on this in your
testimony a little bit, but I have a question, sort of about
the deadlines and time frames under our discussion draft. Do
you think these time frames and deadlines for integrating
benefits and providing services is realistic to States that
need more time? I just ask if anybody has a comment on that.
Dr. Atkins. I think the way it is structured for States
that haven't been able to do managed care on the LTSS and
behavioral health side, there is a way to get around that and
kind of be able to do it even with a fee-for-service kind of
structure in place there. So I think that is an important
carve-out because a lot of States aren't yet in the position to
be able to have aligned Medicare and Medicaid managed care
plans.
But I think the time frames, as far as what I have seen, in
the legislation seem reasonable.
Mr. Wing. SCAN also believes that the movement to full
integration for the D-SNPs is mission critical. Unless we have
integration, there is no hope for savings, long-term savings,
keeping people out of nursing homes for the State which is a
big burden for the State. So I think it is 2021 and legislation
and we support that. We think if there is a FIDE SNP at any
stage, there is a lot of FIDE SNPs like SCAN in the United
States, we think a 4-year time frame is very, very doable and
essential.
Mr. Hudson. Great. I appreciate that. Dr. Atkins, in your
testimony, you know, what we have also heard from the GAO that
there are not standardized measures for long-term services and
supports that have been widely adopted or broadly used.
However, it sounds like your association has initiated an
effort to adopt quality measures that can meet the State
requirements or yet not burdensome for plans. This sounds great
to me, but I am wondering if you could tell me more about when
you think the association will have more to report to us.
Obviously, the more data points we have to deal with, the
better.
Dr. Atkins. Thank you for that question. I will say that we
have adopted a quality framework which is a list of the
indicators that we would feel we were able to report in a
reasonable time frame. We will hay to put all of this into
effect, all the companies who participate will agree to put all
of this into effect.
These are measures that we did not create. These are
measures that have gone through the NQF process or are being
developed by Mathematica for CMS or are generally out there in
the home and community based consumer survey.
So there are existing measures that we believe that we can
actually produce now out of our databases. So the process we
are going through right now is to do what is called
specification. We are actually digging down into each of our
plans to see where the data is going to come from and how
consistent we can get it to be across all of these.
Our purpose is not to do it unilaterally by ourselves, but
to work with our States to encourage the States to essentially
accept these measures that we would report as measures that are
used in overseeing the quality, integrating with the quality
reporting systems that they are going to have in place because
it is a State function to report this.
Mr. Hudson. Right. I think that is critical for being able
to determine the impact on the beneficiaries.
Dr. Atkins. We would be glad to come back and talk to you
in a couple of months with some much more detail about where we
are with it.
Mr. Hudson. I think it would be great, Mr. Chairman. I hope
we can encourage that and I will yield back the balance of my
time if anybody else would like to use it. Thank you.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentleman. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from
California, Ms. Eshoo, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman for holding this hearing
and to the witnesses, thank you for your wonderful testimony.
You bring enormous expertise to the hearing room and we all
appreciate it.
I am fascinated by the question of our colleague from
Georgia about why does it have to be this way? Do we need a new
title? Why do we have part of Medicare? Why is it in Medicaid?
And I can't help but think of the President saying ``Whoever
knew that healthcare could be so complicated.'' So we are
dealing with the complications here and these hearings are
targeted to specific areas, but they also broaden and deepen
our understanding of the system that we have and how we want to
improve it and what is important to do.
What stands out to me today is how important Medicaid is, I
mean how essential it is. And so the broader context in terms
of what we are dealing with, whether some of us like it and
some of us don't like it is that the House passed a bill that
fundamentally restructures the Medicaid program by implementing
per capita caps and block grants and the Senate is debating a
lot of things, but we know that Medicaid is on the chopping
block.
Now this discussion about reauthorizing, I think we should
reauthorize. I think that we need to make some changes and you
have brought some very good ideas to the table, but the reality
is that I think anyway, Medicaid is hanging by a thread. I
think it is hanging by a thread. Forget the ACA. Medicaid
itself as an entitlement is hanging by a thread.
So my question, I guess I will start with Ms. Bella, is
what would that do to dual eligibles? I mean it is my
understanding that 70 percent of the SNP plans have dual
eligibles in them, so can you talk about what if there is, in
fact, an implementation of per capita caps or block grants in
the Medicaid program, how does that affect what we are talking
about today? We are talking about improving it, but the larger
picture is that it is up to a 35 percent gouge of Medicaid
itself.
Ms. Bella. So I guess a couple of things. One, we are
talking about improving it and improving it means we can put a
full kind of cadre of Medicaid-funded services along with the
medical piece.
Ms. Eshoo. I understand what those are. I worked on this
years ago when I was a county supervisor for the dual
eligibles. And we developed a capitated plan in the county.
You know what? I took care of my parents and they were
blessed with a long life. And I know what is needed in the
home. They are better off at home if, in fact, you can bring
the kinds of services that they--the particular services that
they need. So while they weren't enrolled in Medicaid, they
were Medicare beneficiaries, they had the beneficiary of their
daughter, too. But in terms of the care, I understand it.
Ms. Bella. Right, so those services----
Ms. Eshoo. And the care for each one of them was unique.
Ms. Bella. Right, those are the services that are at risk
with a per capita or some sort of Medicaid block grant. And it
is those services that are keeping people in these integrated
programs out of the hospital and out of other places.
Ms. Eshoo. See, thank you for saying that. I hope everyone
is listening to this. Because we are dealing with frail,
elderly people that are far more vulnerable. I have always
thought--I remember saying to the doctor when he said I think
we need to take your father to the hospital and I said well,
what are they going to do at Stanford Hospital that I can't do
here at home for him? He said, you know, you have got a good
point. So we kept him at home and in three and a half days, he
was much better. But I think that in some ways we have got our
heads in the sand here, because we are talking about how to do
this, what it is, reauthorizing and meanwhile in the larger
bubble, there is a wrecking ball that is going up against
Medicaid. So we have got some choices here and I think we need
to tell the truth about what is going on which is so
frustrating to me. I am glad we are having the hearing, but you
know what, we are pretending that everything is all right. And
it is not because what is at hand is going to take a wrecking
ball to what these people have come here to testify about.
Thank you, and I will yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The gentlelady's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentlelady from Indiana, Mrs. Brooks, 5 minutes
for questions, please.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I, too, thank you
for providing your expertise to all of us.
I have heard a lot of discussion today about the need for
more integration coordination, but one policy area I know there
is often typically a lot of bipartisan interest in is the issue
of telehealth and it is something that--I represent a district
that is urban, suburban, but very rural as well. I know that
one school in a smaller community of Elwood, Indiana, has begun
some telehealth with the school nurse and I know that this is
something that I think could have tremendous benefits to
citizens throughout the country.
So I am interested in each of you commenting on the policy
idea that many Medicare Advantage plans have expressed an
interest in, and that is to allow Medicare Advantage plans to
offer telehealth as part of their bid, so they don't have to
use rebate dollars to provide it. They have an incentive to be
efficient in their bids and this flexibility could be
particularly helpful with the frail, disabled, or homebound
beneficiaries and beneficiaries in rural areas that I just
discussed.
So I wondered if you could please share with us, if you
think it would be useful to give special needs plans this
authority, at least for the next 5 years, and to see how this
tool could boost the health outcomes for patients and what each
of your thoughts are on telehealth and these types of plans.
Mr. Wing?
Mr. Wing. I will start. I mentioned earlier that we have a
pilot of behavioral health telehealth which we think is mission
critical. And when you are dealing with the fully integrated D-
SNPs, we are talking about a very vulnerable population and a
lot of them, as you mentioned, are homebound. And so we need to
figure out how do we bring the delivery system into their home?
In telehealth, the technology is there. The funding isn't,
but the technology is there. And we are using it for
telehealth, but for truly homebound members who don't have the
financial wherewithal to go to a doctor, don't have the
transportation to go to the doctor. They either have cognitive
impairment or other reasons why they can't go to the doctor. We
need to bring the delivery system there.
Now you can bring doctors to the home, but that is a very
expensive proposition. Telehealth seems to hold the hope of
bringing medical physicians, psychologists, psychiatrists, and
other providers into the home at a fraction of the cost in real
time. And oftentimes, these frail duals, they can't wait 15
days to get in to see a specialist. They need to see them now.
So we are very supportive.
Mrs. Brooks. Any particular reason why you are only focused
on behavioral health?
Mr. Wing. No. We are a small company. We happen to find
this company out of Nashville and know that behavioral health,
opioids is a really big issue of the senior population in
aggregate. When you take the duals, it is a very pressing
issue. I think 48 percent of our dually eligible have a
clinical diagnosis of depression, 48 percent. When you see
those numbers, you have to do something about it. And we can't
bring a psychiatrist, a psychologist in a home. First of all,
we don't even know the diagnosis yet. So we think telehealth is
the right modality for behavioral health, but probably for a
lot of other type of specialties.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. Dr. Atkins?
Dr. Atkins. I think Mr. Wing spoke earlier about the
importance of eyes and ears in connecting the medical and
nonmedical parts of the delivery system and that is critical. I
think that we have to explore a lot of technology solutions
that are going to enable us to be better connected in people in
their homes who have these very complex care needs. Telehealth
certainly is going to be a major part of that.
Mrs. Brooks. Ms. Bella, do you see any impediments to us
advancing telehealth in Medicare Advantage plans?
Dr. Atkins. No, especially if it is part of a broader push
to recognize supplemental benefits generally that plans could
be given more flexibility around when they are taking the
financial risk.
Mrs. Brooks. Actually, building on that issue regarding
supplemental benefits, could you give us examples of
supplemental benefit plans, benefits that plans provide and how
they improve patient outcomes, other supplemental benefits?
Ms. Bella. Sure, I think--Chris, do you want to answer?
Mr. Wing. Well, again, if you take the FIDE SNP where we
can provide these Medicaid type of benefits, you know, I
mentioned I wrist card, solid flooring in the bathroom, solid
flooring in the kitchen, guard rails in the toilet area and the
shower that prevent the fall, a home- and community-based
services, having a home health aide to help with bathing,
cooking to prevent nursing home viable people being placed in
custodial care. It is really being able for a Medicare
Advantage plan to offer Medicaid-like benefits to prevent the
reason for necessity for acute admission or even more
importantly, going into long-term custodial care where they are
never going to come back from. These are really demonstrated
long time demonstrated benefits that really curtail costs, but
they radically improve the quality of life for beneficiaries.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. Thank you for those examples. I
yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. The
gentlelady yield back. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from
California, Ms. Matsui, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
the panelists here today. We are learning an awful lot and
realize that there is so much more to learn here.
I have got to say that the future of special needs plans is
so very important as we move forward because since their
creation I guess in 2003, we have seen success in managing
complex populations across Medicare and Medicaid, such as those
dually eligible for programs and seniors with chronic
conditions like diabetes and dementia and so forth.
But as we see the increase in population and look to see
the quality of care that the individuals have gotten, I think
it is important because sometimes it is not as successful and
we really need to be very clear as we move towards full
integration in Medicare and Medicaid options for the
chronically ill and dual-eligible beneficiaries. The protection
of beneficiary rights and the quality of care that
beneficiaries receive should be the first consideration when
evaluating any policy change. To that end, I think one of the
most important things that could impact a beneficiary's
experience is a unified appeals and grievance process.
Now I know that for many individuals, it can be
overwhelming to understand how to appeal, doubly so if you are
a person who happens to have both Medicare and Medicaid
benefits.
All of our witnesses have highlighted the importance of a
consistent and understandable appeals process for our
beneficiaries, but I would like to dig a little deeper into
this.
Mr. Wing, can you discuss how appeals and grievances work
in the FIDE SNP, and how this is different from other types of
SNPs?
Mr. Wing. Well, I will talk about one of the solutions is
we do suffer from the different rules for Medicare and
Medicaid. We have to deal with that. I think Melanie Bella has
been talking about that for years. It is very complex. It is
confusing for the members, for the family, for the doctors and
that confusion leaves people to go, I am not going to join.
Ms. Matsui. Right.
Mr. Wing. At SCAN, we have what we call for our fully
integrated D-SNPs, we have basically concierge care. We want
these people to stay with us, but when they are having a
problem with an appeal or a referral or anything, we want them
to have a one-on-one relationship with somebody in our call
center that is not a bank. So everyone of our fully integrated
D-SNP members have what we call a PAL, personal assistant line,
where they develop a unique relationship with someone at our
call center. If they have got a problem with coordinating
appeals and grievances we are there for them. If they have got
a problem with the delivery system, we are there for them. If
they have got a problem with how we deliver care or home health
aide services at home, we are there for them. And that is
mission essential. These people, they have got a lot of special
needs, complex needs. They need the system to come alongside
them as opposed to them coming along aside the system.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Ms. Bella, can you talk about this issue
from the perspective of your former role as Director of
Medicare and Medicaid Coordination Office? What barriers did
you encounter?
Ms. Bella. In the grievances and appeals specifically?
Ms. Matsui. Yes.
Ms. Bella. There are some legislative barriers and then
there are some administrative barriers and so part of the--the
language that is in the House bill will go a long way toward
fixing, so in the Medicare-Medicaid programs there are
different requirements about time frames, for example, and what
level you have to go to, for example.
And so in CMS, in the demonstrations, we were able to
integrate some of those things, but we just couldn't go quite
far enough and we were still doing it under demonstration
authority. Again, the language that you are considering today
makes a huge step forward and then there are some
administrative pieces where we can continue to wrap around
that. That would streamline it even better and make it both
protective of the beneficiary, but also make it easier for all
parties to operate under.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Thank you. Dr. Atkins, even with your
associations, why diversity in membership? It seems like this
is an important recommendation that has been agreed upon. Can
you discuss why unified appeals are so important from the
beneficiary perspective?
Dr. Atkins. Well, certainly. I mean one of the more
confusing aspects of the system is the different routes and
different time frames and things that are involved in appeals
and grievance under the different programs. So I think it is
critical that we work toward getting a single set of uniform
set of rules.
We would, of course, love to see a common architecture in
the program, a common architecture for integrated plans that
would address a lot of these kinds of issues.
Ms. Matsui. Right, right. I think it is really important as
we talked about the unification of--and I think it is very,
very difficult, as we know, in Medicaid and Medicare. But there
is aspects here that I think I could see having some sort of
unifying aspect of it where people aren't as confused as to
what to do as we move forward. I see my time is gone. I yield
back the balance.
Mr. Burgess. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentlelady. The Chair observes that the Chair has actually
delayed his time for questions to the end. We also have been
joined by Mr. Costello, who is not on the subcommittee, but I
believe the gentleman would like to seek time for questions. Is
that correct?
Mr. Costello. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. I will recognize the gentleman for 5 minutes
for his questions.
Mr. Costello. As a follow-up, to a line of inquiry that
Mrs. Brooks had to you, Mr. Wing, could you share with me the
certain types of specialty providers, be they medical or
nonmedical, that you see most likely to begin or most likely to
have the capacity to offer telehealth services?
Mr. Wing. I thought you were going to go a different
direction. I appreciate the question.
Mr. Costello. You can take another direction.
Mr. Wing. I thought you were going to ask me what is the
specialty or type of provider that is going to make the most
profound difference in the future.
Mr. Costello. That was going to be my next piece of it.
Mr. Wing. I like that question. I think it is going to be
community health navigators. These people are $14 or $15 an
hour, but going into the people's home, assessing what is going
on with the social determinants. This is a low-cost, high-
impact intervention. We would like to flood the market,
especially for those who are nursing home certifiable, and make
sure we are identifying the social determinants of health
quickly, make sure the doctor knows. But I see no greater
innovation. I don't think this is a medical problem that
requires medical intervention. This is a social problem that
requires a social solution and I think having an army, if you
will, covering fully integrated D-SNPs or seniors who have
Chronic Special Needs Plans, I think is going to be one of the
most pronounced interventions, the most impactful interventions
to improving quality and reducing costs that we are going to
see over the next 5 to 10 years.
Mr. Costello. Thank you. Ms. Bella, your testimony comments
on how there are things that CMS and States can do to improve
the coordination of benefits and delivery of services for dual
eligibles, including those with disabilities. You know that
State Medicaid manuals should move toward capitation of their
LTSS and behavioral health benefits.
You also said though that they need assurance that if they
go down this path, the future of D-SNPs is not uncertain. So to
confirm, you are effectively saying that a longer extension
would allow more planning and investment in infrastructure and
policies that would better serve individuals with disabilities?
Is that correct and could you expound upon that a little bit?
Ms. Bella. Sure. I am actually saying that permanency would
go the furthest because these have been sort of in limbo since
2003, meaning every few years people are wondering do we have
to come back and argue for their case. And so Pennsylvania is a
great example. Your State just spent several years putting
together a managed LTSS program. They put in their Community
HealthChoices Program. They have required all those
participants to be D-SNPs. Tremendous amount of work.
Tremendous amount of progress. And we want them to keep
investing in that with already limited resources. They can't
feel like it is at risk of going away. So if we want to get
States to continue building these programs, they need the
assurance of knowing that this program is permanent and stable.
Mr. Costello. Thank you.
Dr. Atkins. Could I add one thing to that which is that the
MMP program, which is the demonstration program, has a time
limit on it and we have a lot of people enrolled very
successfully in MMP programs. It would be helpful for those
people to know where they go when that demonstration ends.
Mr. Costello. Thank you for your thoughts and thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. Does the gentleman yield back?
Mr. Costello. I do.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The Chair
recognizes himself for the balance of the time. Just checking
to see if you are paying attention. Ms. Matsui, apparently not.
First off, thank you all for the very intriguing discussion
this morning.
Mr. Wing, let me just start with, you mentioned right at
the end here of this, something that I have thought for a long
time, which is--you even used the term--``concierge medicine.''
Yes, navigators are important. Yes, the home health aides are
important. But you can have all the fingers in the world, but
if you don't have a palm, it doesn't do you any good.
So I remember having this discussion with Dr. Berwick when
he was CMS Director, many, many years ago, that when I voiced
some of the same frustration that the gentleman from Georgia
voiced this morning about not understanding why we have these
programs that are sometimes difficult to comprehend and
navigate, why there wasn't just one place and that, to me,
would have been that position of the concierge or direct
primary care or whatever you want to call the model.
So I was grateful to hear you mention that this morning. I
do think that that is a direction that this subcommittee should
explore. I have felt that for a long time.
And Ms. Bella, even the agency that you used to head up
when we look at the enabling language in the Affordable Care
Act, the establishment of a Federal coordinated healthcare
office, that was the goal. And when I talked to Dr. Berwick and
I said why don't we do a concierge doctor for these poor folks
and actually take care of them, his answer was we are going to
set up a new Federal agency. I wasn't thrilled when he told me
that. I probably had a reaction much like Buddy Carter voiced
this morning, but at the same time I will also say that as your
former office has matured over time, it does seem to be
providing a valuable service to patients.
The reports that you generate at the end of every fiscal
year--and I guess the most recent one I have is for Fiscal Year
2015, and you were probably involved in the generation of that
report, were you not, Ms. Bella? So it is helpful. It is not
just a recitation of things that were done. It actually has
some meaningful insights and perhaps legislative direction that
the legislative branch could pursue, so I think that is a good
and positive development.
But again, Mr. Wing, when you mentioned the word concierge
medicine, yes, I think that is right. When Don Berwick would
complain, I got 20 percent of my folks spending 80 percent of
my bucks and I need to do better with that. It seemed to lend
itself in that direction. So I would be happy to hear your
thoughts on that because this is the first time in all of these
years of having these hearings that I have heard anyone
actually mention that.
Mr. Wing. Well, we believe the center of the universe
really should be the doctor.
Mr. Burgess. That is the right answer. Thank you.
Mr. Wing. Well, it should be, but often again doesn't know
what is going on in the community, so our people in the
community are integrating via a laptop into the EMR with the
doctor and we are trying to do the same thing through or
provider integration efforts so that any encounter that we have
with our PALS unit gets right back with the primary care
physician. Primary care physicians armed with complete data
will make complete decisions. Without complete decisions, they
won't. And we need to arm them to do a better job.
Mr. Burgess. And are you utilizing, of course, the day the
Affordable Care Act was written the smartphone was in its
infancy. The ability now that people have to connect even
absent a navigator in the home, the fact that their smartphone
can electronically transmit a daily weight, a blood pressure, a
blood sugar, to some central facility.
Mr. Wing. We are piloting--actually, some of our medical
groups on their own are piloting, having a smartphone, but
really, it is not really doing telemetry of health outcomes or
bioreadings, but if you have a problem, here is a number to
call. So they have a smartphone. Just call here. If you think
you need to go to the ER, if you are uncertain, call us.
However, we spend a lot of time on the fully duals and
these people have a lot of cognitive impairment. Oftentimes,
they are socially isolated. Oftentimes they have multiple ADLs
and multiple chronic conditions. Smart anything, I don't think
this is going to solely a technology answer. It is going to
have to be a high touch. We need to have people there to come
alongside to help them.
Mr. Burgess. I don't disagree, but even as the gentlelady
from California mentioned taking care of her parents, when I
was in a similar situation, the ability to get that information
to someone to help you make a decision.
Mr. Wing. We are very supportive of that. We are very
supportive of that.
Mr. Burgess. Let me, again--fascinating panel, and I really
appreciate all of you being here this morning. I am sorry Ms.
Eshoo has already left. I am obligated to answer some of the
charges that she made, so I have some stuff for the record, and
I want to offer for the record an op-ed from February 7, 1997.
The op-ed is almost old enough to vote itself. An op-ed from
February 7, 1997, from the New York Times, ``Making the Budget
Bearable.'' This was back in the Clinton administration. Part
of the op-ed says, ``The President offers an important reform
of Medicaid, proposing to control future spending by placing a
cap on the amount of Federal spending per enrollee and allowing
States to place enrollees in managed care without going through
the frustrating process of begging for Washington's approval.''
The New York Times recommending the per capita cap. That was an
idea of a Democratic administration back in the 1990s.
Further evidence, Senator Murray from Washington State.
Senator Murray speaking on the Congressional Record December
22, 1995: ``Mr. President, I hold in my hand today a letter to
President Clinton that is signed by all 46 members of the
Democratic Caucus. This letter urges him to hold firm in our
commitment to basic healthcare for children, pregnant women,
and the elderly, and the disabled... . This letter supports a
per capita cap approach to finding savings in the Medicaid
program.'' This was a problem 22 years ago. It is no less a
problem today.
As Margaret Thatcher once aptly observed, you can
eventually run out of other people's money. And that is a
concern that, although this is an authorizing committee, not an
appropriations committee, it is a concern that we should have
as well. And I think one of the things that this panel helps us
with today is understanding we need to be spending dollars
wisely. It is not that we are not going to spend dollars, but
we need to spend them wisely.
This is not a new concept of what is being debated in this
committee this year and over in the Senate, even as we speak,
not a new concept, one that was embraced by a Democratic
administration 21 years ago, Democratic Senators 22 years ago,
the New York Times 20 years ago. So it has been an interesting
panel this morning. I want to thank you for being here.
Seeing that there are no further Members wishing to ask
questions, I again want to thank our witnesses. We have
received outside feedback from a number of organizations on
these bills, so I would like to submit statements from the
following for the record: Molina Healthcare, Avalere, the
Healthcare Leadership Council, the National Association of
Medicaid Directors, AHIP, the Association for Community
Affiliated Plans, Bipartisan Policy Center, UPMC, and a letter
from 12 advocacy groups on Special Needs Plans.
Additionally, I want to submit the New York Times editorial
from 1997 and the Congressional Record statement from 1995.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Pursuant to committee rules, I remind Members they have 10
business days to submit additional questions for the record. I
ask the witnesses to submit their response within 10 business
days upon receipt of the questions. Without objection, this
subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:59 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

This morning we have a distinguished panel of witnesses to
discuss the ways the committee can improve Special Needs Plans
in Medicare Advantage as Congress looks to extend the authority
for this program in the coming months. Special Needs Plans, or
SNPs (pronounced ``SNIPS'') are private healthcare plans
providing Medicare benefits to some of our most vulnerable
beneficiaries. These are elderly beneficiaries who are in care
facilities, who have chronic conditions or diseases, and who
are low-income and are enrolled in Medicaid.
As a committee with jurisdiction over both Medicare and
Medicaid, we have a special obligation to thoughtfully examine
this unique opportunity to not only extend the SNPs' authority,
but to make refinements to policy which can improve the ability
of States and plans to provide needed care to millions of
beneficiaries. As we embark on our effort, we recognize and
appreciate the good bipartisan committee work that has preceded
us--efforts by our colleagues in the Senate and in the House
Ways and Means Committee.
Today, we complement previous efforts by hearing from
experts and releasing draft legislation. Our bipartisan goal is
to extend and enhance the program in a manner that encourages
integrated, coordinated healthcare coverage.
We want to ensure healthcare plans and State Medicaid
programs have the right incentives and proper tools to offer
the best care to vulnerable patients. We also want to help
ensure patients have the needed protections and help when
navigating healthcare benefits and accessing care.
We welcome and need stakeholders' feedback on how we can
move forward on SNPs in a manner that improves care, enhances
quality, and best serves millions of patients. I'd like to
thank our witnesses for being here with us today, and I look
forward to a productive discussion that will help us move
forward on this critical issue.

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling this hearing to
consider the extension of Special Needs Plans, an important
subset of Medicare Advantage plans for some of our highest-need
Medicare beneficiaries.
It is so important that our committee consider the
extension of SNPs, as they are often called, and any related
policy changes with the program closely. These types of plans
serve some of our most complex and vulnerable patients: those
that are institutionalized or have serious chronic illnesses,
and those that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.
It is undeniable, also, that these types of Medicare plans
have a unique interaction with Medicaid. And, as the chairman
has heard me say so many times, the Energy and Commerce
Committee has the critical responsibility and privilege of
overseeing and protecting the Medicaid program. First and
foremost, we should ensure that people who are dually eligible
for both Medicare and Medicaid or living with a chronic illness
have a seamless experience--regardless of what plan or
combination of benefits they may elect to receive.
At times, this goal has been challenging, but I know that
we have a good opportunity before us with the reauthorization
of SNPs to continue to further that goal.
Today, I look forward to discussing how we can best
continue to integrate benefits and provide high quality care to
people that have chosen a SNP plan to provide their care. Our
colleagues on the Ways and Means Committee and the Senate
Finance Committee have both done excellent work over the past
several months to further the growth and development of SNPs in
the Medicare program. And now, I look forward to adding the
voice of the Energy and Commerce Committee to that important
work.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
