- THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR'S EFFORTS TO RESPOND TO CYBERSECURITY THREATS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR'S EFFORTS TO RESPOND TO CYBERSECURITY THREATS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 1, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-3

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

24-845                         WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            GENE GREEN, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                       Massachusetts
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             TONY CARDENAS, California
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           RAUL RUIZ, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
Subcommittee on Energy

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               SCOTT H. PETERS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             GENE GREEN, Texas
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                       Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota               officio)
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     4
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    10

Witnesses

Gerry W. Cauley, President and CEO, North American Reliability
Corporation....................................................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Answers to submitted questions...............................   110
Scott I. Aaronson, Executive Director, Security and Business
Continuity, Edison Electric Institute, on behalf of Electricity
Subsector Coordinating Council.................................    26
Prepared statement...........................................    29
Answers to submitted questions...............................   124
Chris Beck, Chief Scientist and Vice President for Policy, The
Electric Infrastructure Security Council.......................    45
Prepared statement...........................................    47
Answers to submitted questions...............................   135
Barbara Sugg, Vice President for IT and Chief Security Officer,
Southwest Power Pool, on behalf of ISO/RTO Council.............    62
Prepared statement...........................................    64
Answers to submitted questions...............................   142

Submitted material

Statement of the Large Public Power Council......................   103
Joint statement of the American Public Power Association and the
National Rural Electric Cooperative Association................   108

THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR'S EFFORTS TO RESPOND TO CYBERSECURITY THREATS

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 1, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:15 a.m., in
room 2322 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Fred Upton
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Upton, Olson, Barton, Shimkus,
Murphy, Latta, Harper, McKinley, Johnson, Long, Flores, Mullin,
Hudson, Cramer, Walberg, Walden (ex officio), Rush, McNerney,
Peters, Doyle, Castor, Sarbanes, Welch, Tonko, Loebsack,
Schrader, Kennedy, Butterfield, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Will Batson, Legislative Clerk, E&P; Ray
Baum, Staff Director; Jordan Davis, Director of Policy and
External Affairs; Wyatt Ellertson, Research Associate, Energy/
Environment; Adam Fromm, Director of Outreach and Coalitions;
Tom Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy/Environment; Zach
Hunter, Director of Communications; A.T. Johnston, Senior
Policy Advisor/Professional Staff, Energy/Environment; Katie
McKeough, Press Assistant; Brandon Mooney, Senior Policy
Advisor, Energy; Mark Ratner, Policy Coordinator; Annelise
Rickert, Counsel, Energy; Dan Schneider, Press Secretary; Peter
Spencer, Professional Staff Member, Energy; Evan Viau, Staff
Assistant; Jeff Carroll, Minority Staff Director; David
Cwiertny, Minority Energy/Environment Fellow; Rick Kessler,
Minority Senior Advisor and Staff Director, Energy; John
Marshall, Minority Policy Coordinator; Alexander Ratner,
Minority Policy Analyst; Andrew Souvall, Minority Director of
Communications, Outreach and Member Services; Tuley Wright,
Minority Energy and Environment Policy Advisor; and C.J. Young,
Minority Press Secretary.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. The Subcommittee on Energy will now come to
order. Apologize for the delay. There were some technical
difficulties with the cameras but they are now working. So
everybody looks good and in color.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes. Today's hearing is going
to examine what the electricity sector is currently doing to
prepare for and respond to cybersecurity threats to the
nation's electricity transmission systems.
News reports bombard us almost daily about malware
infections and portrayals of the harm from cyber-attacks. We've
read alarming descriptions of what might happen if there is
successful widespread attack on the critical infrastructure of
the electricity system and the potential challenges to
recovering from such an attack.
It is unquestionable that ensuring the reliable supply of
electricity is absolutely vital to our nation's security,
economy, our health and welfare.
In Michigan and across the country, electricity enables
telecommunications, financial transactions, the transport and
delivery of energy, food, everything. It powers the
infrastructure that delivers our drinking water. It enables
businesses and industry to make and provide the goods and
services of our modern society and it powers our hospitals and
our households.
So cyber threats to reliability deserve our constant
examination. But as we do so, we have to recognize that
ensuring reliability is the central function of electricity
grid operations, and a tremendously complex system has
developed over time to ensure that the lights stay on. Given
the unique nature of electricity, the system operates to
address the occasional loss of transmission components and to
avoid cascading failures. It doesn't always succeed, but large-
scale blackouts have been rare for a reason.
Nevertheless, new risks are emerging rapidly. The
integration into the system of new technologies, especially
digital technologies, that are essential for keeping up with
the nation's energy needs constantly adds new vulnerabilities.
Combine this with the rapid development of cyber-attacks and
safeguarding transmission infrastructure becomes particularly
challenging.
In recent years, Congress has enhanced the ability of the
electricity sector to address emerging cyber and physical
threats. In the last Congress, this committee wrote provisions
included in the FAST Act that sought to facilitate sharing of
threat information between the private sector asset owners and
the federal government. Other measures enhanced authorities for
taking emergency action against cyber and physical attacks.
At the same time, the NERC, operating through authorities
authored by this committee, has been establishing and enforcing
critical infrastructure protection standards and coordinating a
number of other activities to confront these threats. Industry
and federal authorities have been working to address those
risks.
We have taken testimony that outlines these activities in
recent years, and I think that evidence shows that utilities
and transmission operators are not sitting still.
I don't think that anyone will dispute that improvements in
operational practices, information sharing, defensive planning,
supply chain controls, hardening of infrastructure remains
necessary. And nobody will dispute that someday, an attack may
succeed in taking down these components. So how does the
industry plan to respond?
This hearing will update the subcommittee on the state of
the various NERC and industry activities to mitigate risks and
respond to cyber-attacks. This will inform two objectives.
First, this subcommittee's agenda for the Congress will
include a close focus on the various structural, economic, and
technological factors that are affecting development of the
nation's electricity systems. We'll be examining policies that
may need to be reformed to ensure this system adequately meets
the demand of consumers in coming decades, and a key aspect of
any of this work will certainly involve enhancing reliability
in the evolving electricity system to meet the demands of the
digital age.
And second, we must continue to build a record about
electric sector efforts to address cyber security threats. This
will help us identify whether additional measures are
necessary. In time, we will hear from DOE, FERC and other
agencies, but developing a clear picture today about what the
industry actually is doing will be critical to this ongoing
effort.
With that as a backdrop, let me welcome our witnesses. Our
panel today provides a number of important perspectives. We
will hear from NERC, the industry's reliability organization
responsible for setting and enforcing standards. We will hear
how the industry coordinates cybersecurity planning and
response. We will hear perspective from a critical
infrastructure expert, and we'll hear from someone responsible
for cybersecurity in the actual operations of transmission
systems.
This panel this morning should help cover a range of topics
from security standards to information sharing, recovery
planning. It's going to help us understand where gaps may be
going forward, and we welcome that testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today's hearing will examine what the electricity sector is
currently doing to prepare for and respond to cybersecurity
threats to the nation's electricity transmission systems.
News reports bombard us almost daily about malware
infections and portrayals of the harm from cyber attacks. We've
read alarming descriptions of what might happen if there is
successful, widespread attack on the critical infrastructure of
the electricity system-and the potential challenges to
recovering from such an attack.
It is unquestionable that ensuring the reliable supply of
electricity is absolutely vital to our nation's security,
economy, our health and welfare.
In my home state of Michigan and across the country,
electricity enables telecommunications, financial transactions,
the transport and delivery of energy, food. It powers the
infrastructure that delivers our drinking water. It enables
business and industry to make and provide the goods and
services of our modern society. It powers our hospitals, our
households.
So cyber threats to reliability deserve our constant
examination. But as we do so, we should also recognize that
ensuring reliability is the central function of electricity
grid operations-and a tremendously complex system has developed
over time to ensure our lights stay on. Given the unique nature
of electricity, the system operates to address the occasional
loss of transmission components and to avoid cascading
failures; it doesn't always succeed, but large scale blackouts
have been rare for a reason.
Nevertheless, new risks are emerging rapidly. The
integration into the system of new technologies-especially
digital technologies-that are essential for keeping up with our
nation's energy needs constantly add new vulnerabilities.
Combine this with the rapid development of cyber threats and
safeguarding transmission infrastructure becomes particularly
challenging.
In recent years, Congress has enhanced the ability of the
electricity sector to address emerging cyber and physical
threats. In the last Congress, this Committee wrote provisions
included in the FAST Act that sought to facilitate sharing of
threat information between private sector asset owners and the
federal government. Other measures enhanced authorities for
taking emergency action against cyber and physical attacks.
At the same time, the North American Electric Reliability
Corporation (NERC)--operating through authorities authored by
this Committee-has been establishing and enforcing critical
infrastructure protection standards and coordinating a number
of other activities to confront these threats. Industry and
federal authorities have also been working to address risks.
We've taken testimony that outlines these activities in
recent years. And I think the evidence shows that utilities and
transmission operators are not sitting still.
But I don't believe anybody will dispute that improvements
in operational practices, information sharing, defensive
planning, supply chain controls, hardening of infrastructure
remain necessary. And nobody will dispute that someday, an
attack may succeed in taking down critical components; how does
the industry plan to respond to that?
Today's hearing will update the subcommittee on the state
of the various NERC and industry activities to mitigate risks
and respond to cyber attacks. This will inform two objectives:
First, the energy subcommittee's agenda for this Congress
will include a close focus on the various structural, economic,
and technological factors that are affecting development of the
nation's electricity system.
We'll be examining policies that may need to be reformed to
ensure this system adequately meets the demands of consumers in
coming decades. And a key aspect of any of this work will
involve enhancing reliability in the evolving electricity
system to meet the demands of the digital age.
And second: we must continue to build a record about
electric sector efforts to address cyber security threats. This
will help the subcommittee identify whether additional
measures, are necessary. In time, we will hear from DOE, FERC
and other agencies, but developing a clear picture today about
what the industry actually is doing will be critical to this
ongoing effort.
With that as a backdrop, let me welcome our witnesses. Our
panel today provides a number of important perspectives: We'll
hear from NERC, the industry's reliability organization
responsible for setting and enforcing standards; we'll hear how
the industry coordinates cybersecurity planning and response;
we'll hear perspective from a critical infrastructure expert;
and we'll hear from somebody responsible for cybersecurity in
the actual operations of transmission systems.
The panel this morning should help cover a range of topics-
from security standards to information sharing and recovery
planning. It should help us discuss the various levels of cyber
and related physical risks to electricity infrastructure and
how they are addressed. And it should help us understand where
gaps may be going forward.

Mr. Upton. At this point, I recognize the ranking member of
the subcommittee, my friend from Chicago, Mr. Rush.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this
opportunity and for this hearing.
Mr. Chairman, this is an important hearing on the
electricity sector's efforts to respond to cybersecurity
threats. Mr. Chairman, this is a very first step in examining
the critical issue of a electricity sector cybersecurity.
I look forward, Mr. Chairman, to engaging our distinguished
panel of industry witnesses and their recommendations designed
to protect the grid from external threats.
However, Mr. Chairman, I am sure we will all agree that
additional information is needed to truly appreciate the
expanding host of challenges that could potentially threaten
the U.S. electrical sector.
Mr. Chairman, it is my understanding that you have
committed to holding at least one additional hearing with
agency stakeholders in the near future so that the members of
this subcommittee will have a greater and a fuller appreciation
for the security issues facing the grid.
The issue of external forces hacking into most public and
private domestic targets is one that is front and center on the
minds of most of the American people.
If recent history is any indication, then it's not a matter
of if, Mr. Chairman, but, rather, when some threat, whether it
be a national disturbance, an individual hacker, a rogue state
or even a well-known foreign power challenges the resiliency of
our nation's energy infrastructure.
Mr. Chairman, we are all aware the cyber-attack in the
Ukraine this past December that left over 225,000 people
without power in Kiev as a result of suspected Russian hacking.
While we have been fortunate, Mr. Chairman, to date in that
we haven't suffered any major cybersecurity attacks on our own
grid, let us not become complacent and wait until an event
occurs.
Many of us, Mr. Chairman, still view Russia, among other
countries, as a potential threat to the U.S. grid system and we
cannot risk our safety and security on the whims of Putin or
any other foreign leader who may try to do us harm.
Quite the contrary, we must be prudent and proactive in
securing our electrical grid and part of that strategy must
include close cooperation and collaboration between the public
and private sectors.
As was noted, in the last quadrennial energy review
conducted by the Obama administration in January 2014, there is
still work to do to improve the information sharing processes
between government and industry.
Additionally, we must ensure that our grid is protected
from some of the specific challenges of today's world. We must
make certain that the electricity sector is secure, even in the
place of an aging infrastructure and a changing energy
portfolio.
That would include more distributed energy, smart grid
technologies and other advanced technologies. Mr. Chairman, it
is vital that Congress examines the state of the grid and
provides real leadership in regards to modernizing our grid and
making sure that it's secure for the challenges of the 21st
century.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Upton. Thank you. I understand that Chairman Walden is
on his way but he's not quite here. So we will go to Ranking
Member Pallone for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Greg was at the other
hearing.
I want to thank you for holding today's hearing evaluating
the cybersecurity threats to the electricity sector in our
country and, of course, I welcome you to this new role as
chairman of the Energy Subcommittee.
You and I accomplished a great deal together in the last
Congress and I hope to work together with you, Mr. Rush, on
critical energy policy in this Congress.
This hearing is a good first step for our committee to look
into the impacts of cybersecurity threats on the electricity
grid.
However, I believe that we need more hearings and a deeper
analysis of the issue so members can truly understand the
challenges and threats facing our grid and I appreciate the
chairman's willingness to honor Ranking Member Rush's request
to hold another hearing on this topic with federal government
witnesses, especially from the Department Energy and the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
Their perspective and experience on this issue will be
vital to the committee's oversight efforts and I also believe
that the committee should hold a closed-door hearing to look at
the cybersecurity risk to our electricity grid.
There are classified aspects of this issue that can't be
discussed in a public hearing like this and members deserve the
opportunity to be briefed on this high-level information in
order to ensure we are adequately protecting the grid from
threats.
To date, the industry has done a commendable job of
guarding electricity consumers against losses caused by cyber-
attack. But make no mistake, the threats are out there.
In December 2015, Russian state hackers successfully
compromised the Ukraine's electric grid, shutting down multiple
distribution centers and leaving more than 200,000 residents
without power for their lights and heaters.
That attack was premeditated and well-choreographed with
groundwork that predated the full attack by many months. It was
sophisticated and synchronized, taking down backup power
supplies and jamming phone lines to keep operators unaware of
the extent of damages. And to date, it stands as the only
recognized cyber-attack to successfully take down a power grid.
Certainly, there are vast differences between the system in
the Ukraine and our own grid. So it's tempting to dismiss
events in the Ukraine as something that could never happen
here.
But we owe it to the American people to ask whether
anything about that attack could be replicated here, what
lessons can we learn to make our electric grid more secure and
utility workers more vigilant of cybersecurity threats.
And what should be the priorities of this committee and
this Congress to ensure that a successful cyber-attack on the
electric grid never happens on American soil? If Russia hacked
our election, what's to stop them from hacking our electricity
grid?
Now, our committee has not been idle when it comes to grid
security. Last Congress, Chairman Upton, with my support and
the support of many members of the committee, pushed through
legislation to enhance the security of our group from cyber and
other threats.
I was pleased to see that signed into law by President
Obama because I consider grid security to be a top tier
national security concern.
And yet, just days ago President Trump signed a
presidential memorandum establishing the members of the
National Security Council's principles committee and it appears
that the Secretary of Energy, who Congress just made the lead
federal official responsible for securing our electricity grid,
has been booted off this significant interagency advisory
panel, and this is incredibly troubling and I strongly urge the
president to reconsider his decision to sideline DOE from the
national security dialog.
I would hope that my Republican colleagues would join me in
asking the president to reverse this decision. It's
inexcusable, in my opinion, that there no longer appears to be
room at the top level of the National Security Council for the
secretary of energy who also is in charge of nuclear security
but there is a permanent slot for Steve Bannon, his chief
strategist.
Essentially, President Trump has chosen his top political
security advisor over the nation's top energy security advisor
and that's a recipe for disaster.
I hope my colleagues will join me in conveying that view to
the White House before something happens that endangers our
economy and our people because the safety of our grid and our
nuclear arsenal are too important.
I don't know if anybody else wants my time. Otherwise, I'll
yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding today's hearing
evaluating the cybersecurity threats to the electricity sector
in our country. I welcome you to this new role as Chairman of
the Energy Subcommittee. You and I accomplished a great deal
together in the last Congress, and I hope to work together with
you and Mr. Rush on critical energy policy in this Congress.
This hearing is a good first step for our committee to look
into the impacts of cybersecurity threats on the electricity
grid. However, I believe that we need more hearings and a
deeper analysis of the issue so members can truly understand
the challenges and threats facing our grid. I appreciate the
Chairman's willingness to honor Ranking Member Rush's request
to hold another hearing on this topic with federal government
witnesses, especially from the Department of Energy and the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. Their perspective and
experience on this issue will be vital to the Committee's
oversight efforts. I also believe that the Committee should
hold a closed-door hearing to look at the cybersecurity risks
to our electricity grid. There are classified aspects of this
issue that cannot be discussed in a public hearing like this,
and Members deserve the opportunity to be briefed on this high-
level information in order to ensure we are adequately
protecting the grid from threats.
To date, the industry has done a commendable job of
guarding electricity consumers against losses caused by a
cyberattack. But make no mistake: the threats are out there.
In December 2015, Russian state hackers successfully
compromised the Ukraine's electric grid, shutting down multiple
distribution centers and leaving more than 200,000 residents
without power for their lights and heaters. That attack was
premeditated and well-choreographed, with groundwork that pre-
dated the full attack by many months. It was sophisticated and
synchronized, taking down backup power supplies and jamming
phone lines to keep operators unaware of the extent of damages.
To date, it stands as the only recognized cyberattack to
successfully take down a power grid.
Certainly, there are vast differences between the system in
the Ukraine and our own grid, so it's tempting to dismiss
events in the Ukraine as something that could never happen
here. But we owe it to the American people to ask whether
anything about that attack could be replicated here. What
lessons can we learn to make our electric grid more secure and
utility workers more vigilant of cybersecurity threats? And,
what should be the priorities of this Committee and this
Congress to ensure that a successful cyberattack on the
electric grid never happens on American soil? If Russia hacked
our election, what's to stop them from hacking our electricity
grid?
Now, our Committee has not been idle when it comes to grid
security. Last Congress, Chairman Upton, with my support and
the support of many members of the Committee, pushed through
legislation to enhance the security of our grid from cyber and
other threats. I was pleased to see that signed into law by
President Obama because I consider grid security to be a top
tier national security concern. And yet, just days ago,
President Trump signed a presidential memorandum establishing
the members of the National Security Council's Principals
Committee--and it appears the Secretary of Energy--who Congress
just made the lead federal official responsible for securing
our electricity grid--has been booted off this significant
interagency advisory panel.
This is incredibly troubling and I strongly urge the
President to reconsider his decision to sideline DOE from the
national security dialogue. I would hope that my Republican
colleagues would join me in asking the President to reverse
this decision. It is inexcusable that there no longer appears
to be room at the top level of the National Security Council
for the Secretary of Energy--who also is in charge of nuclear
security--but there is a permanent slot for Steve Bannon, his
chief strategist. Essentially, President Trump has chosen his
top political security advisor over the nation's top energy
security advisor--and that's a recipe for disaster. I hope my
colleagues will join me in conveying that view to the White
House before something happens that endangers our economy and
our people. The safety of our grid and our nuclear arsenal are
too important.
I yield back.

Mr. Upton. The gentleman yields back.
I just want to tell the gentleman that we do anticipate
having some classified hearings as to cyber. So I know everyone
has signed a pledge, so look forward to having that happen.
At this point, I'll yield 5 minutes to the full committee
chairman, my friend, the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Walden.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Upton.
Mr. Upton. Welcome to your first appearance before the
subcommittee as full committee chair.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. I am delighted to be here, and I am delighted
you're chairing this subcommittee. I wish you could have been
downstairs for the beginning of the Health Subcommittee because
we had a nice big University of Oregon ``O'' come up on the new
screen there to match your green hearing room.
Good morning, and I am pleased that the ranking member has
such strong confidence in the new Secretary of Energy. We think
he's a good man, too, and look forward to working with him on
this committee.
One of the humbling responsibilities for members of the
Energy and Commerce Committee is to fully appreciate the power
we have to make policy changes that can have enormous and
positive impacts on American consumers for decades to come.
From health care, to manufacturing and trade, to
telecommunications, transportation, and the delivery of energy,
our goal is to identify how to position the United States to be
able to harness the tremendous potential of digital
communications for all sectors of the economy, while minimizing
unintended side effects.
We are witnessing the transformation of American commerce
as advances in digital and information technology affect almost
everything that we do in our daily lives. And we see how
layering new digital ways of doing things onto existing
practices and infrastructures creates new risks and potential
harm.
Who among us is not frequently seeking out a plug-in so we
can keep our various electronic devices charged? We are really
tethered.
Never has the reliability of the electric grid been more
important to everything in our lives. That also means never has
the electric grid been more of a potential target for
disruption by nefarious actors.
The hearing today concerns what is being done to address
and respond to the cybersecurity threats to our nation's
electricity system.
By any measure, the reliable supply of electricity is an
essential part of almost everything that we do, and its loss--
even for short periods of time--can have expensive and life-
threatening consequences.
Unfortunately, cyber threats in this sector are
unavoidable, and they are growing. This is due to the dynamic
nature of the information flows in the modern world as well as
the increasing sophistication of hackers and adversaries.
Threats in these flows will only grow as the instant
information and communications enabled by digital technology
become more essential for our electricity system to operate at
increased levels of reliability.
Looking forward, it's clear the growth of digital
technology will constantly introduce new avenues for
cybersecurity threats. They must be managed effectively.
Responsibility for addressing these threats, while
harnessing the promise of digital technology, rests largely on
the thousands of people involved in planning and operating our
nation's complex electricity transmission systems, as well as
the organizations charged with ensuring reliability.
This morning we will hear from industry and cybersecurity
experts who can provide us a report on the state of
cybersecurity planning and practices.
Our witnesses will help us understand just what is being
done to address cybersecurity threats and how the industry
plans to confront new threats as they emerge. The hearing will
help us begin to understand more fully where the electricity
sector is and where it should be in terms of cybersecurity and
related risk to electric reliability.
This will lay the groundwork for closer scrutiny of the
relevant policies necessary to ensure future reliability in an
evolving electricity, and, frankly, digital sectors.
There are many questions to pursue, such as, how is
cybersecurity planning being embedded in procurement and other
systems planning by the industry? What measures are being
implemented to prepare for successful attacks, so that--just as
with nature's constant threats--if the lights do go out, can we
get them back on quickly?
And I know all of you run that grid test periodically and
the tabletopping of it. So we will be interested to hear more
about that.
What's being developed to address the truly high
consequence of the low probability events that can have the
most devastating impacts? And what more can be done?
We really appreciate your testimony. I've read through it
and we are enhanced by your counsel. We look forward to working
with you.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

One of the humbling responsibilities for members of the
Energy and Commerce Committee is to fully appreciate the power
we have to make policy changes that can have enormous and
positive impacts on American consumers for decades to come.
From health care, to manufacturing and trade, to
telecommunications, transportation, and the delivery of energy,
our goal is to identify how to position the United States to
harness the tremendous potential of digital communications for
all sectors of the economy, while minimizing unintended side
effects.
We are witnessing the transformation of American commerce
as advances in digital and information technology affect almost
everything that we do in our daily lives. And we see how
layering new digital ways of doing things onto existing
practices and infrastructures creates new risks and potential
harm. Who among us is not frequently seeking out a plug in so
that we can keep our various electronic devices charged? Never
has the reliability of the electric grid been more important to
everything in our lives. That also means never has the electric
grid been more of a potential target for disruption by
nefarious actors. The hearing today concerns what is being done
to address and respond to the cybersecurity threats to our
nation's electricity system.
By any measure, the reliable supply of electricity is an
essential part of almost everything we do, and its loss-even
for short periods-can have expensive and life threatening
consequences. Unfortunately, cyber threats in this sector are
unavoidable and growing.
This is due to the dynamic nature of the information flows
in the modern world as well as the increasing sophistication of
hackers and adversaries. Threats in these flows will only grow
as the instant information and communications enabled by
digital technology become more essential for our electricity
system to operate at increased levels of reliability.
Looking forward, it is clear the growth of digital
technology will constantly introduce new avenues for
cybersecurity threats that must be managed effectively.
Responsibility for addressing these threats, while harnessing
the promise of digital technology, rests largely on the
thousands of people involved in planning and operating our
nation's complex electricity transmission systems, as well as
the organizations charged with ensuring reliability.
This morning we will hear from industry and cybersecurity
experts who can provide us a report on the state of
cybersecurity planning and practices. Our witnesses will help
us understand just what is being done to address cybersecurity
threats, and how the industry plans to confront new threats as
they emerge.
The hearing will help us begin to understand more fully
where the electricity sector is and where it should be in terms
of cybersecurity and related risks to electric reliability.
This will lay the groundwork for closer scrutiny of the
relevant policies necessary to ensure future reliability in an
evolving electricity sector.
There are many questions to pursue: How is cybersecurity
planning being embedded in procurement and other systems
planning by the industry? What measures are being implemented
to prepare for successful attacks, so that--just as with
nature's constant threats-if the lights do go out, can we get
them on quickly? What is being developed to address the truly
high consequence but low probability events that can have the
most devastating impacts? And what more can be done?
As the committee implements its own energy policy agenda,
the testimony we take will inform how we approach the future
and how we best use innovation and technology to protect
American consumers.

Mr. Upton. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. We are
ready for our witnesses.
We are joined by Gerry Cauley, President and CEO of the
North American Electrical Reliability Corporation, NERC; Scott
Aaronson, Executive Director for the Security and Business
Continuity from EEI, Edison Electric, on behalf of the
Electricity Subsector Coordinating Council; Barbara Sugg, Vice
President for IT and Chief Security Officer of Southwest Power
Pool on behalf of ISO/RTO Council; and Dr. Chris Beck, Chief
Scientist and Vice President for policy from the Electric
Infrastructure Council.
I welcome you all. We appreciate you submitting your
testimony early, so we are able to take it home on the last day
or two. We ask you to summarize it and take about 5 minutes in
your presentation, at which time we will go to questions.
Mr. Rush, yes.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, by way of announcements, we have a
former member here, Mike Ross from Arkansas.
Mr. Upton. It is good to see your face, Mike. Welcome back.
A good friend to all of us that served with you. Thank you.
Thanks, Bobby.
(Applause.)
Mr. Cauley, you're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF GERRY W. CAULEY, PRESIDENT AND CEO, NORTH
AMERICAN RELIABILITY CORPORATION (NERC); SCOTT I. AARONSON,
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, SECURITY AND BUSINESS CONTINUITY, EDISON
ELECTRIC INSTITUTE (EEI), ON BEHALF OF ELECTRICITY SUBSECTOR
COORDINATING COUNCIL; CHRIS BECK, CHIEF SCIENTIST AND VICE
PRESIDENT FOR POLICY, THE ELECTRIC INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY
COUNCIL (EIS COUNCIL); BARBARA SUGG, VICE PRESIDENT FOR IT AND
CHIEF SECURITY OFFICER, SOUTHWEST POWER POOL (SPP), ON BEHALF
OF ISO/RTO COUNCIL (IRC)

STATEMENT OF GERRY W. CAULEY

Mr. Cauley. Good morning, Chairman Upton, Ranking Member
Rush, Committee Chairman Walden, Ranking Member Pallone, and
members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for conducting this timely hearing this morning
to assess the cybersecurity of the nation's power grid.
The threat of cyber-attack by nation states, terrorist
groups and criminals is at an all-time high. In December, as
has been mentioned, of 2015, a cyber-attack in the Ukraine left
over 225,000 customers without power for several hours.
This indicates that nation state adversaries have the cyber
tools and now the will to disrupt the grid of other nations.
More recently, in the U.S., although no effects were seen
on the power grid, we saw a million electronic devices all part
of the internet of things captured and used in a sudden denial
of service attack against internet service providers.
We've seen an increased presence of ransomware, data theft,
and other criminal activities against all sectors of our
economy. As defined by Congress, NERC's role is to assure the
reliability and security of the bulk power system through
mandatory standards, enforcement, and through reliability
assessments.
Our independent board and staff are not affiliated with the
power system owners and operators. FERC approves NERC's
standards and enforcement actions in the U.S. and has the
authority to direct NERC to produce new standards or to revise
existing standards.
As a nation, we share a grid with our fellow countries to
the north and south, which is why NERC is an international
organization spanning the U.S., Canada and, of course, Mexico.
Our cybersecurity standards, which are developed with the
expertise of industry participating in that, provide a strong
foundation for security practices across the industry.
As just a few examples, our standards require inventory of
cyber assets and configuration management, security perimeters
and physical access controls, effective passwords and
authentication, the use of certified software and patches,
background checks and training of personnel, incident reporting
and recovery plans.
NERC, along with our eight regional entities, has cyber
experts that conduct hundreds of visits each year to assess
cybersecurity controls at these companies.
We are finding that power companies take cybersecurity very
seriously with strong attention at the top from CEOs and from
boards.
Cyber assets used to operate the grid are separate and
isolated from business systems and corporate systems, and also
from the public internet. Utility personnel are screened and
well trained.
There is a strong culture of security across each company.
Companies are using advanced third party services to identify
vulnerabilities and threats, and to maintain their system's
secure.
Most importantly, power companies know they must
continually monitor and detect suspicious activity, isolate
malware, and destroy it before anything happens. And this
process is commonly known as the kill chain.
As flexible and risk-based as our standards are, I firmly
believe that we cannot win a cyber war with regulations and
standards alone. Industry must be agile and continuously adapt
to threats, and to do that we need robust sharing of
information regarding threats and vulnerabilities.
NERC operates the electric sector Information Sharing and
Analysis Center, the E-ISAC. Our role is to assimilate
intelligence and share trusted information with industry and
government and to recommend specific actions.
One of our most effective tools in this process is the
Cybersecurity Risk Information Sharing Program, otherwise known
as CRISP. Developed by the Department of Energy, CRISP has been
adopted by NERC and deployed across wide areas of the U.S. grid
to continuously monitor and detect malicious activity.
Working with the U.S. government analysts at the classified
level, we are able to detect problems early and get this
information out to industry for action.
When time is of the essence, NERC can also issue alerts to
industry at three levels of urgency. The two highest levels of
urgency require response from industry back to NERC.
In addition to operating the E-ISAC, NERC conducts an
annual security conference, training events and frequent
classified briefings. As has been mentioned, we also conduct
continent-wide cyber and physical security exercise called
GridEx.
Over 4,000 participants from industry and government
organizations across North America engage for two days in a
very severe massive cyber and physical attack on our grid. The
exercise includes a tabletop which industry CEOs and senior
government officials coordinate a national response including
communications, deployment of resources, cyber mutual
assistance, and other strategies.
To date, there has not been a single cyber-attack in North
America that has resulted in a power outage to a customer. This
is an exceptional record. However, we will never be complacent.
We understand the risk is real. We have hard work to do every
day and we will continue to do that.
I thank the Committee for the time today and look forward
to your questions. Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Cauley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Mr. Aaronson.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT I. AARONSON

Mr. Aaronson. Thank you, Chairman Upton, Ranking Member
Rush, and members of the subcommittee. I am glad to be here
today to discuss the security of the power grid. We appreciate
you holding this important hearing and making it a priority for
the subcommittee.
As owners and operators of some of the nation's most
critical infrastructure, we share your commitment to ensuring
the grid is secure and resilient.
From some of the headlines and movie script scenarios out
there you may be left with the impression that a month's-long
power outage is inevitable and the power sector is powerless to
do anything about it.
If there is one thing you take from my testimony it is
this: Our industry is doing an extraordinary amount of work at
all levels all the time to defend the grid and to respond to
incidents.
You have to remember we live and work in the communities
that we serve and our infrastructure is our most important
asset. We are motivated for many reasons to make security a
major priority.
Since these topics can be sensitive and, as was mentioned,
sometimes classified, we may not talk about them a lot in
public, but don't take that as complacency or a lack of action.
My written testimony has more extensive details on how
electric companies address threats so I won't read it to you.
But, instead, I'd like to quickly focus on three areas that
form the foundation for how the electric power industry
approaches security.
It's three legs of the stool, effectively. So the first leg
of the stool is standards. The electric industry has mandatory
and enforceable critical infrastructure protections, or CIP,
regulatory standards for both cyber and physical security that
Mr. Cauley just mentioned.
These are not lax lowest common denominator standards.
These are rigorous requirements that improve the industry's
security posture.
Failure to comply can cost companies more than a million
dollars per infraction per day. So, suffice it to say,
companies feel a strong incentive to comply.
But compliance does not equal total security. So that
brings me to the next leg of the stool, which is partnerships.
Protection of critical infrastructure is a shared
responsibility.
In order to be prepared for an ever-changing threat
environment, industry and government are partnering at an
extremely high level. In addition to my role at EEI, I am also
privileged to serve on the secretariat of the Electricity
Subsector Coordinating Council, or ESCC. The ESCC is made up of
all three segments of the industry as well as Canadians and
independent power generators, the nuclear sector as well as the
gas sector.
It is made up of 31 CEOs from across the segments of the
industry. Those CEOs meet regularly with senior government
officials not to simply update each other but to set a
strategic course that has helped the sector make extraordinary
advances in grid security in a very short amount of time by
bringing together government-industry executive leadership.
It's also been recognized by the National Infrastructure
Advisory Council, which advises the executive office of the
president as the model for how critical infrastructure sectors
can partner with government.
So the ESCC focuses on four specific areas. The first is
deploying tools and technology. The focus here has been moving
government-developed tools to industry applications that
improve situational awareness. And, again, Mr. Cauley mentioned
the best example of this, the Cyber Risk Information Sharing
Program, or CRISP.
The second focus for the ESCC has been improving the flow
of information. That is making sure the right people are
getting the right information at the right time.
From classified briefings for executives to actual
intelligence for operators, government and industry are sharing
threat information more easily and more often, and some of that
has to do with some of the legislation that has been passed by
committees like this to make information sharing more seamless
between the public and private sectors.
The third thing that we are doing in the ESCC is
coordinating with other sectors. While electricity is often
described as the most critical to critical, if we don't have
water, we can't generate steam or cool our systems. If we don't
have transportation or pipelines, we can't move fuel or our
equipment. If we don't have communications, we can't operate.
So to address interdependencies, the power sector is
working across sectors, and most recently we are pursuing a
partnership with the financial services and communication
sectors to form a Strategic Infrastructure Coordinating
Council, or SICC, that follows the model of the ESCC by
bringing senior executives together to form a center of gravity
that will help harmonize people, policies, and technologies
across the sectors that form the foundation of civil society.
Then the last area of focus for the ESCC also happens to be
the third leg of the stool. So we have got regulations, we have
got partnerships, and then we are preparing to respond and
recover from incidents if there were ever a successful attack.
Simply put, electric companies have to be right 100 percent of
the time and the adversary has to be right once.
Given those odds, preparing for incidents is just common
sense. First of all, we have a history of working together to
restore power after an incident through mutual assistant
networks where workers from across the sector help affected
companies.
We also have a robust spare equipment sharing program
including several bilateral and multilateral arrangements, one
of them known as the Spare Transformer Equipment Program, or
STEP.
We exercise regularly, as Mr. Cauley noted. NERC's GridEx
series brings together thousands of operators and executives
from across North America in the largest exercise of its kind,
and we now are developing a cyber mutual assistance program to
coordinate industry resources for companies affected by cyber
incidents.
As an example of how quickly the sector can implement new
strategies under the ESCC, the CMA program was conceived in
January of 2016, just about a year ago, following GridEx III
and the 2015 cyber-attack on Ukraine's energy grid.
In just the last year, this program went from a concept
suggested by the CEOs of the ESCC to a program that currently
has more than 80 participants and growing almost daily, a legal
structure, a play book that has been exercised and even
utilized in response to the Mirai botnet that affected internet
services this past October.
Bottom line is this: We are constantly working to manage
risk, but also planning to address incidents because we
understand we can't fully eliminate risk.
There isn't enough money in the world to protect against
every threat in every location, but we are working to prevent
incidents from having long-term or devastating impacts.
We understand that the service we provide is critical to
the life, health, and safety of all Americans. From CEOs to
operators, the power sector has shown it takes this
responsibility very seriously and is committed to constantly
improving its security posture as these threats evolve.
Again, I appreciate the opportunity to be here and look
forward to answering your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Aaronson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you very much.
Dr. Beck.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS BECK

Dr. Beck. Chairman Upton, Ranking Member Rush and members
of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
before you today on this important topic.
EIS Council, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, is, at its core, a
public interest organization. Our chief mission is to do our
part to ensure societal continuity for black sky hazards by
hosting research and national and international collaboration
focused on whole community resilience, response, and
restoration planning.
Black sky is increasingly becoming a term of art referring
to threats that could cause extended and long-duration power
outages covering many states and lasting more than a month, and
the subsequent cascading failures of our other critical
infrastructures.
Six black sky threats have been identified as primary
concerns. Three are naturally occurring and three are
malicious, including a sophisticated cyber-attack--the subject
of today's hearing.
The Ukrainian cyber-attack demonstrated that a blackout of
electric power can be achieved through remote cyber means.
Stuxnet and Aurora demonstrate that catastrophic damage to
physical equipment can be accomplished through cyber-attack
vectors on operational technology or industrial control
systems, causing disruption, misoperation, or destruction of
the hardware they control.
The successful coupling of these two components could
result in a black sky event. This would be the case if the
damaged equipment were critical to grid operation and required
a long period of time to repair or replace.
It would also be the case if the disruption pushes
restoration times past the point where cascading failures of
other infrastructures began interfering with the restoration
process.
In the aftermath of a natural disaster, response activities
typically commence once the immediate danger has passed. In a
cyber-attack scenario, it is possible or even likely that the
attacker could launch subsequent attacks to disrupt response
and recovery efforts or cause further damage.
At the same time that the cyber threat is constantly
evolving, the attack surface continues to grow with the ever-
growing trend to computerize and allow remote access and
control.
An adversary may also infiltrate a utility not through a
direct attack on the utility system itself, but through a
trusted, maybe less secure third party connection, or by
inserting malware into critical hardware or software at several
points along that product's production life cycle.
Leading power utilities have taken positive action along
the cyber-attack threat timeline or kill chain though there is
certainly a large spread between the capabilities within the
power utilities.
Electric utilities also have a long history of providing
mutual assistance, and the same concept is being applied by the
ESCC for mutual support in response to cyber incidents though
challenges unique to cyber must be taken into account.
Operational technology systems in particular vary greatly
from utility to utility. IT and OT professionals are typically
a limited resource.
In a large enough attack, availability of such expertise
will likely be too limited to address the need, and CEOs may be
reluctant to flow personnel to assist others when they might be
the next target themselves.
To bolster electric sector mutual support, external support
is also necessary. Government support for utilities is
available at the federal and state levels. ICS-CERT and E-ISAC
provide operational support and information sharing.
A DOD USCYBERCOM may provide assistance through defense
support to civil authority missions. DOE is the federal agency
for emergency support function 12 for federal support to energy
restoration, and the FAST Act provisions now provide broad
authority under a grid security emergency declaration by the
President.
At the state level, National Guard units may assist
electric utilities and state fusion centers in sharing
information and including electric utilities in emergency
planning and operations.
These support options, however, might be overwhelmed by the
scale of the attack. Another possibility would be expanding the
concept of mutual assistance to bring IT and OT professionals
from other private sectors including information technology,
aerospace, water and waste water, telecommunications,
manufacturing, and others.
EIS Council is facilitating a process to explore this
opportunity. Power grid restoration following a successful
black sky cyber-attack will only be possible if broad multi-
sector planning is in place for cross-sector support to that
restoration process.
Those plans must be continuously tested and improved
through exercises such as GridEx and through training within
each utility and across sectors. Cyber security enhancements
ultimately require focused private and public sector
leadership.
When the CEO of a company takes security and resilience
seriously, the company develops a culture of security and
resilience. Inclusion of security and, specifically, cyber
security principles in planning for expansion, equipment
replacement and employee training are all essential to enhanced
cyber security in the electric power sector.
I thank you very much and look forward to your questions.
[The statement of Dr. Beck follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Ms. Sugg.

STATEMENT OF BARBARA SUGG

Ms. Sugg. Good morning, Chairman Upton, Ranking Member Rush
and all members of the Energy Subcommittee.
My name is Barbara Sugg. I am the Vice President of
Information Technology and Chief Security Officer at Southwest
Power Pool, which is headquartered in Little Rock, Arkansas.
Southwest Power Pool is one of the nine independent system
operators and regional transmission organizations--the term
ISO/RTO will be used henceforth--in North America.
Collectively, these nine organizations serve two-thirds of
the energy consumers in the United States and half in Canada.
We are nonprofit organizations. We do not own generating plants
or operate generating plant substations or transmission
facilities.
However, we do provide a number of various services from
reliability coordination and balancing authority functions to
transmission planning for future expansion of the transmission
grid.
We all have the common goal of ensuring sustainable,
affordable, and reliable power with our wholesale energy
markets.
I am here today on behalf of the ISO/RTO Council, known as
the IRC. The IRC has an executive committee, which includes the
CEOs from each of these nine organizations and is made up of a
number of committees and working groups focused on different
areas of interest to the ISO/RTO community.
I serve as a member of the IT committee, which brings
together the chief information officers from each of those nine
organizations, where we come together to share best practices,
to collaborate on common interests, and to work on directives
that may come from the executive committee.
One of the working groups that reports to us is the
security working group. With this security working group, which
has been in place for a very long time now, there are security
experts that come together from each of our regions to share
best practices, to work on incident response planning, and to
understand our dependencies with each other.
Cybersecurity is a top concern at the ISO/RTO. As Ranking
Member Rush said earlier, it's not a matter of if but when, and
we recognize that.
We have five core strategies to our cybersecurity
framework. One of those is defense. Certainly, we have to be
prepared to defend against attack. We do this through controls,
through multiple layers of security and good practices to
ensure that we stand ready to defend.
The next is response. From advanced security monitoring and
practicing incident response plans we stand ready to respond.
And the third is recovery. You've heard us mention about the
GridEx opportunities to practice our recovery drills.
We do those every other year in a nationwide effort but we
also do local, state, and regional exercises much more
frequently to ensure that our recovery plans are ready to go.
Partnership is the fourth key element of our strategy and
these gentlemen talked a lot about all the of the information-
sharing opportunities and the various government agencies that
work with us to collaborate and provide cyber assistance.
The fifth is education. We recognize the importance of
every single ISO/RTO employee when it comes to protecting our
systems and protecting our information, and so security
awareness is high on our list.
Over 10 years ago, the CIP standards to critical
infrastructure protection standards came out. They've advanced
quite a bit over the last decade and they serve as a base level
of security for us.
However, we have to get beyond the standards and recognize
that a culture of compliance is important but even more so
important is a culture of security.
We look beyond the standards in a number of ways from
developing, in advance of standards, security coding
requirements for our control system vendors. And when I say we
I am talking about the entire ISO/RTO community working
together to make sure that we are equally protected.
We have worked with the FERC energy infrastructure security
office to do security architecture reviews, and to look for
best practices and talk about evolving threats and current
technologies.
It's very difficult for the standards to keep up with the
evolving threats and so we must look beyond that. It's also
difficult with emerging technologies.
Standards shouldn't be so prescriptive that they limit us
in our capability to develop new infrastructure and new
architecture. And we work very closely with NERC and the rest
of the community to ensure that those standards are secure
enough for us without being overly prescriptive and limiting
our capabilities to keep up with the evolving threats.
I thank you for your time this morning and I look forward
to answering your questions.
[The statement of Ms. Sugg follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you all.
I think each of you mentioned that it is a daunting task.
When you look at the power grid, 7,700 operating power plants
that generate electricity from a variety of primary energy
sources, 200,000 miles of high-voltage transmission lines,
55,000 substations, five-and-a-half million miles of local
distribution lines.
I think each of you mentioned that you have to be right
every day. They just have to be right once for a catastrophe to
happen. And as we all know, we passed, on a bipartisan basis,
the FAST Act in the last Congress.
Tell us how that has helped you on a bipartisan basis. Tell
us specifically, Mr. Cauley and Mr. Aaronson, how has that
helped protect consumers?
Mr. Cauley. Well, thank you very much for the question, Mr.
Chairman.
Two ways for me in particular. One is there was a lack of
clarity around emergency authorities and I think providing
those emergency authorities to the Department of Energy under
an emergency declared by the President was helpful.
I testified a number of times in the past about that
potential gap. I think the other thing that's extremely
valuable to us and to consumers is it provided for greater
protections of cybersecurity information.
It's very important that as companies report to us details
that border on being classified, if not classified, that we are
able to maintain the confidences and keep that secure.
Particularly, allowing FERC to have procedures to secure
information which we frequently exchange with them, but other
controls around maintaining those confidences.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Aaronson.
Mr. Aaronson. Echoing some of the things that Mr. Cauley
just said, agree. And then in addition, I think it really
speaks to the value of the partnership at a very high level,
providing the Secretary of Energy, who oversees our sector-
specific agency with some authorities in the midst of a grid
security emergency, which was very well defined in the FAST
Act.
Further, it sort of solidifies that relationship in the
midst of an incident. And the fact that it calls for
coordination with the sector--where practicable--during such
emergency ensures that the Secretary would be well informed on
what to order.
We are in the process of responding to the notice of
proposed rulemaking from the Department of Energy that would
outline some of the processes for how this authority would be
used and we look forward to continuing that conversation. The
joke has come up--there isn't one phone number you can call,
the Batphone, for the electric sector.
So having a understanding of who would need to be
coordinated with and contacted in the midst of such emergency
is going to be a challenge.
But, again, with the Sector Coordinating Council playing
that role as a center of gravity with the ISO/RTO Council and
other partners throughout the sector it gives us a good, high
level set of entities to coordinate with should the unthinkable
happen.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Cauley, you talked a little bit in your
testimony about the tabletop exercise. Can you elaborate a
little bit more?
The other thing I want to hear particularly, Mr. Aaronson,
from you, as it relates to that, and I presume that you were
involved, the STEP program.
One of the concerns that a number of us have raised is if
there was some issue where a transformer was taken down because
of the lack of uniformity between a variety of different units
that may be taken out of business. How long would it actually
take to get new transformers into place and the mechanism that
that would go about it?
I presume that that was probably one of the issues that was
engaged in a tabletop exercise that you had.
Mr. Cauley. The exercise in preparing for our fourth, now
in November of this year, have intentionally gotten
progressively more difficult and challenging to overcome, and
the pattern is we build capability, we learn what we learn, and
we get better each time.
I think as we run the exercise in a way that's two days and
that it's companies distributed across the U.S. and Canada
participate locally in their state and local environment using
their operating systems and people. People actually run out to
stations.
They call the FBI. They actually do it on the ground. Then
there is a central exercise that we look at at the executive
level with the top levels of government, and we have had FEMA,
DHS, White House representatives and others.
Mr. Upton. Are the results of that in a classified setting?
Mr. Cauley. There is a public report for each of the
exercises. What we found is that when we propose an exercise
that destroys equipment, explosions, deaths, where the power
could be out for weeks and potentially months, it really
exceeds the capabilities that we have anticipated in the past,
not just industry, but government. We never thought of it that
way.
We have to think differently in terms of unity of effort,
how do we unite around these capabilities and bring the best of
industry, best of government to overcome those situations.
Mr. Upton. I know my time is expired, but I have one quick
question on that. Were the governors engaged in this tabletop
exercise?
Mr. Cauley. We anticipate expanding that in GridEx IV in
November but, yes, there were representatives from National
Guard. The state of Wisconsin, I believe, was represented. And
so we did engage some state-level representation at the table.
But, obviously, we need to bring in a lot of state-level
activity. A lot of the solution, in my mind, is going to be how
do we handle the public situation and the issues on the ground
during a crisis. And that really involves local and state
governments to support it.
Mr. Upton. And Mr. Aaronson, just quickly to respond on the
STEP program.
Mr. Aaronson. So I appreciate you asked that. In addition
to STEP, let me kind of go through a few of the resiliency
programs.
This goes to some of the things Gerry was just talking
about with respect to having an exercise, understanding where
your vulnerabilities are, and then implementing some solutions
to fill those gaps.
In addition to this Spare Transformer Equipment Program
which grew up about 10 years ago, a little bit more than that,
that is a binding relationship between the companies that are a
part of it.
In the event of a presidentially-declared terrorist
incident, there is a contractual obligation to share equipment
during such incident. That's a really high bar.
Fortunately, STEP has been utilized beyond just in
presidentially-declared terrorist activities but to be able to
move these really important components that form the backbone
of the system.
In addition to STEP and its rigorous approach to Spare
equipment, we also have something called SpareConnect, which is
effectively a database of asset owners and asset managers for
companies.
If I am a company that has been impacted by something and I
need to get one of these high-voltage transformers in place, I
can create a bilateral agreement, call the person who has the
equipment that I need, make an arrangement, and have it moved
into place.
There also are industry-led versions of this, something
called Grid Assurance that has stood up. Again, companies come
together to pool resources and a new program called Restore,
which is a regional approach, along the same lines.
Last thing I'll say about this is having the equipment is
one thing. Moving it is another. These things are quite
literally hundreds of thousands of pounds and very hard to
move. It has required us to work with other sectors, again,
going to interdependencies across sectors, but rail and
trucking in particular and then the riggers who actually get it
onto the rail car, move it into place and then go the last mile
to bring it to the location.
We have both worked with the rail industry and exercised it
through something called the Transformer Transportation Working
Group. So, again, lessons learned from all of these incidents
have really informed industry programs that are making us more
resilient and more able to move equipment to where it's needed.
Mr. Upton. Sorry it took so long. Thank you.
Mr. Rush.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to touch on an area that we have been silent on--
this hearing's been silent on so far and that's the area of the
cybersecurity workforce.
I think that's a very critical concern on the plans or the
technology--on the well-intentioned efforts of many of us we
have come to know and we don't have a sufficient, capable, and
expert workforce.
According to the IEEE, there are a million unfilled
cybersecurity engineering jobs around the world with that
number expected to grow by 1.5 million by 2019. In the U.S.
alone there are only 67 job seekers for every 100 open
cybersecurity positions.
I am wondering if this shortage of available workers is
posing problems for electric companies seeking to fill
cybersecurity jobs that protect our electricity grid.
Mr. Aaronson, can you talk about the current situation in
the electricity sector as it relates to cybersecurity jobs and
is it indeed true that companies are finding it difficult to
find and hire skilled workers to fill these positions?
Mr. Aaronson. So I think this is a refrain that you'll
hear, and I am sure there is others on the panel who have some
experience actually trying to fill these positions.
I will say I've heard from my membership and across the
sector that this is a challenge. There are a lot of needs and
not a lot of people to fill it.
This is something that's going to require a long-term
concerted effort starting with STEM education and moving up to
attracting a workforce to this particular critical
infrastructure industry.
I will say a couple of things. EEI in particular has a
program known as Troops to Energy, and that helps to take
people who have served in the military who have excellent skill
sets and really do lend themselves to being a part of a
critical infrastructure industry.
So there is attraction there. There is also attraction
among cyber workforce and cyber experts. This is a pretty cool
industry to be in. You are the most critical infrastructure
sector and we are quite literally defending against adversaries
from near pure nation states all the way down to sort of the
traditional proverbial hacker kid in his mom's basement.
Having that opportunity is something that is attractive but
it doesn't change the fact that we need to generate more of
these people.
Mr. Rush. Ms. Sugg, would you want to add anything
additionally?
Ms. Sugg. That's a great question and an interesting topic.
I don't find that we are having as much trouble filling those
kinds of positions because we are working with the
universities.
STEM education is a big focus for us as well. At the
university level we are working with a number of them on their
curriculums, and what's interesting is the Millenials are
particularly skilled at this.
This is new technology. It's evolving threats and it's
something that the Millenials find really exciting and some of
our most innovative thinkers, which is really what you need to
think outside of the box on security, are coming out of the
universities.
There are a number of opportunities for experienced
employees to get education and certifications in cybersecurity
areas.
So that's been helpful as well and it is something people
that have worked in other areas find interesting and perhaps
want to change their careers because it is ever changing and
good employees love a good challenge.
The universities are producing some really skilled
graduates that challenge our way of thinking about security in
a very healthy way.
Mr. Rush. Is there a role for the federal government in
terms of increasing the quality and quantity of the
cybersecurity workforce?
Ms. Sugg. I think there is an opportunity for the federal
government to challenge the universities to think more broadly
about the different types of cybersecurity in areas and sectors
that are perhaps less secure, such as the internet, and maybe
there are opportunities to fund research toward developing a
more secure internet and that would be something that would be
very interesting at the academic level.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Upton. Thank you. The chair would like to recognize the
chairman of the full committee, Mr. Walden, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walden. I thank the chair and thank our witnesses again
for your testimony and your counsel.
I listen to this and I think about your tests. I was in the
radio business. We would do these emergency alert tests and
drills from time to time, and we had one of these. You were
talking about how you go out to the substation, you call the
FBI, you do all that. We got the call into the radio station to
announce that Bonneville Dam, one of the major dams crossing
the Columbia River, and we were supposed to announce on air had
been breached.
Fortunately, I had a sort of retired announcer working that
Saturday morning who said, ``I think it's probably not a good
idea to actually go on the air and tell people that one of the
Columbia River dams has been breached, but we will make a note
here.''
So you have to be careful when you do these exercises, but
they are really important because emergencies do happen. I
think back to what happened during Hurricane Katrina and how
rapidly things disintegrated when there was no power. Because
then there is no water, there is no sewage, there is no
refrigeration. The ATMs don't work.
I talked earlier about how we are all connected to these
digital devices. You can't talk to your loved ones. You can't
make emergency calls. So the work you're doing to push this and
test this is really important.
I know many of us have been in both classified and
unclassified briefings on this matter about the reliability of
the grid and the threats that are there. We are very cognizant
of the cyber security issues, and the attempts by others to put
hardware into our systems that have vulnerabilities in it, and
to harness the internet of things to be a swarming attacking
machine, basically.
When you analyze the systems that are there, and I don't
mean the hardware systems--I mean the human systems to
communicate and interact--what are we missing? What are you
finding we need to improve on?
Are you hamstrung by certain laws, too? We did six
hearings, I think, on our telecommunications subcommittee on
this topic of cybersecurity. Every witness on every panel said
please do no harm.
If you lock things in statute in terms of technology the
bad guys will know what we have to do and you'll misallocate
our capital. Are there things like that locked in that we
should review, either in a public setting or in a more secure
setting?
We want to make sure we have a reliable grid that can
withstand any kind of issue whether it's a solar flare or a bad
actor. What are we missing here? Or is it all perfect?
Mr. Cauley. Well, I'll just start the response. I think a
lot of the framework that we have is really good. I think the
idea of the industry participating in a standard setting and
the standards being really focused on being adaptive and sort
of driving solutions I think works.
So I think continuing to engage industry experts and
leaders, and the process that we have to Section 215 in FERC
and NERC I think is very helpful.
There are some challenges that are difficult. Most of the
challenges that we face are not limited to the electric system
and I think, once we start talking about the kinds of
existential threats that we are thinking about here, revolving
a broad sweep of telecommunications and other industries,
finance and others, I don't ever expect there is going to be an
attack that's just only on the grid.
So I think the ability to work cross sector and to engage
multiple sectors together in a conversation and leadership is
very helpful. I think we are challenged with supply chain and
sort of the global picture that everything that we get and use
from the system that's digital is coming from somewhere in the
world is a challenge.
And the final thing I would say that we need to continue to
work on together is strategic reserves around essential
equipment and the ability to deploy that in a severe emergency.
Mr. Walden. By the way, a side question--do you involve the
amateur radio community in your emergency drills at all? I
confess, I am one. But it also is a very dispersed--it's like
the original internet, right?
Mr. Cauley. We have not particularly sought after that, but
I know Dr. Beck and his crew at EIS has had some work around
the use of ham operators for emergencies.
Mr. Walden. Yes, they are the only communication tool left.
But go ahead, Mr. Aaronson.
Mr. Aaronson. So a philosophical question but I won't give
a philosophical answer. I think the culture issue around, and
you alluded to it, that people are very much tethered to their
devices and very much reliant on this.
We have found, even in storms, while the industry has
gotten considerably better at restoring more quickly, if you do
a good job of preparing the general public ahead of time power
will be out for a short period of time. This is what's going on
to restore it, I think helping people understand that it may
not just be storms anymore but there are other sorts of threats
whether cyber or physical or otherwise that may have an impact,
and if they can be prepared and they understand that we are
preparing I do think there is a really important public policy
and public communication role that the Congress and federal
policy makers in general can play.
I'd also say just from cultural perspective, there has been
this tendency to blame the victim when incidents do happen on
critical infrastructure operators. Look at Sony, look at
Target.
Changing that dynamic a little bit so that people recognize
when you're talking about very sophisticated threat actors and
near pure nation states who are targeting critical
infrastructure, and I think, again, if people recognize there
is a partnership between industry and government, that we are
working on this, that we are heartening our systems, that we
are more resilient, I think that can go a long way.
One last quick note, I would say this, and you alluded to
it a bit, this reliance on a culture of compliance. Security
can never be a check the box exercise, ``OK, I've done X, Y,
and Z and therefore I am secure.''
No. Actually, it's the opposite. You are complacent and,
again, going back to culture, I think helping people understand
that this is a journey without a destination, but it is one
that we are all on, will help to prepare your constituents, our
customers, for the new world that we live in.
Dr. Beck. I would say, going to Scott's point about the
social aspect, to your question, Chairman Walden, that I don't
see any regulation currently that's hamstrung the efforts, but
they are challenged by two social structures: stovepipes and
tunnels.
Stovepipes we are more familiar with and those have to do
with, for example, government agencies that can be one
stovepipe or infrastructure sectors that we need to work on
getting more discussion through those stovepipes or those
silos.
But the other one is tunnels, and what I mean by that is
there is communication and common understanding at specific
levels of decision making. So CEOs understand each other and
they have a certain view of a situation.
The engineers that work on cybersecurity have a different
understanding of it. The CFOs, et cetera, and so we need to
look at all of those, breaking down basically both silos and
tunnels so that there is a common operating picture and
mission.
Ms. Sugg. There has been a lot of comments here that I
could echo and I'll save the time on that. Innovation is
important. Working together through the ISACs, through multi-
disciplined ISACs are important.
Continuing to work closely with the Edison Institute. Their
work is phenomenal and is benefitting the entire industry. And
through NERC to evaluate what's coming out of the government
and how do we best prepare ourselves within the framework.
I agree about it's important not to vilify the company that
does indeed get breached because we will all learn from it.
Someone else's detection is everyone else's prevention. So
thank you.
Mr. Upton. Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the chairman and I am going to
follow up on one of your questions with Mr. Aaronson.
Do you think that transformer standards would help reduce
the threat of transformer attack or do we need a strategic
reserve of some kind?
Mr. Aaronson. So I think as you know the electric grid grew
up in fits and starts over, quite literally, the better part of
a century and as a result there are these different voltage
classes and sort of a mishmash of equipment across the sector.
Interestingly, that's not necessarily a bad thing. It does
create some biodiversity, which in and of itself is a
protection mechanism.
So I think standardization within reason may be something
worth at least exploring. With respect to a strategic reserve,
I think this is one of those instances where government and
industry have to be aligned.
Industry, as I mentioned, has the Spare Transformer
Equipment Program, has SpareConnect, has Grid Assurance, has
Restore, has these other bilateral arrangements and
multilateral arrangements across the sector.
Those are really useful and have grown up out of necessity
and have been utilized. To the extent that there are
opportunities for the federal government to provide additional
backstop, additional spare equipment, not just limited
transformers but are many other critical components and support
for moving them. Filling the gaps that the industry observes, I
think that's a useful pursuit.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Cauley, do you feel that the trend toward distributed
generation makes our electric system less or more vulnerable to
cyber-attacks?
Mr. Cauley. Well, it's a great challenge and a great
dilemma that we face in front of us. In some respects it
creates a system that's more resilient because there is more
resources and capabilities that are more distributed, and there
are greater redundancies in the system and I think it enhances
reliability and resilience.
The challenge is that all those devices are going to be
communicating with something else and in some cases they are
much closer to the internet than the bulk power grid.
So it's going to create a much greater surface to attack
and can create multipliers in the attack where you have common
devices that are out there. Instead of there being three
breakers of a certain model, there are 1.5 million devices that
are exactly the same and can be simultaneously hacked.
So it goes both ways and I am deeply concerned that we
continue to focus on the distribution side in terms of getting
security right and getting it built into those systems.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Ms. Sugg, how effective would cyber hygiene, education, and
enforcement be in preventing successful cyber-attacks?
Ms. Sugg. Cyber education is extremely important. Security
awareness is important. We cover everything in our training and
education from how to ensure that you don't click on e-mails on
to how to recognize an event within the systems at any given
time using some of our advanced security monitoring.
That awareness is required as part of the standards, which
I think is a very healthy requirement for us. But we don't just
limit that to the people that work within the scope of the
critical infrastructure.
We expand that awareness and education to all of our
employees, recognizing that each of them has an opportunity and
a responsibility to help us protect all of our systems.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Beck, with the internet of things are there concerns
about potential cyber threats from systems that are already in
place but we haven't seen incidents yet?
Dr. Beck. Certainly, the question is the continued
expansion of the internet of things or even going back to your
question of Mr. Cauley about distributed generation.
As things are introduced and connected into the grid, what
is an important practice is, if we are going to try to stay
ahead of the threat, to have it be a part of design philosophy
when new devices or processes are put in place.
We don't want to connect things and then say oh, gosh, we
forgot about cybersecurity--now we have got to do a bunch of
patches and things. Again, it's more of a social issue of
trying to get security practices baked in to new development as
we go forward, and we can grow your way to greater security
because the grid is always expanding, things are always being
updated and replaced by new equipment, better processes and so
on. And if that new equipment and better process includes
security as a baseline feature of its design and
implementation, we will be safer.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I've been involved in standards
committees and I know how slow and deliberate they are. Are
standards able to keep up with the threat in terms--even
actually the definition of what cybersecurity and threats mean?
Mr. Cauley. Well, I think they certainly help provide a
baseline even as the topic was just about distributed systems
and internet of things.
IEEE and other technical equipment standard-setting
organizations could have standards built in to make those
devices more equipment. The tendency to selling to consumers is
to make them as easy as possible to plug in and set up, and
that really creates a difficulty.
So I think there is room for standards to set the baseline
in terms of how protected individual equipment should be.
Mr. Aaronson. If I could just piggyback on that. I think
the answer is yes, but standards have a role.
They cannot completely keep up with a very dynamic threat,
and I wanted to just weigh in really quickly on the question
about distributed resources.
I think Mr. Cauley hit it on the head. It's sort of a
paradox. There is some resilience that can be brought from
distributed resources, but it broadened the attack surface and,
largely, these are consumer-grade electronic devices that do
not have the same security standards, to bring it back to that
question that may be necessary.
Another challenge is visibility from the operators of the
grid into these distributed resources. It's a misnomer to think
these distributed resources are not connected to the grid.
In fact, they have to be. Having a rooftop solar panel if
it's not connected to the grid is like having a computer not
connected to the internet. You need to be a part of that
broader ecosystem.
So ensuring that there is security baked in, not bolted on
to those pieces, and that the owners-operators have visibility
into the power that's being generated is going to be critical
to ensure reliability and resilience for the rest of the
sector.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Olson. Gentleman's time is expired.
The chair calls upon the Vice Chairman of the full
committee, Mr. Barton from Texas, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I apologize for
not being here at the beginning.
I had, as some of the others, the hearing on the Medicaid
program in the Health Subcommittee downstairs. So I am honored
to be a part of this subcommittee also.
I want to recognize former Congressman Ross out in the
audience, a valuable member of this committee in the past, and
I think probably the subcommittee, and you're looking very
happy being a former member. So we are glad to have you.
The purpose of the hearing today, Mr. Chairman, as you well
know, is to discuss what we are doing and look at trying to
protect our electrical grid from the threat of cybersecurity
problems.
We have the president of the organization responsible for
protecting us, Mr. Cauley. So I am going to ask the other three
witnesses, Mr. Aaronson, Dr. Beck and Ms. Sugg.
Ms. Sugg, what kind of a job do you think he's doing. Is he
doing a good job? A bad job? What do we need to do to encourage
him?
Mr. Aaronson. And I am not saying this just because he is
sitting right next to me, but I think he's doing an
extraordinary job and I think that the North American
Electrical Reliability Corporation serves an exceedingly
important role as the electrical reliability organization as
directed by this committee and Congress through the Federal
Power Act.
It is a challenge to be sure, but I do think the role that
they play between a regulatory body that is pushing standards
and, regulators regulate--that's their responsibility. But also
then to organize the industry and ensure that the engineers and
grid operators have a voice in the standards that have to be
developed for reliability of the system to make sure that these
standards: number one, keep up with technology; number two, are
flexible enough, as Ms. Sugg referenced, and that they can
apply to the smallest of the utilities--and the largest
investor-owned utilities in the nation is a challenge but one
that I think Gerry can pass.
Mr. Barton. You give him an A?
Mr. Aaronson. I'll give him an A.
Mr. Barton. Dr. Beck.
Dr. Beck. I'll second that, and I want to say that I
appreciate that Mr. Cauley has been a support for EIS Council
and that we have appreciated the fact that we have been able to
have discussions with NERC regarding our shared areas of
interest and he certainly didn't have to do that.
But we discovered that focusing on what we consider
outside, and beyond just the professional realm of regulating
the electric reliability, is fundamentally we are all
interested in the security of our families and our fellow
citizens and the nation as a whole, and I think that our shared
commitment in that has allowed us to work together to share
ideas and we appreciate that partnership.
Mr. Barton. OK. Ms. Sugg.
Ms. Sugg. We appreciate the partnership with NERC as well.
Our experience is that NERC is very collaborative. They listen.
They ask a lot of questions.
They hold us accountable for standards but more so, and
I've heard Mr. Cauley mention this numerous times in other
arenas, that it's more important to focus on security and to
shift that focus from just being focused on or worried about
being compliant to being secure.
The standards drafting teams that are led by NERC that pull
together industry experts to develop the standards, to really
understand how best to put a standard in place that doesn't
become overly restrictive, is very healthy for the industry.
And I also find that NERC is receptive to understanding or
hearing additional conversation about standards that do exist
that are already in place. Not just standards that need to be
developed, but to understand the challenges that we have with
them and ensure that they stay as robust as possible without
limiting us in our technologies. I give him an A.
Mr. Barton. It's very rare that Congress does something
that, this system came from the Energy Policy Act of 2005,
which I was chairman of the committee and the chairman of the
conference committee. So I guess I'll pat myself on the back.
But I am going to give you the final word, Mr. Cauley.
You've just gotten three As. That's a pretty good report card.
Is there something legislatively this subcommittee and full
committee needs to do to improve what appears to be working or
are you happy with the authority you have and just want to be
left alone?
Mr. Cauley. I appreciate the question and the previous
question and the responses.
Mr. Barton. They expect you to take them to dinner tonight
because of their answers.
Mr. Cauley. Something along those lines. I think the
testament to the legislation creating this framework that our
data, not our view but our data that we collect from industry,
is that reliability of the bulk power system has improved over
the last 10 years and that's the testament that we want to
leave is that we are getting better on the bulk power system in
terms of number of outages, frequency of outages, impact on
customers.
I think the framework works. Our relationship with FERC is
excellent and when we have got to get something really
important done, like they said, let's do a physical security
standard or a standard on GMD. We have a conversation. They
direct us to do it and we do it and we meet their requirements.
The one area where I think we continue, particularly in the
area of security, or we need to continue to work on is the
ability to share information between industry, NERC and the
government, and sometimes we do it well and sometimes we don't
do it well.
There is always the challenge of what's classified, what's
secret, what's sensitive to the military. But we crave
information in industry to figure out what we need to do to
protect the grid and to get that free flow of information. To
have it be protected is essential for us. Thank you.
Mr. Barton. OK. Well, downstairs we are fighting like cats
and dogs. But in this subcommittee on this issue we are hugging
each other.
I think we can work together if we need to and I want to
thank the witnesses and thank the subcommittee vice chairman
and the subcommittee ranking member for holding this hearing.
Mr. Upton. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair calls upon the gentleman from California, Mr.
Peters, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
witnesses for being here.
So in 2003, my wife and I took my two kids to New York. We
thought we'd get some good food, visit some friends, see ``The
Lion King'' and we, of course, were there for the blackout. So
we had a nice Italian meal the first night. The next night was
salami and crackers and still never seeing ``The Lion King.''
But the impressive thing about that was that it all came
from some glitch in Ohio. So I guess we are inferring from your
comments about the reliability of bulk power that that sort of
thing has been improved upon.
But it did also make me think about distributed generation
because one of the things that we have seen in San Diego in the
defense sector is a development of micro grids.
At Pendleton you see this all over, and it seems to me that
for redundancy and reliability that offers some advantages. But
I had the same question about the portals into the system for
attackers.
And you've sort of answered the question but Mr. Aaronson
said something that I want to follow up on, which was you want
security baked in to these devices, not bolted on.
What can we do from this subcommittee to make sure that
that happens?
Mr. Aaronson. So let me refer to the '03 blackout for a
second, also. While that was not the best day in the history of
the electric utility industry, and I think Ms. Sugg hit it on
the head that someone's detection is someone else's protection.
We learn from all of these experiences and in fact Congress
learned from that experience and in its wisdom, as Mr. Barton
was referring to. The Energy Policy Act gave way to the ERO and
here we are.
I think there is something to that, which is observing
where these gaps in security may lie with distributed resources
and ensuring that if they are going to be a part of the bulk
electric system that they have a certain level of security that
they are responsible for as well.
Again, as owners/operators, who have bulk electrical system
responsibilities, I think those who might be able to impact the
bulk electric system should share in that responsibility.
Again, it goes to my point about visibility, also. One of
the things that was learned after '03, it was a cascading
blackout, but the system worked precisely the way it is
supposed to. The system failed safe.
Now, that doesn't change the fact that you haven't had a
chance to see ``The Lion King'' but it does show that cascaded
from Ohio up through Quebec into the northeast, stopped in New
York, didn't go down the entire Eastern seaboard. Spinning
equipment was not damaged and we were able to restore power
within a reasonable amount of time, 48 to 72 hours.
Again, not the best moment in the utility industry's
history, but a show of how resilient the system is in fact. I
want to make sure to maintain that resilience and don't want to
lose visibility or resilience because of a rapid proliferation
of DER.
Mr. Peters. Talk about the distributor or the stuff that's
outside the bulk power system. So, maybe a military micro grid
has better protections than the average household device.
But I am thinking, now you have these home devices. You
turn energy on and off. I assume that that is a point of
vulnerability and what do we do to make sure that the security
you talked about is, as you said, baked in? What is it that we
need to do? Is it standards or what would it be?
Mr. Aaronson. I think it is standards and requirements. We
talked earlier about the internet of things, and these are your
devices like a thermostat, like a refrigerator, like a baby
monitor, that are being put out at--I think about five and a
half million per day and by 2020 we are going to have something
like 20 billion of them connected to the internet.
And these things have hardwired passwords that are default
passwords. These things are easy to break, and if we are
talking about things that have any relationship to critical
infrastructure I think having that low a bar of security, that
consumer-grade electronics tend to have, is a concern for us in
the industry.
Dr. Beck. I would just add that, again, putting the
baseline standards is necessary but it also needs to be
customer driven.
Customers need to say I am not going to buy a device that
has hardwired passwords that I can't change and it's just the
name of the company or the device.
Mr. Peters. On the other hand, just take it at the most
basic level. Take someone who's putting solar on their roof.
They may not care. Why would they care about the larger grid?
What is going to be incentive for an individual customer to
talk about that?
Dr. Beck. Well, I think, again, it's trying to make
everyone aware that when you're this connected then your
vulnerability becomes someone else's problem, not just your
own, right.
So you can have negative impacts on your neighbors' other
systems if you don't care. So we have to get, again, people to
care about this in a broad sense.
Mr. Peters. All right. Well, I'll look forward to working
with that. My time is expired. Appreciate it. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Olson. Gentleman yields back.
The chair calls upon himself for 5 minutes and welcome to
our four witnesses. As a congressman from the state that
consumes the most energy in America, Texas, cyber-attacks on
our electric grid have caused me to lose sleep on occasion.
We all know about Russia's attack on Ukraine in December of
2015. That was kind of easy. They have e-mails of employees are
standard format, first name dot last name dot organization dot
com, dot org, something like that.
Got those, put attachments on those. Sent them back. Opened
up, they deploy and they shut down some circuit breakers.
As has happened charged said the response was all they
could do was film the attack with cell phones. Film the attack
with cell phones.
Now, I know that we're not like Ukraine. We are much more
advanced. But in the Navy, I was a pilot for 9 years. They
teach us to prepare for the worst, hope for the best.
And so, Mr. Aaronson, along those lines, hypothetically, if
the lights go out all over D.C. as this hearing ends--we are
attacked, a cyber-attack--what chain of events does that start
like that?
Mr. Aaronson. So that has happened before and in fact not
long ago there was a voltage dip that occurred because of a
fire at a substation and the lights, in fact in D.C., did go
out. And in that first hour it was unclear why. We knew about
some incidents around the greater metro area. But was it
terrorism?
This idea of fog of war in the midst of an outage, was it
something typical like a voltage dip and those things happen?
Was it an act of terrorism? Was it cyber? Was it physical?
Getting ground truth on that is hard and attribution is
hard. But having the mechanisms in place to talk to each other
is important.
So in that instance, and if there were something Ukraine-
like to happen here in the U.S., it's less about why the power
went out and more about simply restoring at that moment.
Ukraine was a great example, as are all of these incidents
that happen all over the world and here domestically, to get us
better at resilience and the idea is to take the lessons
learned, apply them and get better.
In the instance of your hypothetical, what would happen is
there would be an immediate high level of coordination between
the ESCC and CEOs in the industry along with senior government
officials and including Mr. Cauley and his team from the
Electricity Information Sharing Analysis Center.
In the case of the voltage dip a few years back, that also
resulted in a phone call with DHS on something known as the
NICCL, the National Incident Communications Coordination Line,
and that NICCL call actually had folks from both the affected
utility and DHS and White House leadership.
And what it allowed us to do was have White House
leadership, at the time Josh Earnest was the White House press
secretary, go to the podium from the most important podium in
the land and say this was not a terrorist attack. We knew what
was going on.
So that really tight coordination between senior government
officials and the industry proved itself to be just invaluable.
Mr. Olson. To recover how do you share those lessons
learned with government and industry to make sure that we learn
lessons from these attacks through incidents because that's an
important part of the whole process.
We are attacked. Whatever happens learn from it. So how,
Mr. Aaronson, how do we share that with industry, with the
federal government?Mr. Aaronson. Those mechanisms exist and
they are getting better all the time. I am particularly proud,
again, as part of the secretariat for the Electricity Subsector
Coordinating Council, the ESCC is a place where that happens.
But, again, the E-ISAC and Gerry's organization play a
significant role. The sector as a whole, we operate one big
machine with thousands of owners and operators. There is this
shared responsibility. So when a thing happens we are
particularly good at coming together, applying those lessons
and making sure that in the future a similar incident would
have either less impact or no impact at all.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Cauley, do you have an answer about
recovery?
Mr. Cauley. Usually what we are doing is as quick as
possible situation assessment, put the system back together. If
we have damaged equipment or computers, we will isolate those
and start putting the system back together as quickly as
possible.
Why reliability has gotten better the last 10 years is
because we are always learning from every single event, small,
medium, and large, and we get the information out to industry.
Mr. Olson. Good. Dr. Beck, add anything to those line of
questioning?
Dr. Beck. I think there is challenge in learning lessons
and protection of the herd because there is a natural tension
between restoration and attribution.
So to do attribution sort of like any crime scene, you
don't disturb the scene. You rope it off and then you analyze
it and try to figure out what happened, but that crime scene is
a broken down system that the operators want to restore.
They don't want to leave a mess that people can look
through. It's just a challenge. Nobody's wrong. Both things are
important, but coordinating on attribution could be important
certainly for a very sophisticated attack that may be
distributed and that we don't know where all it is embedded.
Mr. Olson. Ms. Sugg, anything to add from your perspective,
ma'am?
Ms. Sugg. From the ISO/RTO perspective, certainly we are
going to work closely with NERC and support the information-
sharing opportunities that exist to learn from these events.
In the midst of that crisis, our operators are going to be
looking for what's going on in a particular area of the
footprint. I believe Washington, D.C. is in the PJM footprint.
And so PJM operators are going to be looking for ways to
contain a particular system outage to keep it from having
broader cascading effects across their region. That's just one
of the responsibilities of reliability coordination within the
ISO/RTO community.
Mr. Olson. Well, thank you. I'll sleep better tonight, I
guarantee you.
One final question--you might know the incoming Secretary
of Energy is a guy from Texas, Governor Rick Perry. He's a
friend, and Governor Perry asked me to ask of you all, in his
new role over at Energy what is the one thing he can do, one
thing, to help you make our grid more secure, from DOE's
perspective? Your perspective on DOE?
Mr. Aaronson. I'll say it again. ESCC, working as closely
as possible with industry leadership, we have enjoyed a very
fruitful relationship with the Department of Energy because of
their senior leadership being committed to it and we look
forward to and know that Secretary Perry will continue that
tradition.
Mr. Olson. Anything else to add, Mr. Cauley?
Mr. Cauley. I will echo that. Just to get engaged with the
industry leadership. We have several meetings a year with high-
level folks from DOE, DHS and others, and we engage them in our
exercise.
We challenge them and make them uncomfortable, but we have
grown together in the last couple years and I think with the
change of administration we need to renew that.
Mr. Olson. Yes, sir. Dr. Beck, anything to add on that,
sir?
Dr. Beck. I would say, commensurate with the incoming
administration's emphasis on infrastructure that leadership be
shown there, and to pay attention to the electric and fuel
infrastructure that supports it and, again, to ensure that
security is part and parcel also with efficiency and
reliability so that they are on equal footing and that those
practices are embedded in any new infrastructure.
Our infrastructure should always be getting more secure as
it is upgraded. We can't be introducing or reintroducing old
vulnerabilities or introducing new ones.
Mr. Olson. Ms. Sugg, your comments.
Ms. Sugg. I would encourage continued collaboration across
the various industries that are dependent upon each other and I
would also encourage the DOE to continue to focus on developing
their cybersecurity frameworks that are made available to
utilities to help ensure that we are thinking about security
from soup to nuts and not just focused on the current threat or
the current issue on the front page of the paper.
Mr. Olson. Well, thank you all. On behalf of Governor
Perry, much obliged.
And my time is expired. I now recognize the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Doyle, for 5 minutes. He has departed, so I
guess it's going to be Ms. Castor from Florida for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning and thank you for being here today. Mr.
Cauley, to date the power grid in the United States has not
lost any service hours due to a cyber-attack, correct?
Mr. Cauley. Yes, ma'am. That is correct.
Ms. Castor. OK. Nevertheless, the electricity sector has
not been invulnerable to cyber-attacks. As recently as December
a utility in Riverside, California experienced a cyber event
that did not cause a blackout but potentially could have
affected grid reliability, according to an account on file at
the Department of Energy.
The same month, suspicious activity was detected on laptop
at a Vermont electric utility, which was not connected to the
grid.
Does NERC have data on cyber-attacks against utilities that
have not resulted in a loss of power on the grid?
Mr. Cauley. Yes, ma'am. We track pretty much every incident
and they are as small as incidents around a compromised laptop,
which both of these cases were.
They are connected to the corporate systems and the
business systems of the enterprise and not to the electrical
controls of the grid, and both of these were reported to us
through our regular reporting capability.
We understood what they were. Basically, the corporate side
of each utility is as exposed to the outside world as any other
business and you have to have that diligence around that and we
are also subject to human frailties, people going onto a
particular site so the idea is to continuously monitor, catch
those and fix those. But both of those organizations reported
to us.
They did the right thing and we were able to distribute
that information to the rest of the industry so that they could
look for the same kind of issue.
Ms. Castor. I think you're right. Oftentimes the weakest
components in security are the humans that have to interface
with the systems. Spear-phishing attacks have resulted in major
leaks when even savvy users relinquish their passwords.
And everyone is very concerned about what happened in the
Ukraine and I--this was a good little article by security
writer Kim Zetter.
Everything we know about Ukraine's power plant hack--that
the end of December two power distribution companies in Ukraine
said that hackers had hijacked their systems to cut power to
more than 80,000 people.
The intruders also sabotaged operator work stations on
their way out the digital door to make it harder to restore
electricity to customers.
The lights came back on in three hours in most cases but
the hackers had sabotaged management systems and workers had to
travel to substations to manually close breakers that hackers
had remotely opened.
And days after the outage Ukrainian officials appeared to
blame Russians for the attack, saying that Ukraine's
intelligence service had detected and prevented an intrusion
attempt by Russian special services against Ukraine's energy
infrastructure.
Speaking at the S4 security conference, former NSA and CIA
spy chief General Michael Hayden warned that the attacks were a
harbinger of things to come for the U.S. and that Russia and
North Korea were two of the most likely culprits if the U.S.
power grid were ever hit.
Now, what was interesting is utility operators in the
Ukraine began experiencing small attacks 6 months prior to the
main attack.
These included e-mails to utility operators containing
documents which installed malware. Could spear-phishing attacks
and other similar intrusions represent a vulnerability to grid
systems if hackers are able to identify information about grid
systems by first infiltrating the personal and business
information of the grid operators and what are we doing about
that?
Mr. Cauley. Well, spear-phishing, going to malicious sites,
picking up malware on a laptop or a computer is probably the
greatest vulnerability that we have and the most challenging to
manage.
I am pretty sure that the situation in the Ukraine would
not happen here, because they failed to really recognize
between March of 2015 and December 2015 we would not allow that
software to go unchecked and for the perpetrators to get
elevated credentials so they could actually operate the system.
Those are extreme violations of all our rules and all our
checks and balances and the controls that we have in place. I
don't view what failed there is that an operator clicked on the
wrong link.
I feel that the organizational and institutional framework
failed to have the rules in place to make sure that those are
constantly checked. Humans will make mistakes.
It should not last on a laptop more than hours or days
before they get detected and fixed. It takes months to
perpetrate a campaign like that, and it did in this case. But
you got to use that time to figure out you've been compromised
and fix it.
Ms. Castor. I appreciate that and I appreciate how all of
you today have expressed sincere understanding all of the
security facets of this.
But please be cognizant that a lot of this can start with
those innocuous looking smaller type of infiltrations and I
hope that you're talking with all of your personnel about that,
too.
I trust that you are. Thank you very much.
Mr. Olson. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The chair calls upon the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Murphy, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
panel, too.
First of all, I want to make sure we know in the record as
far as the Ukraine goes--a bigger threat to their grid is the
fact that Russia has invaded them and Russia has taken their
coal fields away and that Russia threatens every European
nation that is under the boot of Gazprom and that's what they
do and they say if you don't buy our gas from us and you don't
do this we are shutting off the pipes.
So that's a big concern, too. But doing it through a back
door avenue of a cyber-attack is important, something we all
should pay attention to and I hope that our new president
establishes good negotiations with President Putin so we can
get back to the work of doing other things.
But I wanted to ask about another area here. When it comes
to working with the cyber-attacks and prevention, et cetera, we
know that--I think it was Home Depot was hacked and they were
hacked because they went through some small level billing--an
HVAC system that didn't have the kind of protections. They
worked their way through those channels to finally get into
their----
Dr. Beck. That was Target.
Mr. Murphy. Oh, it was Target? OK. May have been they find
some little area that doesn't have strong defenses here. And so
I am wondering also in the utility sector and the power grid
sector what can the federal government do to help to enhance
cybersecurity, noting that someone may come in through any
door, any unprotected door in this.
Does anybody have any ideas of how this could be? Any
supplier to a power plant, any supplier that they could find
some weak link there? Mr. Aaronson, do you have a thought on
that?
Mr. Aaronson. So a couple of observations, and it brings in
Ms. Castor's point about humans also. The weakest links,
whether it is an unsavvy vendor, whether it is even a savvy
user, there is always the joke.
There is hardware vulnerabilities, there is software
vulnerabilities and there is wetware vulnerabilities, and we
are the wetware.
I think, going back to my original testimony, as owners and
operators we have to be right 100 percent of the time and the
adversary has to be right once, I think looking at the weakest
link shows that there are a lot of opportunities for the
adversary to be right.
But them being right does not have to be catastrophic. It
goes to this idea that Mr. Cauley was talking about of the
cyber kill chain.
Seeing early precursors to potentially more nefarious or
destructive activity, predictive analytics that help us to see
those and being more aggressive in that cyber kill chain to
both prepare, protect, and defend but then also being able to
respond and recover.
And to bring this back to Ukraine, while I agree with Mr.
Cauley that a similar attack in the United States is very
unlikely, but not impossible, I do think that the lesson that
we have learned from them is they were able to get their
200,000-plus customers back up and running within about 6
hours. They were operating in a degraded state but electricity
was still flowing.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. So let me ask this, though, because
with regard to the grid, do any of the larger customers have
any kind of other software and other controls that can pull off
the grid and demand more?
So if there was, obviously, not control of the power plant,
but do they have any kind of links than can affect if they are
not getting enough?
Do all those controls have to go back through the original
utility company and the power company on that grid if they
experience some problems?
Mr. Cauley. I think the general answer is that the system
is built to be very redundant and with excess capacity. So if
something is damaged or not behaving correctly it can be
removed and there is plenty of capacity to move energy around.
Mr. Murphy. Sure. I am wondering about the two-way
communication. I am also looking for other back doors in there,
too.
Two of the things that we have in Pittsburgh--one is the
Carnegie Mellon University computer emergency response--the
global leader in this and also there's another program there
called the National Cyber Forensic Training Alliance, which is
a room filled with lots of cubicles of businesses of every
shape and form, and when one picks up something they announce
it. It's like the stock exchange.
Someone says hey, I've got something here and they start
looking back and forth and see where these back doors--channels
are starting to probe--where's the Trojan horse running, et
cetera.
And I am wondering that it's one of the areas the federal
government can look at because sometimes we will silo these
off--let's work on DoD, Navy's going to do their thing, Army's
going to do their thing, Air Force is going to do their thing,
Commerce is going to do their thing, maybe different parts of
Energy.
I am wondering do we have enough cooperation between
different branches of the federal government and working at
these things together so are we creating more inefficiencies in
our system.
Dr. Beck, go ahead.
Dr. Beck. Well, it's still a challenge. So I talked about
the silos before. But I would say no but it is improving. The
information sharing needs to be done with regard to sharing
research, with regard to what are the problems you're trying to
solve.
Mr. Murphy. This may be part of the lesson to take back to
the new secretary of energy, that people have to be willing to
play together in the same sandbox and share their toys.
Dr. Beck. Right. So you have DOE labs and you have DoD labs
and they don't talk to each other very much, but they could
with leadership and they end up working on similar problems and
find out later wow, we have a military application. We had a
problem here but 90 percent of that problem might be relevant
for a civilian electric power grid.
It takes the ability to share information at least at a
high level and then be able to dig in and share that possibly
if it's classified but at a more technical level as well.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I appreciate that. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Olson. Gentleman's time has expired. The chair calls
upon the gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Welcome to our panelists. This subcommittee heard from
Secretary Moniz about the interdependence of our critical
infrastructure.
And from what we heard this morning, it sounds like there
is agreement that the security of our grid infrastructure is
particularly important because of so many other sectors relying
upon it. Is that a fair assessment?
Mr. Cauley. Yes, sir, and we drive that out when we do our
exercise and we break everything down. Financial sector,
transportation, telecommunications, water--we are as dependent
on them as they are on us.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Thank you. And while I appreciate the focus
on increasing security and mitigating cyber risks, I am also
interested in knowing more about procedures in case there is a
major cyber-attack.
So, thankfully, our country has not had any major cyber
incidents that have needed response but we have had major
natural disasters. I would cite as an example in my home state
of New York we dealt with Superstorm Sandy in 2012.
What specific lessons have been learned from the response
to major natural disasters that may be applicable to a future
cyber-related response effort?
Mr. Aaronson. So I think it's fair to say that the lessons
in coordination, because we have not had an opportunity outside
of exercises to necessarily exercise and stretch those muscles
with respect to a cyber incident. They have grown up with
respect to natural disasters and a couple physical security
incidents as well.
That partnership is invaluable. I look at the role that the
Electricity Information Sharing Analysis Center plays. I look
at the role that the Sector Coordinating Council plays in
coordinating with the highest levels of the industry.
I look at our partnership with DOE, who operates under
emergency support function 12. Not only are they our sector-
specific agency, but they are the electric sector's entre into
the rest of the federal government enterprise, working closely
with DHS, working closely with FEMA, working closely with the
Department of Defense.
A great example was Superstorm Sandy, when we did have the
opportunity not just to help inform but actually be in the
interagency room and help to direct resources where they needed
to be directed. So taking information from affected utilities
and feeding it into the government and taking information from
the government and feeding it back to affected utilities, that
same battle rhythm would be seen in the event of a cyber
incident as well.
Mr. Tonko. So the intercommunication is important and I see
you all kind of nodding in regard to that. So do you feel the
procedures, the equipment, the personnel are in place in order
to respond to a major cyber incident today?
Mr. Aaronson. I think the proper answer is it depends.
That's always the proper answer. No, I mean, to give some
modicum of comfort, yes. I think these relationships and these
processes and these exercises have really informed and these
experiences have really informed the industry's not just
security posture, but response posture.
I do think there is the added complication with cyber of
data assurance, knowing that the data you are reacting to is
the right information or has not been compromised in some way.
So we are very cognizant of those challenges.
But I do think just simply having that underlying
foundation of partnership and response capabilities makes us
fairly well prepared and getting better all the time. That's
the goal.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Dr. Beck, did you want to say something?
Dr. Beck. I would say I largely agree with that but, again,
with particular respect to cybersecurity, there are additional
challenges to expanding mutual assistance, which the industry
has a long history of.
When it's a physical system--your example of Superstorm
Sandy, those were mostly downed poles and lines. The equipment
was standard. The repair techniques and knowledge was standard.
Within any utility's OT system you're going to see more
variation than you are between poles and lines. And couple that
with Mr. Rush's point earlier about a smaller cyber workforce.
It's a resource challenge. I applaud ESCC for taking it up.
But it is more challenging than traditional mutual
assistance.
Mr. Tonko. Let me just quickly get this in. You all partner
with the Departments of Energy and Homeland Security and,
obviously, they provide a lot of expertise.
But can you discuss your relationship with state and local
governments? And I would just throw the caveat out of New York,
again, working to develop their own cybersecurity capabilities.
They've done this with the National Guard.
Both New York and New Jersey National Guards have created a
partnership to form a cyber protection team. Just your response
to that, please.
Mr. Aaronson. So I was remiss in not mentioning, as Dr.
Beck did, the cyber mutual assistance program and agree
completely with his assessment that it is in its nascent stages
and mutual assistance in its traditional form was born under
the crucible of lots and lots of incidents of natural disasters
over the years.
The same will be true of cyber, and to bring it to your
question about state and local, a state chief information
officer once said to me states are the consequence people. And
you certainly see experiences where governors and the local,
national, and the state National Guard work very closely with
their utilities.
Those partnerships are in place. The cyber mutual
assistance program is leveraging those relationships for two
reasons: one, states are the consequence people; two, the
National Guard has some extraordinary capabilities that can
help augment and complement and supplement the capabilities
that the industry brings to bear with its cyber mutual
assistance program.
So I would say working closely with governors at the
highest level, I would say working with operators and helping
to bolster the cyber mutual assistance program with the Guard
and then I would say sharing information at the local level
through fusion centers.
And, again, there are 73 fusion centers across the country.
The joke has always been if you've seen one fusion center
you've seen one fusion center, but they are increasingly better
at coordinating amongst each other at the state level and
giving us yet one more tool to share information and better
respond in the event of an incident.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Olson. Gentleman's time has expired. The chair calls
upon the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Harper, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to each of
you for being here. This is such an important topic as we go
forward so I appreciate all the input each of you have given.
Mr. Cauley, if I may ask you a couple of questions here. Is
the North American Electric Reliability Corporation's alert
system working as intended to provide the concise actionable
security information to the electric industry?
Mr. Cauley. Yes, sir, it is, and we are able to get out
information very quickly if needed, within an hour if needed,
and it gets to all of the owners and operators of the system
with the specific information and they have access to it
directly.
So we are always looking to make it better. I think in the
Ukraine and the internet of things incident that we saw in the
last 12 months we have learned to scale.
We can get thousands of people now on a conference call and
let them know immediately what's going on, including the CEOs
and others.
Mr. Harper. What are the threats outside the bulk power
system?
Mr. Cauley. The threats to the grid outside the bulk power
system?
Mr. Harper. Yes.
Mr. Cauley. Well, I think we touched on it earlier. There
are much more electronic digital devices that exist in the
distribution system and then customer systems that I think are
going to increasingly have an influence on the overall grid.
Mr. Harper. Let me just follow up just a little bit. As you
previously stated, the North American Electric Reliability
Corporation uses an alert system to notify the electricity
industry of the issues or problems.
You note that North American Electric Reliability
Corporation determines the appropriate alert notification based
on the risk to the bulk power system. How do you determine the
risk or the level of that risk?
Mr. Cauley. We have expert folks on both the cyber side as
well as the operational side of the grid to know what the
potential impacts might be and this is actually one of the
particular values that we add in our relationship with
Department of Energy, DHS, and the FBI is they often ask us
what does this mean and how would it affect the grid if it
actually happened.
So we have both sides of that expertise and we have people
who work in classified space to interpret what it means and
what the potential downside could be if this actually happened.
Mr. Harper. OK. Obviously, other business sectors depend
upon electricity. We have discussed that. But can you explain
how the electric sector is dependent and reliant on other
sectors and what is the industry doing to reach out and address
these interdependencies for better cybersecurity?
Mr. Cauley. Well, we are reaching out to the other sectors.
I think the dominant one is the telecommunications industry
because a lot of our control systems, the ones I mentioned
earlier, were so essential that we want to protect the most run
over communications networks.
The majority of those are privately owned by us through
services with some of the major vendors. But if those systems
go down, and you look at the example of Hurricane Sandy when
some of the major telecommunication suppliers had vaults in
buildings in Manhattan that were flooded with water, we
depended very much on those communications capabilities.
Water, transportation--finance is one you might not think
about but if there is a severe enough event utilities need the
liquidity to get everything done and recover and pay their
folks and pay for the emergency housing and things like that.
So there are a lot of dependencies that we are working on
through the expanded relationship that Mr. Aaronson had talked
about of getting the same level of CEO support that we have in
the electricity industry.
We want to get with those other sectors and get them all in
the room with the government folks that we need to work with to
make sure we are communicating and coordinating and planning
together.
Mr. Harper. Well, I want to commend each of you on the
level of cooperation and communication that you share and
appreciate the effort that you're making.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Sarbanes, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
panel.
I am trying to get my head around how much of these efforts
to protect the grid from cyber threats and so forth is an
exercise in kind of retrofitting what we have versus trying to
build these protections in as new technologies and new
components of the grid are rolled out. And I don't know if
there is any way you can quantify or address it in some other
fashion. Yes.
Ms. Sugg. So you're right. The bulk of the standards and
requirements are retrofitting to mitigate risks and identify
and manage vulnerabilities and what not.
I applaud NERC's efforts to get ahead of the supply chain
challenges that we have to develop standards. You know, the
industry itself has moved forward.
The ISO/RTO council has put specific requirements in place
for our control system vendors ahead of there being a standard
that says you should have some secure coding practices for your
control system vendors.
But it's not just software vendors. It's also hardware
vendors. And then a comment made earlier about, I think it was
Dr. Beck, about the importance of educating the consumer on
those smaller devices.
I think we should put more emphasis on the manufacturers as
well and really hold them accountable for developing things
that are easy to maintain security with, not things that you
just plug in and forget about, with the control systems and all
of the systems within our organizations, not just those that
NERC has put some mandated controls around but for all of those
systems.
We have a responsibility and accountability to keep them
current and to address vulnerabilities at all times. But that
doesn't exist, to my knowledge, when you get outside of the
industry.
And so I think we have to go back to the manufacturers and
perhaps the equipment needs to be certified or----
Mr. Sarbanes. Is it feasible to think in terms of, in a
sense, cordoning off some of the consumer component of this
internet of all things grid that's developing from more of the
traditional infrastructure as a practical matter?
Do we just have to accept the notion that somebody's
thermostat somewhere in their house can be a path all the way
to shutting down some regional generator or something?
Mr. Cauley. I think to a large extent we do that already
because the most critical assets are in the bulk power system.
So you can picture a grid with the major control center and
a lot of substations. We are trying to firewall it off, import
multiple layers of protection.
So the image that comes to my mind is sort of a shuttle
going through space and it's just getting bombarded all the
time. So we are getting bombarded all the time and they are
usually hitting the shield.
And as was mentioned earlier, sometimes the frailty is a
human being enables something to get through. But so we are
doing that.
A long-term question as a country that you're kind of
raising, which is a lot of the electronics comes with huge
capabilities. We used to buy a relay for the system and it
would just be a couple of contacts and a coil of copper wire.
Now you get a box and it has 10,000 lines of code because
it can do anything and everything that you want. Well, that
philosophy really permeates everything in the consumer side, in
the distribution systems and in the bulk power system.
We are getting electronics that can do everything. The
difficulty there is then it can be reprogrammed to do anything
anyone else wants.
All right. So I think we have to think about long-term
partnership with suppliers, vendors, and manufacturers in terms
of building better security into systems, making sure we are
able to manage a purpose and have those be beneficial purposes
and not adverse purposes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Right. You have kind of a bundling problem.
Get this thing and it can do all of this neat stuff that I
don't necessarily need and could introduce a vulnerability that
I won't notice because I never use that feature.
Mr. Aaronson. Just to sort of piggyback on some of that, I
think we don't have the luxury of doing the ostrich thing and
putting our heads in the ground.
Smarter energy infrastructure is here to stay and it serves
a really important purpose and I think customers and consumers
want it and are going to deploy and, again, utility scale and
just industry in general sees the value.
We talked about distributed resources, having a impact on
resiliency. They are both a good one and a bad one, and I think
instead of trying to fully cordon off I think the most critical
assets instead we need to look at segmentation and awareness of
the vulnerabilities that are introduced and additional
resilience to ensure that a problem at one node is not a
catastrophic problem, more broadly.
And again, I think some of the standards that are already
in place and some of the approaches to the promulgation of
distributed resources are going in the right direction.
Mr. Sarbanes. I yield back. Thanks.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back. The chair calls upon
the gentleman from West Virginia, Mr. McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This issue has come up literally every year since I've been
in this committee for the last 6 years and I keep being told
that everything is going to be fine, that we have got things
under control.
Two years ago we had Tom Siebel with C3 Energy testify
before us and Mr. Siebel said, it was kind of shocking to me,
he said, I could--any hostile country--and he said as a matter
of fact I could take 10 engineers from U.C. Berkeley and I
could shut down the electric grid between Boston and New York
within four days.
Now, that was after all the testimony about all the
safeguards we had in place. So is Mr. Siebel wrong?
Mr. Aaronson. So I guess I'd push back on the premise a
bit. He is not wrong in that, and I don't think any of us today
are saying it's 100 percent under control.
I think, as I mentioned, it is an ongoing effort to
continue to improve our defenses to respond to incidents
internationally and domestically and to apply those here. You
have two options.
You can be a good example or you can be a cautionary tale
and, fortunately, there are a lot of cautionary tales out there
about how a sophisticated, well-informed threat actor with a
purpose can have an impact on grid operations.
I think what I would say is while an attack that has an
impact is always within the realm of the possible, the
resilience and redundancy that has grown up and the ability to
respond that continues to evolve makes me a lot more
comfortable in our ability to deal with these.
Mr. McKinley. We took that theme, that concept back--we had
a cybersecurity summit back in West Virginia and we had some
180 people attending, almost 200 people, in panels from all
across the country, people coming in.
They all agree that we are still very vulnerable. This
exercise that we go through, talking about and telling us we
are OK. They are saying from the inside we are not.
So I am still going to remain uncomfortable--it goes back a
little bit to what Johnny Wooden used to say when he was
coaching the UCLA Bruins, that we often in America confuse
effort with accomplishment. And I am afraid we are doing an
awful lot of effort.
We are showing up daily, talking about it. But I am not
comfortable yet and neither were the other people on the panel
that we hosted.
So if I could now go to Ms. Sugg. One of the other
testimony we had not too long ago here was from PJM and they
said notwithstanding the problems that we have with
cybersecurity but the bigger issue that we have with our
electric grid is the electric magnetic pulse, EMP.
Do you agree with that, that it's as much of a threat as
cyber, or worse?
Ms. Sugg. I think the probability of that occurring is much
lower. However, the impact of it, if it were to happen, is much
larger than a cyber-attack. So it is a concern.
We are working with the vertically integrated utilities who
actually own the physical equipment to understand what sort of
protections and redundancies and things that they need to have
in place.
Our dependency on the telecommunication industry is
certainly a concern there because if there were a significant
EMP event it would take out the telecommunications.
And while we have a lot of redundancy in
telecommunications, if it were all to go out then we'd have to
relinquish the controls that we have back to the utilities
themselves to help manage the grid.
But I know Dr. Beck is an expert on the EMP. I'll be
interested in his additional comments.
Mr. McKinley. If you could. We are running out of time on
this.
Dr. Beck. Sure. Well, just quickly, they are both
definitely an issue. We will just say on the one hand we have
cyber-attacks, which are happening right now while we are
having this conversation, right, versus EMP attacks getting the
bullet for the EMP attack is difficult whereas getting the
bullet for a cyber-attack you can go out and buy it right now
on any criminal hacker web site.
So there is a much different proliferation concern. The
footprints could be quite similar. You can distribute a cyber-
attack quite broadly as you could with an HEMP attack and also
the similarity in that similar types of systems can be
attacked. Any computer network could be susceptible to any EMP.
It could be susceptible to cyber.
Mr. McKinley. In respect for the time I had some other
questions. Let me just close with a--I would hope, given the
confusion out there, that we could possibly just show us what
accomplishments, if periodically we get briefed on different
terrorism attacks.
If 56 were stopped last month or somehow to show that
whatever you're doing on cybersecurity is working. Because when
I have these panels they don't think it is.
So I need to have something back to be able to support
that. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Olson. Gentleman yields back.
The chair calls upon the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
the panel for being here with us today.
Mr. Aaronson, some have expressed concern that the recent
episode with the electric utility in Vermont will cause
industry officials to avoid or think twice about sharing
information with the government in fear that it could be
leaked.
Trust, as we all know, is a two-way street, and while we
need to ensure that industry officials are properly
implementing and carrying out federal cybersecurity standards
and regulations, the government must be a trustful cooperative
partner.
What can be done, in your opinion, if anything, to improve
this relationship and build trust, moving forward?
Mr. Aaronson. I appreciate the question. The first thing
I'll say is it would be helpful if sensitive information shared
in confidence was not shared then with the media.
Mr. Johnson. Hope you're better at it than we are here. Go
ahead.
Mr. Aaronson. Well, I will say up to the moment that there
was a front-page article in the Washington Post, I would
suggest that the information sharing associated with the
Vermont incident went perfectly.
There was actionable intelligence from government
officials, shared with the Sector Coordinating Council. We
brought together more than 30 CEOs onto a phone call within
about 4 hours.
That information was then cascaded broadly throughout the
sector at a very senior level and at the operative level both
through the Sector Coordinating Council and the E-ISAC.
Utilities across the sector took that information, compared it
against their systems and what do you know, some potential
indicators of compromise were found. That is exactly the way
it's supposed to happen.
To answer your question about will this have a chilling
effect on information sharing, I don't believe it will. I think
because of the industry's commitment to and responsibility to
help each other as we operate this one big machine together,
there is a sense of responsibility to continue to share
information even in the face of potential breach of or a
potential disclosure to public sources.
But we are looking at what happened at the end of last year
as a teachable moment and one that we hope isn't replicated.
And I will give the Burlington Electric Department a ton of
credit. They said in their statement that they would not let
this episode chill their intent to continue to share
information.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Good. Well, thank you for that. Anybody
else want to comment on that? I've got a couple of other
questions. OK.
Let's talk about information sharing a little bit and we
will just go down the line for any that want to respond.
Why do you think situational awareness and information
sharing is so necessary to enhance the electricity sector's
ability to prepare for and respond to cyber and physical
threats and vulnerabilities?
So why is situational awareness and information sharing so
necessary? Mr. Cauley.
Mr. Cauley. I think the main reason is that one company's
only going to view their own experience and what they see. So
if a company has one laptop compromised they think, well, that
laptop got compromised, somebody must have pushed the wrong
button.
But we are able to put together hundreds of specific
instances, look at patterns over time and I think one of the
capabilities we have through CRISP and through our analytics is
to see patterns of connection points of internet locations,
signatures of compromise, and things like that.
We can see a pattern over 3 months, 6 months, 18 months in
some cases and you can see what they are doing. You can
actually watch what's evolving in a very big picture.
So I think that's really the multiplier effect of being
able to get everybody's data and to be able to share. We share
through the DOE lab. We work the CRISP program.
On the back end of that is the Pacific Northwest lab. They
have people working classified space, helping us analyze the
data. So for us to be able to get that, what does it mean, what
are people trying to do to us, what should we look for, we turn
around and give that back to industry.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Aaronson. In the interest of time, I will say Gerry is
spot on and I would just add one more thing Ms. Sugg said
earlier which is, I love this quote, I wrote it down:
``Someone's detection is someone else's protection.''
And I think everything that happens is a lesson for the
rest of the industry. Applying it helps make us all more
secure.
Mr. Johnson. See something, say something.
Mr. Aaronson. There it is.
Mr. Johnson. There you go.
Dr. Beck. I think situational awareness, even in the
broadest terms, is important. So whether knowing about a
certain attack at a certain utility, that whether or not it
needs to be defended against by a different utility it's just
important to have visibility to those reports to understand,
this situation is happening or the frequency of attacks or that
people are reporting it I think that just raises the
consciousness of keeping your eye on this particular ball.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Ms. Sugg.
Ms. Sugg. Very quickly, the NERC alert system certainly has
picked up in frequency of alerting. As Mr. Cauley mentioned
earlier, given the understanding that we need to be thinking
about events at any level no matter how small, one of the
things that makes it particularly useful to us, I believe, is
the accountability to respond to it.
So it's not just a matter of, oh, I received some
information and maybe I'll study that someday. But NERC puts
requirements around--you must read this, you must look at these
things and you must report back, and I think that that helps to
ensure that if there are vulnerabilities somewhere that some
utility has found that they are responsible for addressing
those and reporting that back to NERC.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Great. Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thanks
for indulging.
Mr. Olson. Gentleman yields back. The chair calls upon the
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Walberg, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
panel for being here.
Coming from Michigan and my district, bordering Canada, I
was just interested to know that since this grid is a North
American grid, could you please describe, Mr. Aaronson, how
utility industry coordinates with our northern neighbors on
cyber and grid security.
Mr. Aaronson. Sure, and I'll rely on Gerry a little bit,
too, given NERC's responsibility as the North American
Electrical Reliability Corporation.
For the Sector Coordinating Council, the Canadian
Electricity Association has been a integral part of that
relationship as has the Canadian government. We have had not
just the Department of Energy and Department of Homeland
Security here in the United States but Natural Resources Canada
and Public Safety Canada, their counterparts respectively north
of the border.
Given that this is a North American grid, we are all
operating the same machine together, number one. Number two,
you've seen in instances of particularly natural disasters
where it's not just crews and bucket trucks from the United
States descending on affected areas but from north of the
border as well.
And then also with our nascent, but growing cyber mutual
assistance program, there have been Canadian utilities as part
of that relationship also.
Mr. Walberg. Mr. Cauley.
Mr. Cauley. So to us they are equally engaged in all of our
programs. We actually have representation on the coordinating
council at the CEO level.
They participated in the ISAC. They follow our standards
and so they are equal partners. We share information with them.
They've had some things happen in Canada that we have not seen,
like an airplane flying over lines and dropping wire on line.
So somebody was disgruntled and decided to launch their own
attack out of an airplane. But we share that among ourselves
and we are able to basically learn from each other and they are
equal partners and I think all the ISOs in Canada are run
highly competent systems with the similar controls we have on
the U.S. systems.
Mr. Walberg. Continuing on, Mr. Cauley, with some concerns
about the relationships with Canada and ourselves from my state
specifically, there is a growing number of interdependencies
between power generation and natural gas, pipelines included.
The two industries are similar but are different in some
ways. How are you addressing power generation resilience to
avoid single points of failure and what opportunities do you
see, moving forward?
Mr. Cauley. It's a very timely topic for us. We have
actually been doing some recent analysis and we are in the
processing of publishing a report to look at key parts of the
gas infrastructure system that we depend on.
We have now three of our eight regions that have more than
50 percent of the power supplied by natural gas. And so
pipelines and storage facilities do create vulnerabilities and
I think not just from a physical perspective in terms of
competition with retail gas customers in extreme weather but
also from a cyber perspective where physical attack disruptions
could cascade over into electric power.
So it's high on our list of priorities and the one thing we
do encourage is diversity in fuel and we encourage
infrastructure and I think this is the partnership between us
and Canada and the growing partnership with the infrastructure
in Mexico which we are involved in will help us ensure our
energy security through exchange of gas and electricity and
renewables and all kinds of resources.
Mr. Walberg. And, hopefully, along with that concept,
moving back to a more robust standard of all of the above in
generation and fuels.
I know there has been a push that's pushed, at least in my
district, the energy district of the state, away from having
that robust opportunity for an all above standard.
Mr. Cauley, let me just in the remaining few seconds here,
how is NERC and the industry working to develop policies to
encourage use of system components that will be less vulnerable
to attack?
And follow that up, what the Department of Energy is doing
in this front as well and how you're working with them?
Mr. Cauley. Well, our standards, and I think the experience
that we are learning with feeding back industry encourage
better protection.
One of the things that we are seeing directly is greater
diversity of equipment and basically reducing the criticality
of an individual station or piece of equipment and creating
redundancies in the system to make us less vulnerable.
So I think there is a lot of examples like that where
people are reacting to being more secure and building it into
the architecture and design of their systems.
Mr. Walberg. I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman yields back.
We saved the best for last. The chair calls upon the
gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and to
the panel thanks very much for being here today. It's very,
very informative.
I know that the other juries that we have had in the past
year and two, I should say, that you know, this is a very, very
important topic.
It's a very, very serious topic, and if I could start with
you, Mr. Aaronson, if I could ask this. You mentioned in your
testimony that you're working with DOE to determine the scope
and process for emergency orders.
Would you expand on that conversation and provide insight
as to whether there would be further action from Congress at
this time?
Mr. Aaronson. I don't know about further action from
Congress yet. I mentioned earlier that the notice of proposed
rulemaking was put out a few months ago.
We have a due date actually of this coming Monday, February
6th, to get comments in. Those comments are helping to inform
the process of what an emergency order from the Secretary of
Energy might look like.
I think the most important thing, and it is built into the
NOPR, is this idea of consultation. The law said consultation
with the sector where practicable.
Practicable to us is a little concerning, given that any
emergency order that doesn't take into account how grid
operators actually operate the system could have unintended
consequences.
So that is a point that we are making in this response to
the rulemaking to help inform the process. But I do think that
given all of the great relationship we have with the secretary
of energy and, frankly, just the Department of Energy in
general as our sector-specific agency we are confident that
they understand us, we understand them and think we can work
productively with them to implement that emergency authority.
Mr. Latta. OK. Thank you. Let me follow up, and this has
been touched on a little bit before. You said something kind of
interesting that I wrote down.
You mentioned earlier about the vulnerabilities that the--
that are potentially a concern through the internet of things,
and if you could expand a little bit on that work and also with
the electricity infrastructure sharing and analysis center and
beginning to fix those risks.
But then you said this. I thought, this is kind of
interesting. You said you were on a journey without a
destination. That's not real comforting as we are going down
that road.
Mr. Aaronson. Maybe I should pick a better cliche.
Mr. Latta. I write those things down.
Mr. Aaronson. But the point I am getting across is there is
no such thing as 100 percent security. So we are constantly
evolving and I think that is a good thing.
If we became stagnant and just relied on this culture of
compliance and, yes, we are secure, we would not be able to be
responsive to new and emerging threats.
So, it's the old joke--I don't have to be faster than the
bear, I just have to be faster than the other guy. There is
another cliche to add to that--the hit list.
But what we were doing is constantly trying to stay ahead
of the adversary and they have intent and capabilities but we
do too.
And I think I am particularly proud of the industry's
culture of constantly reinventing and looking at its security
posture, seeing where there are gaps, using exercises like
GridEx, using observations from things that happen overseas and
here at home and learning from those and then applying them to
make us better.
And to Mr. McKinley who I am sorry isn't here, I agree I
love the wooden quote of effort does not equal accomplishment.
But I would say there have been a number of accomplishments
from putting in place spare equipment programs to creating a
cyber mutual assistance program to doing a better job of
sharing information to developing the cyber risk information
sharing program and applying it from a DOE lab into a
commercial application.
So a lot of stuff that is happening in a very short amount
of time because of the CEO leadership of the Sector
Coordinating Council.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Ms. Sugg, if I could go back to what
you also said. You said that innovation is important. Are we
meeting that innovation to make sure we keep up the standards
to make sure that we meet these potential threats?
Ms. Sugg. Well, innovation is certainly changing faster
than the standards are changing, hence my comments about
ensuring that the standards are not overly prescriptive but are
more focused on the risk.
Innovation is important whether it be trying to understand
the threat avenues from our attackers or understanding the
newer and more interesting technologies that are coming to bear
that may provide some additional securities for us beyond what
we have today.
We don't ever want to be really comfortable with our
architecture that we have in place. We need to continue to look
at opportunities to strengthen it, depending on what
technologies are available and matching that up with where the
threats seem to be coming in and how we can try to get ahead of
that.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, my time has expired and I yield back.
Mr. Olson. Gentleman yields back and the chair would like
to have one invitation for the witnesses.
If you want to see a robust grid security in action at a
small level, come to Houston, Texas this weekend. There is this
big football game called Super Bowl 51. It's not a power grid,
but as you can imagine, if the power goes down right as the
Falcons are about to score that touchdown to beat the Patriots,
there will be a riot of biblical proportions. Invitation does
not come with tickets, and that'll cost you a pretty penny.
But seeing no further members wishing to ask questions, I
want to thank all of our witnesses for your participation in
today's hearing.
And pursuant to committee rules, I remind members that they
have 10 business days to submit additional questions for the
record and ask the witnesses to submit their responses in 10
business days upon receipt of the questions.
Mr. Rush, before you leave I ask for uanimous consent that
a statement for the record from the Large Public Power Council
and a statement from the American Public Power Association and
NRECA be put in the record.
Without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:49 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
