- POWERING AMERICA: EXAMINING THE STATE OF THE ELECTRIC INDUSTRY THROUGH MARKET PARTICIPANT PERSPECTIVES

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

POWERING AMERICA: EXAMINING THE STATE OF THE ELECTRIC INDUSTRY THROUGH
MARKET PARTICIPANT PERSPECTIVES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 18, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-45

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

26-883                   WASHINGTON : 2018
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            GENE GREEN, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                       Massachusetts
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             TONY CARDENAS, California
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           RAUL RUIZ, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
Subcommittee on Energy

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               SCOTT H. PETERS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             GENE GREEN, Texas
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                       Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota               officio)
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     4
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     8

Witnesses

Joseph T. Kelliher, Executive Vice President, Federal Regulatory
Affairs, NextEra Energy, Inc...................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Answers to submitted questions...............................   122
Lisa G. McAlister, Senior Vice President and General Counsel For
Regulatory Affairs, American Municipal Power, Inc..............    20
Prepared statement...........................................    22
Answers to submitted questions...............................   124
Steven Schleimer, Senior Vice President of Government &
Regulatory Affairs, Calpine....................................    43
Prepared statement...........................................    45
Answers to submitted questions...............................   133
Jackson Reasor, Chief Executive Officer, Old Dominion Electric
Cooperative....................................................    54
Prepared statement...........................................    56
Answers to submitted questions...............................   135
Tamara Linde, Executive Vice President and General Counsel,
Public Service Enterprise Group, Inc...........................    66
Prepared statement...........................................    68
Answers to submitted questions...............................   143
Kenneth D. Schisler, Vice President of Regulatory and Government
Affairs, EnerNOC...............................................    77
Prepared statement...........................................    79
Answers to submitted questions...............................   146
Alex Glenn, Senior Vice President of State and Federal Regulatory
Legal Support, Duke Energy Corporation.........................    83
Prepared statement...........................................    85
Answers to submitted questions...............................   150

POWERING AMERICA: EXAMINING THE STATE OF THE ELECTRIC INDUSTRY THROUGH
MARKET PARTICIPANT PERSPECTIVES

----------

TUESDAY, JULY 18, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2123 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Fred Upton
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Upton, Olson, Barton, Shimkus,
Murphy, Latta, McKinley, Kinzinger, Griffith, Johnson, Long,
Bucshon, Flores, Mullin, Hudson, Cramer, Walberg, Walden (ex
officio), Rush, McNerney, Peters, Green, Castor, Sarbanes,
Tonko, Loebsack, Schrader, Kennedy, Butterfield, and Pallone
(ex officio).
Staff present: Elena Brennan, Legislative Clerk, Energy/
Environment; Adam Buckalew, Professional Staff Member, Health;
Karen Christian, General Counsel; Kelly Collins, Staff
Assistant; Wyatt Ellertson, Research Associate, Energy/
Environment; Adam Fromm, Director of Outreach and Coalitions;
Tom Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy/Environment; A.T.
Johnston, Senior Policy Advisor, Energy; Alex Miller, Video
Production Aide and Press Assistant; Mark Ratner, Policy
Coordinator; Annelise Rickert, Counsel, Energy; Dan Schneider,
Press Secretary; Sam Spector, Policy Coordinator, Oversight and
Investigations; Jason Stanek, Senior Counsel, Energy; Madeline
Vey, Policy Coordinator, Digital Commerce and Consumer
Protection; Priscilla Barbour, Minority Energy Fellow; Jeff
Carroll, Minority Staff Director; David Cwiertny, Minority
Energy/Environment Fellow; Rick Kessler, Minority Senior
Advisor and Staff Director, Energy and Environment; Alexander
Ratner, Minority Policy Analyst; and Tuley Wright, Minority
Energy and Environment Policy Advisor.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. It is my understanding that Mr. Rush is coming
in the door, so we will now come to order at the subcommittee
and the chair will recognize himself for an opening statement.
So I am certainly pleased to be here today to kick off this
first of many hearings focused on America's electricity system.
And as many in this room are aware, this committee has had an
extensive history overseeing the nation's power sector. In
fact, the namesake of this very building, Speaker Rayburn,
worked as the chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee to
pass the Federal Power Act back in 1935, a law which continues
to serve as the legal foundation of America's electricity
system.
More recently, the committee was instrumental in the
discussion and actions resulting in the creation of organized
wholesale electricity markets and other power market reforms
ensuring that rates continue to be just and reasonable. I can
confidently say that this committee's efforts to oversee the
nation's power sector must remain ongoing, as the ever-changing
nature of the U.S. electricity system guarantees that there
will always be new challenges to solve and new opportunities to
seize.
With that in mind, I am excited to launch a new set of
Energy and Commerce hearings today entitled Powering America
series. This series of hearings is going to take a
comprehensive look at recent developments and challenges in the
way that we generate, transmit, and consume electricity in the
U.S. and today's hearing will give us the opportunity to
examine the state of the electric industry through the
perspective of various market participants.
After hearing from each of these marketing participants
this morning, we are going to be holding a second Powering
America series hearing next week where we are going to be
receiving testimony from each of the RTOs and ISOs who are
responsible for operating America's regional wholesale
electricity markets. It should also be said that in the coming
months we are going to be announcing additional hearings in
this series which will focus on more in-depth topics and issues
related to the U.S. electricity system.
Joining us in today's discussion we have a full range of
experts representing a wide range of stakeholders from across
the electric sector and I would like to welcome them and thank
them for being here.
As I am sure that each of our witnesses will attest to, the
nation's electricity industry and system is undergoing a
significant period of transformation. This transformation is
affecting the composition of the country's electricity
generation mix, the way that industry and regulators are
approaching grid reliability, and how federal energy policies
are interacting with state policies. Many of the recent
developments and changes within the electricity sector are
creating tremendous benefits for American consumers.
U.S. electricity prices are low, employment within the
energy sector continues to rise, and advanced technologies are
giving consumers more control over how they interact with the
grid. And it is safe to say that the American electricity
industry is a world leader and deserves more credit for the
amazing work that they do.
With that being said, I know that the U.S. electricity
system is not perfect nor will it ever be. The electricity
industry is facing dynamic challenges in an uncertain future.
The witnesses before us today have serious ideas on how
electricity markets and energy policies can be improved, and
this committee welcomes those ideas and is eager to engage in a
meaningful discussion as to how we can strengthen the grid and
how to provide greater value to consumers.
No one here is under the illusion that these issues will be
understood and addressed in one or two hearings. The U.S.
electricity system is the largest, most complex collection of
machines and computers in the world and are influenced by a
staggering number of stakeholders.
These electricity systems issue are complicated and in
order to address them it will require an extended effort by
this committee and by the Congress. Moreover, tackling these
issues will require a bipartisan effort, which is why we have
worked with our colleagues on both sides of the aisle in
planning and conducting this hearing.
Reliable, affordable, clean energy is a vital component of
every American's life. Going forward, we have got to strive to
enhance the generation, delivery, and marketing of electricity
in a way that continues to enrich the lives of all. And with
that in mind, I look forward to the hearing and future hearings
and would yield 5 minutes to the ranking member of the
subcommittee, my friend from Illinois, Mr. Rush.
[The opening statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Good morning. I am pleased to be here today to kick off
this first of many hearings focused on America's electricity
system. As many in this room are aware, this Committee has an
extensive history overseeing the nation's power sector. In
fact, the namesake of this very building, Speaker Sam Rayburn,
worked as the Chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee to
pass the Federal Power Act in 1935, a law which continues to
serve as the legal foundation of America's Electricity System.
More recently, this Committee was instrumental in the
discussion and actions resulting in the creation of organized
wholesale electricity markets and other power marketing
reforms, ensuring that rates continue to be ``just and
reasonable''. I can confidently say, that this Committee's
efforts to oversee the nation's power sector must remain
ongoing as the ever-changing nature of the U.S. electricity
system guarantees that there will always be new challenges to
solve and new opportunities to seize.
With that in mind, I am excited to launch a new set of
Energy and Commerce Committee hearings today, titled the
``Powering America Series''. This series of hearings will take
a comprehensive look at recent developments and challenges in
the way we generate, transmit, and consume electricity in the
United States. Today's hearing will give us the opportunity to
examine the state of the electric industry through the
perspective of various market participants. After hearing from
each of these market participants this morning, we will be
holding a second ``Powering America Series'' hearing next week,
where we will be receiving testimony from each of the RTOs and
ISOs who are responsible for operating America's regional
wholesale electricity markets. It should also be said that in
the coming months, we will be announcing additional hearings in
this series which will focus on more in-depth topics and issues
related to the U.S. electricity system.
Joining us in today's discussion, we have a full panel of
experts representing a wide range of stakeholders from across
the electric sector and I would like to welcome them and thank
them for being here. As I am sure each of our witnesses will
attest to, the nation's electricity industry and system is
undergoing a significant period of transformation. This
transformation is affecting the composition of the country's
electricity generation mix, the way industry and regulators are
approaching grid reliability, and how Federal energy policies
are interacting with State policies. Many of the recent
developments and changes within the electricity sector are
creating tremendous benefits for American consumers. U.S.
electricity prices are low; employment within the energy sector
continues to rise; and advanced technologies are giving
consumers more control over how they interact with the grid. It
is safe to say that the American electricity industry is a
world leader and deserves more credit for the amazing work they
do.
With that being said, I know that the U.S. electricity
system is not perfect, nor will it ever be. The electricity
industry is facing dynamic challenges and an uncertain future.
The witnesses before us today have serious ideas on how
electricity markets and energy policies can be improved. This
Committee welcomes these ideas and is eager to engage in a
meaningful discussion on how to strengthen the grid and how to
provide greater value to American consumers.
No one here is under the illusion that these issues will be
understood and addressed in one or two hearings. The U.S.
electricity system is the largest, most-complex collection of
machines and computers in the world and is influenced by a
staggering number of stakeholders. These electricity system
issues are complicated and in order to address them it will
require an extended effort by this Committee, and by this
Congress. Moreover, tackling these issues will require a
bipartisan effort. Which is why we have worked with our
colleagues on the other side of the aisle in planning and
conducting this hearing.
Reliable, affordable, clean electricity is a vital
component of every American's life. Going forward, we must
strive to enhance the generation, delivery, and marketing of
electricity in a way that continues to enrich the lives of all
Americans. With this goal in mind, I look forward to this
hearing and future hearings to come in this series.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman,
this hearing is important because it is examining the state of
the electric industry through market participant perspectives.
Mr. Chairman, we know that the electricity grid of the 21st
century will look significantly different than the grid of the
last century, and rightfully so. Even as the Trump
administration attempts to weaken federal environmental
regulations and Congress fails to act in any meaningful way to
address climate change, we see businesses, municipalities,
states, and individual consumers step up their own campaigns to
address this critical issue.
As consumers become more aware of their carbon footprint
and how their behavior impacts their environment, they are also
more demanding in terms of information, they are more demanding
in terms of control over how energy is produced and consumed.
Indeed, Mr. Chairman, while many changes in our electric
grid are spurred by state and federal policy and marketing
forces, it is important to understand that consumers are also
driving many of the trends we see taking place in the
electricity market. From an increase in smart meters such as
the ones being installed throughout my home city of Chicago to
smarter appliances, consumers want the tools to more
responsibly use energy both as a way to save money and as a way
to save the environment. Other current trends include greater
demand for cleaner, renewable sources of energy to compete with
the traditional fossil fuels as well as increase in distributed
generation and demand response resources.
Mr. Chairman, the result of these trends, as a DOE draft
report suggests, does not make the grid less reliable but
rather the opposite. The DOE study indicates that having fuel
diversity has in fact improved grid stability. I want to quote,
Mr. Chairman, that very same report. ``The power system is more
reliable today due to better planning, market discipline, and
better operating rules and standards,'' is the remarks from
that report.
Mr. Chairman, with the federal government abdicating its
responsibility in enacting comprehensive energy policy that
addresses one of the world's most pressing challenges, it is
even more vital that we provide the resources and guidance for
states to take more of a permanent role in advancing smart and
sustainable energy policies.
Congress should not stand in the way of states like my own,
Illinois, Mr. Chairman, that choose to enact renewable energy
portfolios that provide credit to reliable zero or zero-carbon
baseload sources of energy, including nuclear power, but rather
Congress should ensure that FERC has the necessary mechanisms
to meet the challenges and take advantage of the opportunities
found in today's electric grid.
By almost all accounts, Mr. Chairman, for the foreseeable
future, the nation's energy mix will continue to include
sources from all of the above portfolios including cleaner
burning fossil fuels, nuclear, and renewables. So Mr. Chairman,
we must make sure that regulators have the tools and have the
authority that they need to effectively and efficiently manage
this portfolio.
So Mr. Chairman, I look forward to engaging today's panel
of distinguished industry insiders and hearing from them
regarding the opportunities and the challenges that we face in
terms of electric infrastructure. I want to thank you, Mr.
Chairman. With that I yield back.
Mr. Upton. Thank you. The chair now recognizes the chair of
the full committee, the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Walden, for
5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And welcome
to all of our witnesses and guests today. Last fall, this
subcommittee held a hearing where a distinguished panel of
witnesses described the origins of the Federal Power Act and
how it has withstood the test of time. That testimony provided
us with an historical context of how the federal government
regulates the electricity sector.
Having explored those historical perspectives, today we
begin examining the current state of the electricity industry.
As we embark on the Powering America series of hearings, I
would also like to welcome our witnesses again who are leaders
representing a diverse set of utilities and market
participants. We greatly value your input and counsel.
American consumers have come to expect safe, reliable, and
affordable supplies of power regardless of how they receive
their electricity. My district in Oregon, we receive
electricity from just about every source including renewables.
We get coal, we get natural gas, we get hydro, we get solar,
and we get wind. We also receive it from cooperatives and
public utility districts and municipalities and IOUs. In fact,
we have just about everything out there.
In all these situations though, we expect to have power
when we flip the switch and we expect to be at 60 cycles and
120 or 240 or whatever, but we expect it to work, and yet we
know it is becoming more and more complex to provide that
energy especially as we integrate and go up and down the grid.
New market participants offering advanced technologies and
innovative services are changing the face of the industry
faster than many have expected and that pace of change will
only increase over time. At the same time, wholesale
electricity prices are at near record lows around the United
States.
While this is largely a result of cheap and plentiful
natural gas supplies, the emergence of renewable resources are
also affecting the composition of power being generated as well
as market-clearing prices. As a result, in regions with
competitive markets that dispatch generation based solely on
lowest cost, we are seeing that some traditional baseload
units, such as nuclear and coal-fired plants, cannot compete
because they are too expensive to operate within their markets,
causing some plants to retire before the end of their useful
life.
While on its face low electricity prices are a boon for
consumers and businesses, we are now hearing from some segments
of the industry that the loss of nuclear and coal units from
the generation fleet could have longer term impacts on grid
reliability. While this is an issue that the DOE is examining
in its baseload study, this is also an issue that this
committee is exploring. Additionally, recent proposals by
states to advance certain public policies in the organized
electricity markets have added yet another layer of complexity
to an already complicated system.
So my hope is that there is a path forward to achieve these
state policies while also maintaining the integrity of the
wholesale markets. I recognize this is not an easy task. Next
week, we will continue our examination of the electricity
system with executives from the RTOs and the ISOs who operate
the transmission systems, but today I am interested in hearing
directly from market participants regarding their experiences
working in the electric sector and their thoughts on areas of
potential improvement.
I would note that our panel includes representatives that
participate in both the non-restructured markets as well as all
seven organized markets. So, as Chairman Upton noted, today is
just the first in our Powering America series of hearings
examining this industry.
So I look forward to learning more about the state of the
vital industry and hearing your thoughts regarding what, if
any, reforms could help to achieve greater efficiencies,
reliability, and competition in the wholesale markets while
also continuing to deliver value to customers. As I have said
previously, at the end of the day, our goal is to serve the
interests of consumers and I look forward to your ideas to
further that mission.
And I will say at the outset, we have another subcommittee
hearing going on, on 340B hospital issues, so I have to pop up
to that one as well, but with that I would yield the balance of
my time to the chairman of the Environment Subcommittee, Mr.
Shimkus.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Last fall this subcommittee held a hearing where a
distinguished panel of witnesses described the origins of the
Federal Power Act and how it has withstood the test of time.
That testimony provided us with a historical context of how the
federal government regulates the electricity sector. Having
explored those historical perspectives, today we will be
examining the current state of the electricity industry. As we
embark on this ``Powering America'' series of hearings, I'd
like to welcome today's witnesses who are leaders representing
a diverse set of utilities and markets participants.
American consumers have come to expect safe, reliable, and
affordable supplies of power--regardless of how they receive
their electricity. In my district, residents in central and
eastern Oregon receive their electricity from small
cooperatives, which are often the only provider in vast rural
areas in Oregon. In other areas, like in southern Oregon or my
hometown of Hood River, consumers rely on large investor-owned
utilities to supply their electricity. In both situations,
Americans now expect their power on demand. However, producing
and delivering electricity from a power plant to our homes and
businesses is becoming increasingly complex. New market
participants offering advanced technologies and innovative
services are changing the face of the industry faster than many
have expected, and that pace of change will only increase with
time.
At the same time, wholesale electricity prices are at near
record lows around the country. While this is largely a result
of cheap and plentiful natural gas supplies, the emergence of
renewable resources are also affecting the composition of the
power being generated as well as the market clearing prices. As
a result, in regions with competitive markets that dispatch
generation based solely on lowest-cost, we are seeing that some
traditional ``baseload'' units, such as nuclear and coalfired
plants, cannot compete because they are too expensive to
operate within their markets, causing some plants to retire
before the end of their useful life.
While on its face, low electricity prices are a boon for
consumers and businesses, we are now hearing from some segments
of the industry that the loss of nuclear and coal units from
the generation fleet could have longer-term impacts on grid
reliability. While this is an issue that the DOE is examining
in its ``Baseload Study,'' this is also an issue that the
committee will be exploring.
Additionally, recent proposals by states to advance certain
public policies in the organized electricity markets have added
yet another layer of complexity to an already complicated
system. My hope is that there is a path forward to achieve
these state policies while also maintaining the integrity of
the wholesale markets. I recognize that this is not an easy
task.
Next week, we will continue our examination of the
electricity system with executives from the RTOs and ISOs who
operate the transmission systems--but today I am interested in
hearing directly from market participants regarding their
experiences working in the electric sector and their thoughts
on areas of potential improvements. I would note that our panel
includes representatives that participate in both the non-
restructured markets as well as all seven organized markets.
As Chairman Upton noted, today is just the first in our
``Powering America'' series of hearings examining the
electricity industry. I look forward to learning more about the
current state of this vital industry and hearing your thoughts
regarding what, if any, reforms could help to achieve greater
efficiencies, reliability, and competition in the wholesale
markets, while also continuing to deliver value to consumers.
As I've said previously, at the end of the day, our goal is to
serve the best interests of consumers and I look forward to
your ideas to further that mission.

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will be brief.
First of all, I want to welcome Joe for being on the panel,
former committee staff. That shows you how old I am and how old
you are starting to look there.
Secondly, for my colleagues on both sides, we are
soliciting co-sponsors for our nuclear waste bill, the one we
passed out of the full committee, 49-4. We are going to keep
gathering names for the next 2 weeks, so check with your staff
and make sure you get on that bill and I would appreciate it.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Oh, H.R. 3053 is the
bill number. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Upton. As a co-sponsor of that bill I am glad to see
that that is the case. And I would yield to the ranking member
of the full committee, the gentleman from New Jersey, for an
opening statement, Mr. Pallone.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks for
holding the hearing to provide us with a market participant
perspective in our system of electricity regulation. Today's
hearing picks up on the issue that you started to focus on last
Congress, Mr. Chairman, with our insightful hearing on the
Federal Power Act.
Like that hearing, today's hearing was developed in
partnership between you and Chairman Walden and me and Ranking
Member Rush, and this set up to be a completely non-partisan
hearing with the goal of providing us important background for
future decisions. I also want to welcome our witnesses,
particularly Tammy Linde from New Jersey's PSEG, and I would
like to welcome back to the committee a former counsel to the
subcommittee and FERC chair, Joe Kelliher.
As I said previously, while our attention to electricity
issues has been sporadic since the passage of the Energy Policy
Act of 2005, there was a time when it seemed like this
committee held hearings on the electric sector almost weekly.
Now, developments in the electricity sector and the regional
markets, both promising and concerning, require us to return
again to a serious assessment of the state of the electric
sector and how it is regulated.
Technology has dramatically transformed the possibilities
for cost effectively generating and efficiently delivering
electric energy to homes, businesses, and manufacturing
facilities from a variety of sources. Distributed generation
both fossil- and renewable-based along with improving storage
options, smart meters, microgrids, and other technologies, have
altered the possibilities for effectively and economically
ensuring reliability.
These technologies have also called into question the most
basic tenets of rate making and have challenged the
longstanding financial model for utilities. These are enormous
and complex matters that require careful examination by this
committee. At the end of the day, we may decide that we need to
make changes to the Federal Power Act or we may conclude that
we should make no changes and continue to allow developments in
the states and the courts to drive policy.
It is critical that our committee, at a minimum, take the
time we need to examine these matters so that we arrive at
decisions that are informed by fact and that serve the
interests of our districts, our states, and the nation as a
whole.
And at this time I would like to yield the balance of my
time to Mr. McNerney.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you for holding today's hearing to provide us with a
market participant perspective on our system of electricity
regulation.
Today's hearing picks up on an issue that you started to
focus on last Congress, Mr. Chairman, with our insightful
hearing on the Federal Power Act. Like that hearing, today's
hearing was developed in partnership between you and Chairman
Walden and me and Ranking Member Rush. This is set up to be a
completely non-partisan hearing with the goal of providing us
important background for future decisions.
I also want to welcome our witnesses, particularly Tammy
Linde from New Jersey's PSEG. And I'd like to welcome back to
the committee a former counsel for this Subcommittee and FERC
Chair, Joe Kelliher.
As I said previously, while our attention to electricity
issues has been sporadic since the passage of the Energy Policy
Act of 2005, there was a time when it seemed like this
committee held hearings on the electric sector almost weekly.
Now, developments in the electricity sector and the regional
markets, both promising and concerning, require us to return
again to a serious assessment of the state of the electric
sector and how it is regulated.
Technology has dramatically transformed the possibilities
for cost-effectively generating and efficiently delivering
electric energy to homes, businesses and manufacturing
facilities from a variety of sources. Distributed generation -
both fossil and renewable based- along with improving storage
options, smart meters, microgrids and other technologies-- have
altered the possibilities for effectively and economically
ensuring reliability. These technologies have also called into
question the most basic tenets of ratemaking, and have
challenged the long-standing financial model for utilities.
These are enormous and complex matters that require careful
examination by this Committee. At the end of the day we may
decide that we need to make changes to the Federal Power Act,
or we may conclude that we should make no changes and continue
to allow developments in the states and the courts to drive
policy. It is critical that our Committee, at a minimum, take
the time we need to examine these matters so that we arrive at
decisions that are informed by fact and that serve the interest
of our districts, our states and the nation as a whole.
Thank you, I yield back.

Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the ranking member, and I thank
the chair for holding this hearing. I want to welcome the
witnesses, in particular Mr. Schleimer from Calpine.
The electric grid has long provided Americans with reliable
and affordable power upon which our economy depends. Today we
see big changes though in our electric grid such as the
challenge of reducing carbon emissions, distributed generation,
cyber and physical threats, as well as rapidly developing
technology.
Our nation depends on laws and regulations that encourages
and allows utility companies to adapt and thrive. I look at
this series of hearings as an opportunity to be informed in our
legislative process which should be both bipartisan and
productive, so I thank the witnesses and I yield back to the
ranking member.
Mr. Pallone. And I yield back also, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Upton. The gentleman yields back. With that we are
ready to hear the testimony and do our normal Q & A. Thank you,
panel, for being here.
And we are going to start with the senior guy, the guy who
spent a lot of hours here, a lot of weeks and months, so over
the years, Joe Kelliher. Joe, welcome back. Thank you.
It is a new mic so you have got to push the button, still.

STATEMENTS OF JOSEPH T. KELLIHER, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT,
FEDERAL REGULATORY AFFAIRS, NEXTERA ENERGY, INC.; LISA G.
MCALISTER, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND GENERAL COUNSEL FOR
REGULATORY AFFAIRS, AMERICAN MUNICIPAL POWER, INC.; STEVEN
SCHLEIMER, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT OF GOVERNMENT & REGULATORY
AFFAIRS, CALPINE; JACKSON REASOR, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, OLD
DOMINION ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE; TAMARA LINDE, EXECUTIVE VICE
PRESIDENT AND GENERAL COUNSEL, PUBLIC SERVICE ENTERPRISE GROUP,
INC.; KENNETH D. SCHISLER, VICE PRESIDENT OF REGULATORY AND
GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS, ENERNOC; AND ALEX GLENN, SENIOR VICE
PRESIDENT OF STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATORY LEGAL SUPPORT, DUKE
ENERGY

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH T. KELLIHER

Mr. Kelliher. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Upton, Mr. Rush, members of
the subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify today
on the state of the U.S. electricity industry. My name is Joe
Kelliher. I am Executive Vice President for Federal Regulatory
Affairs for NextEra Energy.
NextEra Energy is one of the largest generators in the
United States. We have nearly 40,000 megawatts in the United
States and Canada, and of the larger generators, NextEra has
perhaps the most diverse electricity supply. We are also one of
the relatively few numbers of truly national electricity
companies. We operate in every regional power market in the
United States and I offer the perspective of a competitor in
those markets as well as the perspective of a former energy
regulator. I was chairman of FERC for a number of years and a
commissioner at FERC and a former counsel of this committee.
Since the 1980s and 1990s, the federal government has
promoted competition in the wholesale power markets in order to
lower rates to customers based on the belief that competitive
markets provide greater efficiencies than traditional cost-of-
service rate regulation and the goal of competition policy is
lowering cost and shifting risk from customers to competitors.
The U.S. electricity industry, as members have noted in
opening comments, is undergoing a major transition. The market
fundamentals driving this transition include a dramatic
increase in U.S. natural gas production, the resulting sharp
and sustained decline in natural gas prices, significant
declines in wholesale power prices, lower than expected
electricity demand, and improvements in the efficiency and cost
of new wind and solar generation.
Low wholesale power prices have led to sizable retirement
of inefficient and uneconomic older coal and natural gas
generation facilities, some retirement of uneconomic nuclear
units, and large additions of modern, efficient natural gas and
renewable energy generation. As a result, the U.S. electricity
supply today has changed significantly and is now more diverse
than our electricity supply has ever been up to this point.
These changes have been so significant as to raise concerns
about whether these generation retirements are being driven by
market fundamentals or by federal and state policy and whether
the retirement of uneconomic generation poses a threat to
electric system reliability. The evidence strongly suggests
that the primary factor driving retirements has been market
fundamentals not regulatory policy, and there is no evidence to
suggest that the retirement of uneconomic generation poses a
threat to electric reliability.
A number of states have proposed programs designed to
prevent the retirement of uneconomic generation for a mix of
policy rationales. To be clear, the market failure addressed by
these state programs is low wholesale power prices, and the
solution to this problem is to raise prices charged by a select
few which would tend to suppress the prices for everyone else
and discourage the entry of new, more efficient generation.
These proposals shift risk away from competitors back to
consumers which is contrary to a central goal of competition
policy itself. These state programs are controversial and they
have been challenged in both federal and state courts. Some
have been overturned, one was recently upheld, and other
challenges remain pending. Because these state programs
threaten the integrity of wholesale power markets, FERC is
presented with some hard decisions on how to balance respect
for state policy choices with its legal duty to assure just and
reasonable prices.
This balancing though necessarily involves placing a lesser
priority on efficiency and low cost, and in my view FERC has a
legal duty to protect market integrity.
I believe our electricity markets are working well and are
workably competitive. U.S. electricity markets are undergoing a
major transition driven by market fundamentals, the result of
low natural gas produced by the shale gas revolution combined
with increased efficiency, low demand, and low wholesale power
prices. This transition has been marked by major changes in our
electricity supply mix. We are seeing tremendous diversity in
technology change. This transition is likely to continue,
producing an increasingly diverse and more reliable electricity
supply.
As someone who bears the scars of the California crisis of
2000-2001, I admit that it feels strange to testify at a
congressional hearing on the problem of low wholesale power
prices and possible solutions to that problem. And I have to
wonder if wholesale power prices were much higher we might not
be having this hearing or we would have a completely different
focus.
But that is just a point that we should keep the consumers
in mind as we discuss these issues. While it is painful for
many competitors, the transition of electricity markets has
delivered significant benefits to consumers in the form of
lower prices, and we have to accept the fact that while low
wholesale prices can be painful for the owners of uneconomic
generation facilities they are ultimately good for consumers
and great for America.
And with that, I thank you for inviting me, and I look
forward to questions.
[The prepared statement of Joseph T. Kelliher follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you very much.
Next, we are joined by Lisa McAlister, Senior VP and
General Counsel for Regulatory Affairs at American Municipal
Power, Inc. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF LISA G. MCALISTER

Ms. McAlister. Thank you and good morning, Chairman Upton,
Vice Chairman Olson, Ranking Member Rush and distinguished
members of the subcommittee. My name is Lisa McAlister, and I
am the Senior Vice President and General Counsel for Regulatory
Affairs for American Municipal Power.
AMP is a nonprofit wholesale power supplier and service
provider for 135 members across nine states with the majority
of AMP's members in the PJM region. AMP is one of the largest
public power, joint action organizations in the country and has
generating facilities and/or members located in the districts
of the following subcommittee members: Congressmen Griffith,
Johnson, Latta, McKinley, Shimkus, and Walberg.
At the outset I want to make clear that AMP supports
competitive electric markets. They offer opportunities for our
members to serve their customers at the lower cost. AMP also
strongly supports reliability, but as a member-focused
organization we work hard to ensure that the benefits of
regulatory changes made to improve reliability justify the
costs to consumers. While the energy portion of wholesale bills
is the most substantial portion, capacity and transmission are
quickly becoming more significant and growing.
AMP has serious concerns about PJM's capacity construct and
also the growing transmission costs. My written testimony
provides more details and examples of the challenges that AMP
and our members have faced in these areas. PJM's current
administrative capacity construct called the reliability
pricing model, or RPM, is not a market in any meaningful sense.
Rather, RPM is a complex, rules-driven, administrative
mechanism for pricing and procuring capacity that relies on
distinctly non-market features.
PJM's capacity construct requires constant modifications to
achieve the desired outcomes and is becoming increasingly
complicated bringing increased volatility and so much rules
churn that long-term planning is extremely difficult. We are
moving away from markets.
One alternative solution is for local utilities known as
load serving entities, or LSEs, to satisfy most or all of their
capacity needs through bilateral arrangements in a real
marketplace where there are willing buyers and sellers and they
negotiate arrangements to meet their needs. Under an approach
like this, each local utility or LSE would secure capacity to
meet its peak load obligation plus a predetermined reserve
margin bilaterally on a long-term portfolio basis. The RTOs
would still have a significant role in determining the peak
load obligations, identifying constraints on the system, and
conducting a residual action. And this alternative has numerous
advantages over the current capacity constructs including fewer
moving parts and administrative judgments, harmonization
between states and local policies, avoidance of jurisdictional
disputes, and also flexibility for both states and generators.
It is important also for us to touch on transmission.
Nationally, transmission costs have increased dramatically. For
example, in four of AMP members' transmission zones, annual
revenue requirements have increased by a range of 99 to 214
percent from 2009 through 2016. AMP understands that there are
many drivers increasing transmission costs and AMP's members
are willing to pay their fair share of the cost. But AMP has to
work very hard to make sure these costs lead to the most cost
effective and efficient grid expansion.
The transmission planning process must be open and
transparent, must provide equitable treatment, and take into
account the changing resource mix and configuration of the
future, rather than a piecemeal replacement of the grid of the
past. While it is essential for developers to earn a fair
return on their investment, these rates should reflect current
economic conditions and risks.
AMP supports Congress playing a more active role and
encouraging FERC to refocus on its statutory mandate to ensure
just and reasonable rates. Enhanced congressional oversight is
critical to ensure that FERC is responsive to the real needs of
customers.
Congress can be helpful by insisting that keeping costs to
consumers as low as possible is a central part of the RTO
mission; reiterating that load serving entities have a right to
make generation choices that are not subject to rejection by
the RTOs or FERC; insisting that resource adequacy constructs
must accommodate state and public policy decisions; ensuring
that RTO governing boards are representative, open,
transparent, and independent from RTO management; requiring
RTOs to demonstrate how the proposed market changes benefit
customers; directing FERC and the RTOs to develop robust and
consistent transmission planning criteria; and encouraging FERC
to ensure that return on equity rates for transmission
investments reflect current economic conditions and risk
levels.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today,
and I would be happy to answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Lisa G. McAlister follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you. Thanks very much.
Next, we are joined by Steven Schleimer, senior VP of
Government & Regulatory Affairs at Calpine. Welcome, nice to
see you.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN SCHLEIMER

Mr. Schleimer. Good morning, Chairman Upton, Ranking Member
Rush, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for inviting
me to testify today. Calpine is not a regulated utility
receiving a guaranteed payment from customers. Rather, we
compete head to head with other suppliers to sell power
directly to wholesale and retail customers in the competitive
markets across the country.
We have 26,000 megawatts of mostly natural gas-fired
combined cycles and that is enough to power 25 to 30 million
homes. We also own the Geysers plant in California which is the
largest geothermal facility in the United States.
The first key takeaway I would like to impress upon you is
that the competitive markets and particularly in the East Coast
and Texas have been phenomenally successful. Over the last
decade, there has been over 50,000 megawatts of new generation
either committed or entering operations, representing $70 to
$80 billion of new investment.
At the same time, as has been noted, wholesale prices are
at historic lows, commissions rates are down significantly as
well. The reserve margin, which is a measure of grid
reliability, is significantly higher in each of these regions
as well. All of this is clearly a win for consumers and the
environment.
However, due to various policy goals and pressure from
nuclear and coal generators, state policy makers have been
increasingly intervening in competitive markets to bail out or
subsidize specific plants. Examples include the New York and
Illinois ZEC program along with current attempts to create
subsidies in Ohio and Connecticut and nascent attempts in
Pennsylvania and New Jersey, which were expected. If left
unchecked, these efforts threaten the continued viability of
competition in these regions. Investors are simply not going to
invest in new infrastructure if they believe their direct
competitors will receive out of market subsidy payments.
So now we get to the second key takeaway I would like to
impress upon you, the half-in/half-out hybrid market where the
state relies on the competitive market for some resource needs
but then target subsidies to select power plants does not work.
Once the subsidies start, competitive investment stops.
And how do we know that? We have seen exactly this result
in California which decided to move away from competition and
toward this hybrid half in/half out model more than a decade
ago. And now new investment only occurs with long-term
contracts from utilities and their captive customers. This is
not necessarily a bad thing, that is just a policy decision
California made.
In addition, a growing problem is that virtually all the
existing generation left over from the competitive era is
barely covering its costs or is losing money, yet some of these
resources are absolutely critical for keeping the lights on in
specific locations, for example in the San Francisco Bay Area.
If one of these remaining competitive units suffers a major
mechanical breakdown, it is unclear whether any investment
would make sense without a guaranteed long-term payment from
the utilities or the customers just to bring the unit back.
So the lesson learned from California is that half in/half
out of competitive electricity markets doesn't work. Once the
subsidies and bailouts really take hold it kills the
competitive part. Investment dries up and long-term ratepayer
guarantees are required to fund any new infrastructure or even
to maintain existing infrastructure. Subsidies beget subsidies
would beget more subsidies. So this is exactly what we are
concerned about happening in the eastern market if we do not
address the targeted subsidy issue now.
The good news is that both PJM and ISO in New England are
actively engaged on these issues and have developed innovative
proposals that are intended to allow a state to meet its public
policy goals, but act as a firewall to protect the integrity of
the wholesale competitive market. Both proposals have
significant promise and may well result in workable solutions.
So let me just wrap up by reiterating that competitive
wholesale markets have produced phenomenal results for benefits
for consumers. On the one hand, investment is up and
reliability is up. On the other hand, prices are down and
emissions rates are down. So these achievements, however, are
in jeopardy due to the desire to subsidize or bail out certain
generation units.
The half in/half out competitive market model is
unsustainable if you move towards the hybrid, so a coordinated
effort is needed between all the states, FERC, and system
operators to develop solutions that allows the states to pursue
their public policy goals but is done in a way that allows the
impact of that to be firewalled off from the rest of the
wholesale market. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Steven Schleimer follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Next, we are joined by Jackson Reasor, CEO of Old Dominion
Electric. Thank you and welcome.

STATEMENT OF JACKSON REASOR

Mr. Reasor. Chairman Upton, Ranking Member Rush, and
members of the Energy Subcommittee, my name is Jack Reasor. I
am president and CEO of Old Dominion Electric Cooperative in
Glen Allen, Virginia. Old Dominion is pleased that the Energy
Subcommittee is holding this hearing and that we have been
invited to present our perspective as a wholesale market
participant. And I must say, Mr. Chairman, I am very proud and
pleased to find myself literally in the center of this
presentation.
Old Dominion is a not-for-profit power electric cooperative
that owns and operates electric generation facilities to
provide capacity and energy to 11 electric distribution
cooperatives throughout Virginia, Maryland, and Delaware. Old
Dominion's members provide retail service to end-use consumers
and as a result Old Dominion has an obligation to serve its
consumer owners.
All of Old Dominion's members are located within the PJM
interconnection. In addition, Old Dominion is a network
transmission customer of PJM as well as a PJM transmission
owner. As mentioned earlier, we have an obligation to serve our
consumer members. That means we have to ensure there is enough
electricity to meet their current and future needs.
As a participant in PJM, we also have to pay PJM for our
share of PJM's cost in procuring capacity to ensure that there
is enough electricity to satisfy their future energy needs.
Unfortunately, our experience with PJM's capacity procurement
policies has been mixed at best, and let me explain why.
PJM originally established that we could satisfy the
obligation to procure capacity by building generation sources
or using bilateral contracts to obtain capacity at competitive
market prices. In other words, we could self-supply the
capacity obligation. If additional capacity was needed, PJM
would procure that capacity and allocate the cost to us and the
other members and participants within PJM.
The self-supply, the first option and the PJM procured
capacity second option, worked well for us. Unfortunately, PJM
changed the rules and FERC approved the changes. Now our self-
supplied capacity might fail to satisfy PJM's capacity market
requirements. As a result, we might be required to obtain all
of our capacity from PJM and pay those associated costs. We
could be forced to pay twice for capacity, the significant
investments and costs associated with our self-supplied
capacity, plus our share of PJM's capacity costs.
We believe that federal policy should ensure that long-term
investments in generation are honored and encouraged.
Specifically, we should be allowed to self-supply the capacity
procurement obligation as a first option and then turn to PJM's
administered capacity in energy markets as a second option.
Federal policy should also focus on reliable wholesale service
at just and reasonable rates to provide the right price signals
needed for new generation resource development. It would be a
mistake for PJM to artificially inflate capacity prices above
competitive just and reasonable levels.
In addition, federal policies should foster stability in
market designs. The change in PJM's administered capacity
market from its original function as a second choice option, a
residual market to a mandatory market that threatens our first
choice option has introduced unnecessary uncertainty which
makes long-term planning very difficult.
Finally, federal policy should ensure that choices of
generation resources are encouraged. PJM's administered
capacity market is not a substitute of the wholesale market
where we can determine the amount, the kind, and the location
of generation resources we need to meet our consumers' and
customers' needs.
Nothing in the law prevents FERC from adopting these needed
federal policies. Therefore, at this time we do not believe
there is a need for Congress to enact new legislation giving
FERC additional authority or duties. However, the Energy and
Commerce Committee should continue to use its oversight
function and to monitor the manner in which the wholesale
market operates.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to answering any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Jackson Reasor follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you very much.
Tamara Linde, who is the exec VP and general counsel for
Public Service Enterprise Group, Inc., thank you and welcome.

STATEMENT OF TAMARA LINDE

Ms. Linde. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member.
Thank you for having me here and thank you to Congressman
Pallone for the kind words. My name is Tamara Linde and I am
executive vice president and general counsel for Public Service
Enterprise Group, or PSEG.
Thank you for the opportunity to present PSEG's views on a
critical issue facing the electric industry and, by extension,
the nation's electricity customers. The issue is the urgent
need to assure fuel diversity and resiliency in the nation's
electric generation resource mix and to correct a flaw in the
wholesale market design that is leading to premature retirement
of nuclear baseload generation in our region.
Let me take a moment to describe PSEG. We are a large
diversified energy company headquartered in New Jersey. We
employ approximately 13,000 people and our New Jersey utility
serves around 2.2 million electric customers and 1.8 million
gas customers across the state. When people talk about an all-
of-the-above energy portfolio, PSEG is that example.
Our generation fleet consists of nuclear, natural gas,
coal, solar, and even some hydro. However, while most of our
plants now operate in competitive markets, most were built as
part of a state-regulated utility before wholesale markets were
created. Nuclear baseload is at risk because the wholesale
market has a flaw and does not value fuel diversity. In fact,
markets were never designed to value fuel diversity because
they didn't need to.
Diversity in generation resources was the status quo when
markets were initially designed. The market was designed to
drive another important objective which is to deliver the
lowest cost resource needed to meet demand. For years, while
different fuel costs were roughly comparable, markets could
drive towards the lowest cost without sacrificing fuel security
and diversity. Now the shale gas revolution has brought
opportunity, but it has also revealed this serious market
design flaw.
Today, after more than 30 years of operation, the 3,500
megawatt Salem and Hope Creek Nuclear Generating Stations in
New Jersey turned a dramatic corner last year and they failed
to earn enough to cover their cost of capital. While we have
not announced their closure, we have made it clear that they
are on an unsustainable path.
Absent a change or intervention, these baseload resources
will permanently close. In fact, the timeframe for many at-risk
plants is so short that states are moving forward to address
the problem before it is too late. We believe that it is our
duty to have honest discussions with leadership in New Jersey
to ensure that the stakes are clearly understood and that the
state is given an opportunity to take action if it chooses to.
We believe that state action may be critical if these
resources are to survive. We believe that these actions can be
done in a way that does not undermine the integrity of the
wholesale market and can serve as a bridge until a regional or
federal solution takes hold. Ultimately, we do see potential
for a market solution. Fuel diversity has a value and the loss
of fuel diversity has a cost. This needs to be factored into
the wholesale design.
Mr. Chairman, this committee has presided over many fights
within the electric industry over which fuel is better, which
fuel is subsidized, and which business or regulatory model is
best. We understand that you must look beyond winners and
losers in the industry and focus on customers, communities, and
the nation as a whole.
These closures will impact the reliability and resiliency
of our electric system, our economy, our competitiveness, our
environment, and even our national security. Nuclear energy
contributes 10 billion in federal taxes and 2.2 billion in
state taxes each year. Our global leadership on nuclear energy
drives the adoption of U.S. nuclear safety and security
standards across the world. A vibrant American nuclear industry
supports the nuclear supply chain and provides the workforce
necessary for the defense nuclear industry.
On a more basic level, it is never a good idea to have all
of your eggs in one basket. That is true for retirement savings
and it is equally true for the life-giving electric supply our
customers depend on. In the past few years, our region has seen
a polar vortex, Superstorm Sandy, a derecho, an earthquake, and
a freak October snowstorm. Add to this the prospect for a
physical or cyber intrusion or a fuel supply interruption and
it is clear that the customer interest is better served by not
being overly reliant on one fuel source.
Again I want to thank the subcommittee for inviting me
today, and I will be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Tamara Linde follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Next, Kenneth Schisler, VP of Regulatory and Government
Affairs from EnerNOC, welcome.

STATEMENT OF KENNETH D. SCHISLER

Mr. Schisler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, for this opportunity to testify. My employer,
EnerNOC, is an incredible American innovation success story. We
were among a small group of technology startups right after the
turn of the century that pioneered digital applications in U.S.
electricity markets, and these innovations today are in
commercial operation and are indeed a vital part of the
American economy.
We do several innovative things at EnerNOC, but today I am
here to talk about our primary business line and that is known
as Demand Response. Demand Response is a homegrown American
technology. It is an innovation that found success here first
and has quickly spread throughout the developed and developing
world.
The purpose of Demand Response is to engage customers,
users, and users of electricity to manage consumption of
electricity at critical periods when the electricity grid is
under stress, to serve as a balancing resource on the grid, or
to respond to signals when prices are high. Demand Response
empowers energy users to become more flexible with their
consumption and to monetize that flexibility providing grid
services.
Companies like EnerNOC are known as aggregators. We
aggregate the Demand Response capability of thousands of
customers and manage them as a portfolio of resources in order
to participate in electricity markets. Demand Response
resources are dispatchable in a manner similar to traditional
generation resources that receive and respond to dispatch
signals from utilities and grid operators. In fact, most often
Demand Response is actually treated on the supply side of the
market, which sounds a bit like a non sequitur but it does
work.
We operate in several FERC jurisdictional markets in the
U.S. as well as several programs under the jurisdiction of
state utility regulators. Demand Response enjoys broad
bipartisan support. In fact, Chairman Kelliher seated at the
end of the table, as chairman of FERC, issued the seminal order
that enabled this latent capability of customers to improve the
power grid through Demand Response and his legacy was carried
forward by his successor Chairman Wellinghoff.
Demand Response is a win-win. It is unequivocally a win-win
for the U.S. economy. We contribute to the U.S. energy resource
diversity and security supply. It gives system operators one
additional useful tool to reliably operate the nation's
electricity grid, the users of electricity. Demand Response has
been credited as helping to prevent many major grid
emergencies, many major grid emergencies in recent years
including many of those my colleague acknowledged, the polar
vortex, wildfires in California, and many others.
Customers who participate in Demand Response receive
compensation for participation. We pay customers from the
market revenues that we receive by bidding their resources
again in this portfolio into the wholesale markets. These
customer payments of course bring down their total cost of
energy which makes them more competitive in the U.S. and global
economy.
Demand Response is a domestic energy resource, by
definition, supporting energy independence. Our fuel source, if
you will, is leveraging the flexibility of our customers to
manage their demand for the benefit of the grid. Demand
Response receives no subsidies, no special tax treatment under
the federal tax code. It does not negatively impact the federal
budget and does not require any subsidies from states or
ratepayers in order to participate because it is cost effective
on its own.
Demand Response improves efficiency of the grid and brings
down energy costs for all consumers. In fact, in the PJM region
Demand Response participation reduced wholesale market costs by
nearly $10 billion in the current delivery year alone, and this
is according to a report prepared by the PJM Independent Market
Monitor. These benefits are going to increase as new
technologies such as energy storage are increasingly adopted as
part of a Demand Response strategy.
From a federal policy standpoint, the only prerequisite for
Demand Response to thrive is to have nondiscriminatory, open
access in wholesale electricity markets and that those markets
remain competitive without pricing distortions. We have come a
long way in open access, in part thanks to Chairman Kelliher's
order. We still have some progress to make.
As far as healthy competitive markets, we are pleased that
FERC has recently sought comments on how to maintain
competitive markets while respecting the rights of states to
create their own energy policies. It is vital that we get this
right.
In conclusion, Demand Response is a homegrown U.S.
technology. Companies like EnerNOC have revolutionized and
created tremendous value in U.S. energy markets and we are now
exporting that technology all over the world. Our only ask here
today is that you continue to recognize Demand Response and its
importance to the national energy strategy. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Kenneth D. Schisler follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Last, we are joined by Mr. Glenn, senior VP of State and
Federal Regulatory Legal Support for Duke Energy, and I welcome
you and nice to see you.

STATEMENT OF ALEX GLENN

Mr. Glenn. As owners and operators of wind farms in
Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Pennsylvania, Kansas, Oklahoma,
Wisconsin, Wyoming, Colorado, Texas, solar farms in California,
Arizona, Texas, North Carolina, Florida and New Jersey, and
battery storage projects in Ohio and one of the nation's
largest in Texas with one of our wind farms and in addition to
integrated electric utilities across seven states, we touch
customers across the country every single day.
So to give you a context, Duke Energy is one of the largest
energy holding companies in the United States. We have about
$130 billion in assets and we reinvest in our communities $10
billion a year, annually, on our electric grid and our gas
infrastructure, and we provide service to electric and gas
customers that represent roughly about nine percent of the
nation's population.
So I would like to use my time today to talk about actions
that will greatly benefit our customers, unleash innovation,
and spur economic growth. Specifically, I want to address
permitting, renewables policy, cybersecurity, and then too on
FERC nominations and tax reform.
Duke Energy plans to invest about $35 billion in addition
to that $10 billion a year, $35 billion a year over the next 10
years to modernize our system. This transition is underpinned
in part by natural gas infrastructure, much of which requires
federal permitting. Too often we see overlapping and
conflicting regulatory requirements which result in higher
costs to our customers.
Bottom line, most permitting regulations impose no
timeframes within which an agency has to act. And without a
reasonable what I call a shot clock for decisions, delays put
many vital projects at risk of completion. So just as our
energy system needs to be modernized, so too do our policies.
They need to be modernized to reflect today's markets and
encourage innovation.
As a representative mentioned, the pace of change is
increasing and so is that complexity, but our regulatory
paradigm isn't. An example of this is PURPA. Today, renewable
energy is booming, the cost of renewable energy technologies
have dropped, and independent power producers are prolific and
well financed. Many PURPA contracts though are significantly
above the market cost of power and that is costing our
customers money, so updating PURPA to reflect current market
and technology needs will enable utilities to serve our
customers at a lower cost.
Cyber, so hand in hand with critical infrastructure
investment is the need to protect it. Protecting our
infrastructure from cyberattacks is a top priority of Duke
Energy. The electric industry is the only industry critical
infrastructure, with mandatory enforceable cybersecurity
standards. So Congress could aid our efforts, amending the
SAFETY Act to expressly include cyberattacks so that in the
event of such an attack we can focus on what we need to do,
right, which is get the lights back on and get our economies
back running.
Now we can make policy but we also need regulators to
implement that policy, so that is where FERC nominations come
in. As members of this committee are well aware, FERC has been
without a quorum since February which has prevented action on
crucial energy infrastructure projects. The president has now
nominated three candidates, two of whom are awaiting votes
before the full Senate and Duke Energy would urge this
committee to do whatever it can to encourage your Senate
colleagues to take up these nominees as quickly as possible so
that a quorum can be established.
Finally, tax reform, although I understand tax reform falls
outside the jurisdiction of this committee I mention it because
you all have a deep understanding and are experts in our
business and you understand that our industry is unique. Our
rates and our returns on capital are set and regulated by state
regulators. So because our electricity bills reflect our cost
of service, including after-tax cost of capital, we need to
preserve interest deductibility.
So our industry, as a number of the members have mentioned
here today and our panelists have said, is undergoing
remarkable transformation. We at Duke Energy stand ready to
meet those challenges and those opportunities to power our
economy to improve the quality of lives of the customers that
we serve every day. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Alex Glenn follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you all. And at this point we will
reach our 5 minutes of Q & A by members of the committee. Thank
you very much for your testimony, and I would like to hit a
couple of things in my 5 minutes if I can. One is to talk
briefly about baseload closures. We see a lot of that all
across the country, but I first want to just focus a little bit
on the cybersecurity.
As we visit different installations, whether they be in our
districts or states or even around the country, often we are
hearing that the internet connections of each of those
facilities is independent as not, you know, it is hard to
penetrate. It is not attached to a larger network. Yet at the
same time, we read and we have had some briefings particularly
about state-sponsored attacks that are trying to get in,
whether it is a water system, whether it is a utility, recently
some nuclear facilities in the last couple weeks.
What is it that we can do to make sure that in fact that
does not happen? What additional tools do we need to put into
the toolbox, whether it be FERC, whether it be the Homeland
Security and others, to make sure that in fact that does not
happen?
And Mr. Glenn, you referenced that just briefly in your
testimony, but give us some ideas on where we need to proceed--
and I don't know if you have looked at our bill H.R. 3050,
Enhancing State Energy Security Planning and Emergency
Preparedness, but that is moving with strong bipartisan
support. It came through this committee and will be on the
floor very soon.
Mr. Glenn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for that
bill. I think that is a very, very good start. And I think
there is a couple of things. One is, we are the only industry
with mandatory enforceable standards, so FERC and NERC, a
delegation of FERC, have specifically prescribed standards that
we must meet. How we meet those standards is a defense-in-depth
way of meeting that.
So there is a couple things. One is, I think, streamlining
the process by which our background checks for some of our
employees can be done so that we can work more closely with
other government agencies and heads of those agencies. I think
that would be one thing that we could do that would be
supportive. And we would be happy to work offline on certain
other things that I think we can do.
Mr. Upton. I just want to assure you--other ideas, other
members of the panel, are there additional steps that we should
take? It is important that we get a quorum on FERC. I think we
have all been frustrated with the lack of the quorum. I hope
the Senate acts before they adjourn for sure before their
August break.
Let me talk a little bit about the baseload closures. So
again we see this. In Michigan we have got a number of coal
facilities that are beyond their use and they announced that
they were closing. We have got issues on nuclear facilities
around the country and for different reasons. We know that
natural gas, we know that reliable, renewable energy costs have
come down dramatically.
A number of states like Michigan have actually imposed a
new standard in terms of a minimum requirement and it is a good
thing for all of us that support all of the above. But it does
take a while to get that replacement piece on, whether it is a
new gas facility or whatever it might be. We all care about
diversity, but at the bottom line of course is, I think every
one of you mentioned, the cost to the consumer of that kilowatt
that goes to their home and to their business.
So how do we balance all of that in terms of looking at the
future and the 21st century energy needs that we have? Ms.
Linde, you talked a little bit about that and it seems like New
Jersey has done a really good job.
Ms. Linde. Well, thank you. Fuel diversity is really
important and we are concerned that at the wholesale market
level the market design did not take that into consideration.
So we do see that as something that needs to be addressed, but
we recognize it can't be addressed quickly.
So we have states as was commented on by several of the
other panelists that have nuclear plants that are suffering
that are taking action and doing so as a bridge to a federal
solution, it is important that we don't lose assets that have a
long life ahead of them and that are providing a low-cost
energy to our customers every day.
And I comment on that it is low cost because it is
important to realize that, while nuclear plants are suffering
financially because they are not being fully valued in the
market, we believe it would be more expensive for our customers
in New Jersey if they were to be retired and replaced with
something else. So we believe it is less expensive for
customers to keep these nuclear plants in operation and to keep
them through the rest of their permit life, which goes on quite
far into the future.
Our three nuclear plants in New Jersey have licenses that
go out until 2046, and each of the three plants have different
license terms but they have long lives ahead of them and they
are important for fuel diversity and important for the cost of
energy in the State of New Jersey.
Mr. Upton. My time is expired, but let me, just a quick
comment, maybe Mr. Schleimer and then Mr. Kelliher and then we
will move on.
Mr. Schleimer. Just really quickly, not necessarily sure I
agree that the nuclear plants aren't being fully valued. PJM
went through a process to revamp its capacity market to value
reliability even more than it had been previously.
But putting that aside, I think we generally do agree that
to the extent that there are issues like fuel diversity or
other attributes like ramp rates and start-up times and
shutdown times, et cetera, that aren't being valued, that that
is something perfectly fine and acceptable and great for PJM
and FERC and the other markets to look at expanding what the
value of the different services are.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Kelliher?
Mr. Kelliher. Just very quick. We are really not at a point
where we are losing diversity. I agree that the competitive
markets are not designed to achieve diversity, but they have
achieved it inadvertently almost. With the competitive markets
focused completely on efficiency and cost that has resulted in
the retirement of the uneconomic units, but in their place has
come in very modern, advanced natural gas facilities, solar,
and wind. And that result is we have more diversity in our
electricity supply today than ever before, so there is not
really a diversity crisis that we need to act on.
And the concept of baseload is becoming less useful over
time. It used to be baseload unit was a unit that was cheaper
to run. It also tended to have, it was operationally
inflexible. But the principle characteristic, it was cheaper
than everything else so you ran that first. That has switched.
It used to be that coal was cheaper than natural gas. That is
no longer the case. That is why gas is displacing coal.
It is not policy, it used to be that the most inefficient
coal plant could produce electricity cheaper than the most
efficient natural gas facility, but the fuel prices have
switched to the point where that doesn't happen and it probably
won't ever be restored.
Mr. Upton. Thank you. The chair would recognize the ranking
member of the subcommittee, Mr. Rush.
Mr. Rush. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Linde, there are many energy consumers who believe that
climate change is real and must be addressed and that includes
the overwhelming majority of respected scientists and
climatologists, the majority of the American people, and the
leaders of every country in the world except Nicaragua, Syria,
and our own illustrious president, Mr. Trump.
To address this issue especially in absence of federal
action, many states have developed renewable energy portfolios,
including Illinois, as I mentioned in my earlier statement,
with the objective of reducing carbon emissions. In your
opinion, would states like Illinois and others who have the
objective of reducing carbon emissions be able to hit their
targets without nuclear power, and why is it important that
nuclear plants be valued appropriately as safe, reliable, zero-
carbon sources of energy?
Ms. Linde. Thank you. And you bring up another very
important attribute of nuclear power. Nuclear power does not
emit carbon and it is air emission free, so it is very
important for an environmental policy considering reducing
carbon or not increasing the amount of carbon.
I want to comment on something that Joe Kelliher said. We
do have different opinions on the urgency of this situation,
and Illinois is one of those states who saw the urgency and the
need to take action so nuclear plants wouldn't shut down. In
New Jersey, our nuclear plants that operate in New Jersey are a
large percentage of the energy supply. If they shut down we
will most likely move to predominantly natural gas as the
single fuel source with some limited renewables.
New Jersey, like Illinois, has a renewable portfolio
standard and has made significant steps to increase renewables
in the state, and my company has been developing a lot of solar
in the state as well. And we believe that is important. The
important message I want to leave with you today is that these
nuclear plants play a role in fuel diversity, they play an
important role in keeping prices down, and they play an
important environmental role and they need to be maintained for
the future and they are at risk.
Mr. Rush. Diversity, how important is fuel diversity in
ensuring a reliable and resilient grid?
Ms. Linde. I could comment on that. NERC issued a study
this year that highlighted the importance of fuel diversity to
a resilient grid. I think that report that was issued, I
believe, in March of this year, does spell out the importance
of fuel diversity to resiliency and the ability of a system, an
electric grid system, to respond to a variety of different
situations whether weather or physical or cyberattacks.
So we think that fuel diversity as NERC indicated is
critical to resiliency and long-term reliability.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Schisler, I only have a few more seconds
here, but in your written testimony you state that from a
federal policy viewpoint the only prerequisite for Demand
Response to thrive is to have nondiscriminatory, open access in
wholesale electricity market and that those markets remain
competitive without pricing distortions.
Moving forward, are you confident that FERC will enact
policies that will maintain competitive markets while
respecting the rights of states to create their own energy
policy?
Mr. Schisler. When the FERC gets a quorum we will hope that
that will be the case. I do know that the RTOs and ISOs that
you will be hearing from next week are taking this issue very
seriously. We certainly don't want to stand in the way of
states enacting their own energy policies, creating their own
energy destiny, but market participants like EnerNOC, like
independent power producers, rely upon market revenues and
those prices are very important to sending long-term investment
signals and that is why they have to be--fair, competitive
wholesale markets have to be sacrosanct.
So, FERC has enjoyed a long history, regardless of
leadership, of trying to trend toward making wholesale markets
more competitive and I certainly hope that will continue, but
that really does need to be the guiding principle.
Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Mr. Olson?
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair for holding this important
hearing and welcome to our seven witnesses. It should be no
surprise to anybody in this room, but my home State of Texas
rode down a different trail in terms of our electric grid.
Ninety percent is fully competitive, run by a group called
ERCOT. Two cities, San Antonio and Austin, control their local
grids. The Panhandle of West Texas and East Texas has their
grids. They are interlocked.
Like other states, our source of power is changing rapidly,
we are shifting from coal power to natural gas power fairly
quickly. We have two nuclear reactors, nuclear sites, no more
coming. That is it. We are number one for wind, number one in
America with a rapidly growing solar industry.
My question is for you, Mr. Schleimer of Calpine. Your
company has operations all across the country, many of those in
Texas. As you mentioned in your opening statement, you said of
ERCOT saying they are, ``phenomenal.'' What does that mean and
could our markets learn from the Texas example? Could they be
phenomenal as well?
Mr. Schleimer. Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman.
So yes, Texas indeed did choose a different path. They have
almost completely gone complete competition on both the
wholesale and the retail side. And I would say that you know so
far the distinguishing characteristic that you find in Texas
versus some of the other markets is so far there hasn't been as
much temptation to intervene in the competitive markets.
And so in fact over the last 5 or 6 years or so you have
seen 14- or 15,000 megawatts of new resource being built, both
natural gas but a tremendous amount of renewable resources. And
those renewable resources actually were not done under long-
term contracts with utilities, but really based on confidence
in the market.
We do have some concerns about the structure of the ERCOT
market just like some of the--it is very different. The U.S.
regional markets each have their own concerns associated with
them because of different policy drivers and dynamics and all
that. But I would say so far, Texas is, their market remains
probably the most competitive market with confidence in the
rules going forward.
Mr. Olson. And how do investment decisions in markets like
ERCOT that are competitive or like the Mid-Atlantic differ from
those in more traditional regions? Could a company build a new
power plant in Texas with the same sorts of return on
investment like they can in Georgia, for example, any
competition issues there?
Mr. Schleimer. So a company like ours really builds off of
what the future market looks like and what our expectations of
the future market looks like. So in regions where there is a
known set of rules and we are confident in the set of rules and
we can look out, obviously we are going to be wrong about what
the future looks like, but at least we have, if we think we
have a fair shot of getting our money back.
In other regions of the country that haven't deregulated or
are still vertically integrated where the utilities still
dominate, we will only make those investments over with the
long-term contract or with the long-term ratepayer guarantee.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
Ms. McAlister, ma'am, a new source of energy like wind and
solar only means something if we can get those to market. In
Texas we have what is called competitive renewable energy
zones, CREZ zones, to get resources all across the state. As
plants continue to close and energy sources shift, new lines
will be needed.
Can you share thoughts about the state of new transmission
construction? Is the process working? Is it transparent enough?
Are there bureaucratic roadblocks? What improvements can be
made?
Ms. McAlister. I can speak to the PJM area where most of
our customers are sited and where we have most of our
resources. And I think that FERC has orders in place, Order
890, that allow it to provide infrastructure through an open
and transparent process and we think that PJM is doing a pretty
good job with the long-term transmission planning for those
lines that are needed for reliability.
But what we are very concerned about is a different
category of transmission and that is called supplemental
transmission. Those are projects that are not needed for
reliability and essentially the transmission owners make those
calls whether those lines are needed or not and they really
don't have the same transparency and open process as what the
baseline transmission projects have. And so I think probably
the best way to balance grid reliability is to make sure that
the transmission process whether it is for baseline or
supplemental is for it to be open and transparent and for those
Order 890 obligations to apply to all types of transmission
projects.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. And on behalf of the best team in
baseball, the best record, the Houston Astros, I yield back.
Mr. Upton. Just wait, the Tigers are on a roll.
The chair would recognize the gentleman from California,
Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. Yes, what about basketball? At any rate,
gentlemen.
Ms. Linde, do you believe that the RTOs and ISOs could
charge a carbon adder and dispatch in order to adapt to state
carbon reduction policies?
Ms. Linde. I want to make sure I understand your question.
Do I think they should or----
Mr. McNerney. Could they do that successfully, what effect
would it have on the market?
Ms. Linde. I think the answer is it depends. If the price
that is added to the market for the carbon adder is an
appropriate price, then yes, it would make a significant
difference and it would enable both renewable generation and
nuclear generation, their environmental attributes to be valued
in the market.
I caution, however, though, it is important that the
details are appropriate because we have something else in the
region of East Coast where it is called the Regional Greenhouse
Gas Initiative and it was an effort by a group of states to add
a carbon value and it was too low of a carbon value.
And in New Jersey we have a gubernatorial election coming
up this year and both candidates have said that they will
rejoin RGGI. And I want to be clear to explain that that will
not be enough to address the nuclear challenge because the
price on carbon is just far too low.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Glenn, how would increased transmission benefit both
clean energy development and customers, and what are the
biggest challenges to increasing transmission?
Mr. Glenn. The biggest challenges that we face in
increasing transmission is the siting, frankly, and that can be
at a state level. Also if we look at other projects across the
nation that go through several states, the permitting process,
the eminent domain process, those are our biggest challenges in
getting projects on time, on budget, and getting renewable
energy resources that have very, very low energy costs to
markets in which we serve.
Mr. McNerney. So in your opinion that would benefit the
customers and the market to have increased transmission?
Mr. Glenn. Yes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Schisler, I have been to a distributed generation
facility and it is a very interesting process. There is a boom
in distributed energy resources, renewables, policies of the
Demand Response be brought up, and these are coming up pretty
quickly.
Do you believe that the states have been able to make
policies looking toward long-term effects or have they had to
be more reactive? In other words, are states implementing
policies proactively or are they being reactive to this
technology?
Mr. Schisler. I think it has come so quick that they are
forced to be more reactive. The changing landscape is almost
occurring almost at a geometric rate when you look at the cost
of storage has come down, the cost of renewables has come down.
We are seeing vehicle-to-grid technologies and what is that
going to do? Have we reached peak demand?
Utilities face a degree of radical uncertainty in their
planning paradigm that they have never had to encounter
throughout the history of distributed electricity service. And
I don't know that any utility or any state commission has
really wrapped their arms around what does integrated resource
planning look like in the future. There is a lot to do in terms
of thinking about how do we actually embrace the opportunity
with these new technologies while addressing this radical
uncertainty and still delivering safe, affordable, clean energy
to consumers.
Mr. McNerney. I agree.
Mr. Schleimer, I believe that you recommended a firewall
between subsidized and nonsubsidized generation. Is that the
correct interpretation?
Mr. Schleimer. Yes, sir.
Mr. McNerney. So could you describe what that firewall
means? What would that look like?
Mr. Schleimer. Sure. And there is a lot of different
variations of this, but it basically boils down to running the
capacity market two times. You run the capacity market once for
competitive generators that are not receiving subsidies and
that is basically the price that they get and so it retains the
competitive market price and aspect to it, then you run the
capacity market again and the subsidized units or the units
that are getting out of market contracts get the prices out of
that second run.
And so, instead of the subsidization deteriorating prices
for the entire market, you are basically keeping the
competitive market prices as they were assuming you didn't have
the subsidization coming in. And like I said, there is a
handful of different variations of that but that is the basic
structure.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Walden?
Mr. Walden. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thanks
again to our panelists and to the members for participating in
this important hearing.
There seems to be some consensus among all the energy
stakeholders that the electricity industry is undergoing a
period of significant transformation, I don't think anybody
denies that. And if just quickly we could go one end to the
other, from your individual perspectives what do you think are
the main drivers of that change that are transforming the
industry? What are the main drivers? Is it consumers? Is it
consumer demand, is it state laws, what is it that is from your
perspective driving it?
Mr. Kelliher. Low natural gas prices, lower than expected
demand for electricity, and the sharply declining cost of
renewables both wind and solar.
Mr. Walden. All right.
Ms. McAlister. I would agree it is basic market forces with
the low natural gas, but I think it is also consumers demanding
more and wanting different choices in their supply needs.
Mr. Schleimer. I would agree with that list, cheap gas and
wind and solar prices coming down. But I would also add that a
significant driver is cheap money. I mean there is a lot of
private investment occurring in the mid-Atlantic and the
Northeast and elsewhere just because, you know, borrowing money
is cheap and investors are looking for a place to put their
dollars.
Mr. Walden. Get a return. Yes, all right.
Mr. Reasor. Technology.
Mr. Walden. Expand on that.
Mr. Reasor. What is brought as lower gas prices,
technology, changes in the technologies of how we get that gas.
Mr. Walden. Fracking.
Mr. Reasor. So I would suggest technology has had the
largest impact and going forward in at least the foreseeable
future new technologies will continue to have the greatest
impact.
Mr. Walden. All right.
Ms. Linde. It is a very good question. And the most
significant impacts that I see are from technology impacting
the ability to get lower cost gas and that exposing the design
flaw that I commented on in the wholesale market and also
states. States are really driving towards policies that are
encouraging and enabling investment in renewables and without
that I don't think we would see the level of renewable
investment that we have at least in my area of the country.
Mr. Walden. OK. All right.
Mr. Schisler. I would say technology. Technology has
created an unprecedented democratization of the grid by users
of electricity. They can now use energy in different ways and
interact with electricity markets and interact with electricity
suppliers in ways that were not possible even a decade ago and
that is going to continue.
Mr. Walden. All right.
Mr. Glenn. June 19th, 2007, the introduction of the iPhone.
That has completely changed our business and our business
model. Customers want convenience, choice, and control over how
they use and how they reduce our energy. I completely agree
with Mr. Schisler. That combined with energy storage are the
two things that have transformed our industry.
Mr. Walden. All right, thank you.
Mr. Kelliher, you testified that competition has been good
for consumers as the markets have delivered benefits in the
form of lower prices. And while competition in the electricity
markets always intended to weed out high cost or inefficient
generators, we now have states favoring policies that would
potentially retain older, less economically competitive
generation for a number of different reasons such as zero-
emission benefits, job retention, tax base preservation. So
were the wholesale electricity markets, were they ever intended
to incorporate these state and local policies, can they and
should they? And then I have one other question if we have
time.
Mr. Kelliher. To me, sir?
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Mr. Kelliher. They don't and some critics of competition
policy fault them for not delivering things they were never
intended to deliver, which I think is a little unfair. But your
other question is, well, can they? That is what RTOs are
looking at right now and FERC is looking at right now. Is there
a way to accommodate, accept state public policy choices with
minimal harm to the markets?
And harm to the markets is going to occur either in the
form of suppressed prices or the exit of economic generation in
lieu of uneconomic generation, so I think there is no way to
completely protect the market. It is either going to hurt price
or force the retirement of economic units.
Mr. Walden. Well, and as you know, I think it is next week,
Mr. Chairman, you are going to have the hearing on RTOs and
ISOs and look at all of that side of this as well. Our goal is
to make sure we stay ahead of the dynamic changes in the
electricity market so that the grid works, so you get
electricity where you need it when you need it. And obviously
we have security issues that we will get into here and other
places, but adequacy is a big part of that and the time to
build out to make sure we have got the ability to transmit the
power where we need it is something this committee is very
concerned about as well.
My time has expired, Mr. Chairman. Thank you again. And to
our panelists, thank you very much for your participation.
Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Mr. Peters?
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to follow up on
the Chairman's questions. But before I let it get away, Ms.
Linde, what was the price that RGGI charged that you said was
too low?
Ms. Linde. I am not sure if I have it right here, but it is
in the--oh, it is $2.67 per ton of carbon.
Mr. Peters. OK, thank you.
Ms. Linde. As compared to much higher numbers that are----
Mr. Peters. Thirty to forty is other. So my question had to
do of just putting aside some very important issues for the
minute which is cybersecurity, which we talked about, putting
aside the pricing in the markets, we have seen a phenomenon of
this distributed generation. You say it is sometimes driven by
consumers who want solar panels on their rooves, sometimes it
is driven by state policies. I am concerned. What I hear about
is that that creates an issue for delivering electricity, to
making sure that when you turn on the lights from a systems
point of view that they will come on.
And Mr. Schisler, I think you said something like we
haven't started planning for that. What would that plan look
like? What kind of concerns would you like to raise for us to
consider as we see these technologies get deployed?
Mr. Schisler. So I think we are talking about two slightly
different things. One is sort of a long-term planning paradigm,
where do we need to transition and what transmission resources
and what types of resources are we going to need? Are we going
to need ramping resources or baseload, how much of it? That is
more of a long view question that regulators have to face.
It is a fact that we know more today, both grid operators
and distribution utilities today know what is happening
downstream at the grid than they ever have in the past. We have
better outage management response times. We have better
information at what is happening at customer sites. And that
is, I think that is where there has been innovation on that
side. Not just innovation on the consumer side, it has been
innovation on the utility side that has made the grid more
resilient and I think some of the investments that made in
recent years in grid resiliency in response to some of the
storms have helped do that.
But ultimately I think there is like a real-time component
to managing real-time operations and then there is the long-
term view.
Mr. Peters. Is that something that the private sector is
going to handle or is that something that governments need to
be involved in?
Mr. Schisler. Clearly, the real-time operations, I believe,
is largely a utility function. So it is the distribution
utility and it is the wholesale market and that is a regulated
function.
Mr. Peters. Anyone else have a comment on that?
Mr. Glenn. Congressman, Alex Glenn. Just to piggyback on
what Mr. Schisler said, I think, two things. One is, as we
invest that $35 billion in the grid it is going to make it
smarter. It is going to deploy new technologies, but it is also
going to use data analytics. So the last four people that we
have hired at our company have been Ph.D.s in data analytics.
And I think those two things combined are going to help
significantly the business that Mr. Schisler is in as well as
the ability of customers and the ability of distributed
generation to propagate across our systems in a way that is
smartly done. And that is going to be the critical aspect of
that.
Mr. Peters. And I think it has got to be a partnership. So
we, in San Diego, I think STG needs that 40 percent renewable
now, and I don't--that is obviously not rooftop, but that is
pretty good. But I think that now there is a clamoring among
consumers to do more rooftop and community choice aggregation
and all these things. We can't get so far out in front of it
that we are not talking to the utilities about making sure that
the grid is reliable from a supply standpoint.
And so maybe, Ms. Linde, if you had a question or a comment
on that I think it is really important to have that
conversation and to be in partnership.
Ms. Linde. Thank you. And I agree with Mr. Schisler that
Demand Response is a really critical component of our overall
system. We want customers to respond to the cost and not use
power and identify what price they are willing to not use the
power. But when customers want power, when their rooftop solar
is not working because the sun is not out, the utilities are
the ones who have to be able to meet that demand.
And it is not just having enough as far as numbers, it is
having the right mix, the right mix that can respond at the
right time in the right combination. And the NERC report that
came out this March addresses that and it identifies all of the
different characteristics of different types of supply and how
they work together. And it is important that we have experts
and transmission planners and generation planners looking at
making sure that when the flip, you know, someone flips the
switch and they want their power that the right mix is standing
behind it and ready and able to respond.
Mr. Peters. Right. We want to do that in my perspective in
a way that moves us toward renewables, but we have to do that
together.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Shimkus?
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is great to have
the panel. I think the bigger question now is do we get to the
process of rewriting the Federal Power Act, really, last
codified in 1935. We had testimony last year that said well, it
was so vague that FERC was able to run and help create these
regional markets.
And isn't the constitutional debate of what is interstate
commerce and if you excite an electron and it is going across
state boundaries that caused the question even maybe the
federal regulation of the interstate commerce, which would be
the transmission portion, and states' involvement is still in
the distribution.
So I think that is the bigger question, because we are
trying to--and I am not afraid to be involved in that debate,
because as was quoted by Mr. Schisler, we have democratized
this electricity use to the individual. And the iPhone was, Mr.
Glenn, you used the iPhone as an example. So, and Joe was here
when we did competition, when we used to have state regulated
markets and we moved to the regions.
But I want to spend my time--and the RTOs will be here next
week, but the people who have complaints about the RTOs will
not be here next week. And so I really want to focus on two
comments that are really the same, Mr. Reasor and Ms.
McAlister--Mr. Reasor, you have a beef with PJM and you are
wholly contained, OK, you are the rural cooperative, a
different model evolved over time and some would say obviously
it is a not-for-profit entity.
So briefly can you say, what is your beef? Because then I
am going to go to Ms. McAlister--at least Illinois Municipal
Electric Association has a beef because they are in two RTOs
which causes problems. So first of all, what beef do you have
with PJM because you are wholly contained, and then I am going
to move to Ms. McAlister to explain the separation.
Mr. Reasor. Thank you, Congressman. Our big issue is the
ability and having the first option that we can self-supply.
Mr. Shimkus. And you said that about 15 times in your
opening statement.
Mr. Reasor. I did. I hope you remember that.
Mr. Shimkus. So what do you mean by self-supply?
Mr. Reasor. We are a load serving entity. That is what
makes us a little bit different than some other parties.
Mr. Shimkus. So you are owners and the Federal Power Act
gives you the authority, in fact it is in the statute that you
can self-supply.
Mr. Reasor. Basically that is what we would argue.
Mr. Shimkus. Under 217(b).
Mr. Reasor. That is correct. Because we are a load serving
entity we have an obligation to meet the needs of the consumers
that own us, which we would suggest, I realize it is a
different model, but we would suggest is the ideal model of a
nonprofit entity that the consumer owns and that is where they
get their electricity.
We should have the opportunity to self-supply that load
to----
Mr. Shimkus. You should have the opportunity, it is in the
statute.
Mr. Reasor. Well, but PJM in the way that----
Mr. Shimkus. Well, that is my point.
Mr. Reasor. Yes. And as you said, I have a little bit of a
beef with PJM. However, I would say to you that when PJM
started their first option for us to meet their capacity
obligations, which are legitimate, was that we could look first
to our self-supply.
Mr. Shimkus. OK, let me go to Ms. McAlister. I am running
out of time. Because I hope, we haven't scheduled this out but
I hope you know where I am going with this question.
Ms. McAlister. I think I do. And thank you for the question
and just a quick point. We are also in two RTOs and we also
serve load in non-RTO areas, so we have kind of got the whole
scheme of things. So we have got the same kind of beef that Old
Dominion has and, really, the crux of the problem from our
perspective is that the capacity market and PJM over time has
evolved and become overly complex.
It also reduces the amount of resources, the types of
resources that can participate because they no longer meet the
definition of a capacity resource and it has just become so
unduly complicated that it makes long-term planning for
entities like us very difficult. And we are at risk with what
is called the minimum offer price rule which is essentially a
floor price that is administratively set by PJM that makes----
Mr. Shimkus. And let me hold you because my time is running
out and I want to get this point out----
Ms. McAlister. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. Is that so in Illinois we have
PJM and we have MISO. Most of our generation is in the south
from our Illinois municipal or even our co-ops. They should by
federal law be able to provide to part of their ownership up to
the PJM. But because of these regions, part of that load is
sold to PJM who sells it back into their market at a premium
versus the original clearing price in MISO, which means that
those people who are owners of the generation can't get the
real price of the generation.
And I think that needs to be looked at and I yield back,
thank you.
Ms. McAlister. Do I get to respond?
Mr. Upton. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Green?
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to welcome our
panel and thank the chair and the ranking member for calling
it.
I was just kind of reminiscing because I have been on the
Energy subcommittee and I look back in 2001 and '02 when we had
so many different problems that are--in the day we have some
problems that we can actually deal with, back then it was
almost intractable. But again coming from Texas we don't want
anybody messing with us and we will fix our own problems
through our regulatory commission. So we have a different
problem today, obviously availability and cost and that is
affecting everyone.
Mr. Kelliher, you touched on how significant changes in the
breakdown of our nation's electricity markets have led to
questions about the driving force behind the retirement of
certain types of electricity generation, market fundamentals or
policy on the state or federal level. You stated the
preponderance of the evidence suggests that market factors are
the primary driving force behind the retirement of uneconomic
generation methods.
Can you elaborate on the evidence you reference when
stating that the market forces rather than a regulatory process
has been the primary driving force behind the retirement, and
again both your experience on this committee as a staff member
but also in the industry.
Mr. Kelliher. There have been arguments from time to time
that negative pricing by wind is causing retirements of nuclear
and coal plants, and there is pretty, I think very persuasive
evidence that that is not true. There is PJM analysis that
shows that first of all, negative pricing is when you bid below
zero, but wind projects do bid negative from time to time, so
do nuclear plants, so do hydro projects. So negative pricing is
not something that is particular to wind projects.
But if you look at, well, when does negative pricing by
wind projects set the market price in one of the RTOs, PJM
analysis shows that it occurs 0.1 percent of the time, so that
is 1 hour out of every 1,000 hours. I think it is hard to say
that therefore that wind is the villain.
Mr. Green. Right, they are not driving the train.
Mr. Kelliher. Right. And then even in Texas, your State of
Texas where there is much more wind penetration in Texas than
in PJM, negative pricing by wind projects in Texas occurs less
than one percent of ours. So I think that shows that federal
policies that encourage wind development are not causing those
retirements.
And then the coal plant retirements, that is driven by in
most cases just pure cost factors. As I said earlier, an
uneconomic, an inefficient coal project used to be able to
deliver power cheaper than the most efficient gas project.
Those fuels have reversed themselves and now efficient gas
projects will always be able to produce cheaper than even more
efficient coal projects.
So I think coal retirements are really driven primarily by
economics, not by environmental regulation. There are some that
environmental regulation has been the tipping point where the
cost of complying with new requirements, arguably, is the
tipping point for some coal projects.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, well, again I have welcomed Calpine to Texas
over the last 15 or 20 years, and I joked at one ribbon cutting
for a cogen facility in our district and said, when are you
going to change your name to Texpine because so much of your
investments are in Texas? But I appreciate you being part of
our market. My Californians love that.
I am pleased that you discussed committed method of the
energy market in Texas spurring increased investment and
renewal in natural gas resources. You mentioned how these
investments not only lead to lower prices for consumers but
also increase in the electrical system reliability and decrease
emission rates.
And let me point out in your statement where you talk about
the Texas market, over the last 5 years electricity prices
declined by over 13 percent in Texas and historic lows.
Emissions are down also. Between 2010 and '16, the emissions
per million kilowatt CO
2
s were down 5 percent,
NO
x
emission and CO
2
, SO
2

emissions were down. NO
x
was down 24 percent and
SO
2
were down 40 percent.
I can't remember in my history of being an elected
official, whether it be in the Texas in the legislature or
here, I have seen that kind of result in the electricity
market. Can you share any other information outside of what
your testimony was?
Mr. Schleimer. Well, that has really been driven by, like
we talked about earlier, the low gas price environment and a
tremendous amount of investment that has been spurred in the
Texas market in both highly efficient natural gas-fired
combined cycles as well as, as you know there is a tremendous
amount of wind in West Texas and that has largely displaced a
lot of the coal and old steam facilities that the utilities
used. Those coal plants in Texas, a lot of them are in
financial difficulties now as a result of the change-out in the
technologies.
Mr. Green. Well, Mr. Chairman, thank you for calling the
hearing. Again, thank all our witnesses, because again it is
good for us to look at where we are today as compared to where
we were 5, 10, even 15, 20 years ago. Thank you.
Mr. Upton. The chair would recognize in perfect segue the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Barton.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will be brief. I
have to go to a lunch meeting.
This is an important hearing, but I don't think it will
make the front pages. There is a probably a better probability
of the latest Trump tweet being on the front page tomorrow than
anything we discover here.
But this is an important hearing, Mr. Chairman, because of
a small thing called reliability. I will tell you what
reliability is. I went out to my car this morning to attend
Chairman Walden's breakfast meeting with the subcommittee
chairman. When I turned the key nothing happened. I had no
reliability. As it turns out my alternator had conked out. It
worked yesterday, but it didn't work this morning. By the same
token, when the people that are putting this hearing together,
the staff getting ready for the hearing, when they came in this
morning they turned the switch, the lights came on.
Our electric grid has got about 100 percent reliability.
But that is not a given that it will always be so, and as we
retire more and more plants and more and more of our generation
is from renewables, there is nothing wrong with renewables
except sometimes the wind doesn't blow and of course sometimes
there is no sunshine. Water power is pretty much there all the
time.
So we need to really think about better ways to continue to
maintain and if possible improve reliability. One of the ideas
that has been circulating is this idea of using artificial
intelligence. Of course I know most people think that is what
the Congress has is artificial intelligence, but this is a
different definition.
So I would like the panel to comment on if they think that
this concept of artificial intelligence can be used to more
predict where the demand is going to be and help allocate the
supply to the demand so that we maintain as close as possibly
100 percent reliability, so any comments from anybody about
artificial intelligence used in the electricity grid? It is not
a trick question.
Mr. Glenn. Congressman Barton, this is Alex Glenn from Duke
Energy. I think that is going to be your next significant
plateau then in technology improvements.
Mr. Barton. So you think it can be used?
Mr. Glenn. I think it can be used and I think it ultimately
will be used, the question is how and when. And I think what
you are going to see is baby steps to look at it. And you might
see it in call centers first, so that there is artificial
intelligence in all of our call centers, and you may see that
ramped up in different aspects.
Mr. Barton. Is your company working on----
Mr. Glenn. We are working on that now to do that. So I
think as you see technology and the pace and rapidity of that
technology improvements you are going to see that continue to
be more ubiquitous as the years progress.
Mr. Barton. That is a nice word, ubiquitous. I will look
that up. Sounds good though.
Yes, ma'am?
Ms. Linde. I would also add at PSEG we are constantly
adding new technology to a variety of our generation
facilities, to project what piece of equipment in that
generation facility might have a fault. We just actually
upgraded some of our technology to have more predictive
information, because the lights need to be on when people flip
the switch. So our focus is making sure that our facilities,
there are no surprises.
Also in understanding the transmission system, there is
greater and greater intelligence being added to the
transmission system to tell us information before it becomes a
problem. And I agree with Mr. Glenn that I think we are going
to be seeing more and more of this and utilities are paying
attention. The industry is paying attention to this.
We also have to manage cost, so it is a balance between
adding the right amount of technology but not doing it in a way
that burdens customers if there is not a tremendous value. So
it constantly has to be weighed to make sure we are putting the
right intelligence into the----
Mr. Barton. My time is about to expire. Is there anybody
that doesn't think artificial intelligence is an option as we
try to maintain reliability?
Mr. Reasor. Congressman, I would just say that I am not
going to say it isn't. I think it is important for these
reasons that have been stated to help us better understand
where the needs are and the equipment and technology. But
remember, the old non-artificial intelligence tells you that
for good reliability you have to have the generation and you
have to have the transmission to get it there.
The artificial intelligence maybe can tell us where it is
lacking and maybe can tell us what equipment is failing, but it
doesn't generate electricity. And ultimately for real
reliability, true reliability you have to have the generation
and you have to have the transmission to get it there.
Mr. Barton. I eat a lot of health food but I also eat a lot
of meat and potatoes, so I understand. With that I yield back,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Olson. [Presiding.] The gentleman yields back. The
chair calls upon the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Castor, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to all
the witnesses that are here today. Congress doesn't do a very
good job thinking decades ahead and planning ahead, it is
always the next budget battle or the next bill on the horizon.
But coming from Florida, I am very attuned to the rising
costs for consumers and all of us due to the changing climate,
a/c bills and flood insurance, and Mr. Glenn knows in our neck
of the woods, beach renourishment to keep our tourism economy
going, what we have to do with property taxes to retrofit a lot
of water and waste water infrastructure, property insurance.
So it seems to me we have reached a point where the old
business model of selling electricity needs some updating and
some places in the country are doing that better than others.
The old business model was sell as much power and generate as
much as possible to make your profit build plants and there are
incentives for that.
But that doesn't really match up with what we need to do to
promote a better mix. Yes, the baseload and reliability are
fundamental, but we have got to do a better job in planning for
the future and incentivizing the demand response, energy
efficiency, conservation, and the transition to renewables.
Tell me what is working best out there across the country
when it comes to those kind of incentives for you all, what you
all believe can be the answer. Now realizing that we have had a
change and the Clean Power Plan isn't going to be pushing
everyone in all of the states, but what is working? What are
the best incentives for our utilities to help us with the
future?
Ms. McAlister. Thank you for the question. I think largely
what you are talking about the shifts in resources are really
being driven by consumer demand. And part of what we think
would be a good incentive is allowing those resources to
actually participate in the market without restrictions and be
on par with some of the other types of supply, so that----
Ms. Castor. What do you mean?
Ms. McAlister. Well, for example, in the PJM capacity
construct it has become more rigid and it has become less
flexible and it doesn't incorporate some of the renewables
because they can't operate 24/7 the way that some of the old
coal-fired units can participate.
Ms. Castor. Is there a particular state or region in the
country that is doing that better than others? Is there
something specific you can point to?
Ms. McAlister. I know at AMP in the Midwest we are at 21
percent renewable resources, which for a Midwest utility is
rather high, and that is because we are responsive to the
consumer demands. We are a member----
Ms. Castor. Is it consumer demand or has the states set
energy efficiency goals, conservation goals, or renewable
goals?
Ms. McAlister. For us it is not the state because we are
not regulated by the states, we are locally regulated. So it is
the consumer driving the demand.
Ms. Castor. Mr. Peters and I were comparing notes. What did
you say the San Diego area or--what is it?
Mr. Peters. Forty.
Ms. Castor. With renewable, based on renewable power. And
what is the state of California?
Mr. Peters. Thirty-three.
Ms. Castor. Thirty-three. And that is because--will you be
my witness, because the state has set those goals.
Mr. Peters. Well, certainly it is partly because the state
has set renewable goals and it is partly because I think the
consumers are clamoring for it as well.
Mr. Schisler. I would say one thing that is working well is
many states--California, Texas, and actually there is too many
probably to list now--are doing a good job of getting customer
data to customers through their smart grid investments and that
is empowering customers and opening up newer and more efficient
ways to use energy. So that is one example of what is working
well and should be replicated elsewhere.
Ms. Castor. I guess there was some discussion of cell
phones earlier, and this, the Millennial generation they are
ready, and I do hear too the consumers are clamoring for more
control now. Person-to-person maybe that doesn't make a dent,
but you empower consumers and work with your industrial users
over time and use technology and it kind of highlights the need
for greater infrastructure investment if we could ever get the
Congress in a bipartisan way to move on to energy or to
infrastructure investments.
And I know, Mr. Glenn, you talked about this. We have got
to make sure that energy resiliency and that we do an
infrastructure bill it isn't just the bricks and mortar for
transportation. It is very important, but it has got to be our
energy future to help us control the costs that I see on the
horizon decades ahead.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have run out of time, I yield
back.
Mr. Olson. The gentlelady yields back. The chair calls upon
the gentleman from West Virginia, Mr. McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
When we put two issues on the table, both the grid
reliability and the greenhouse gases and climate change or all
those combined, it is hard to extract good policy, good public
policy and how we might be able to address that because there
are consequences involved with those decisions and how that
works out.
For me in West Virginia it is different than it is in
California or Texas or elsewhere, is we have seen the impact of
the regulatory impact over the last 8 years. Example, in West
Virginia we used to have just in 2008, we had the second lowest
utility bills in the country for industrial consumption, now we
are 26th because our coal-fired power plants many of them were
shut down or they were required to upgrade their facilities to
such a level.
Now in conjunction with that at that same time, we had the
seventh best rate of unemployment in the country, now West
Virginia is 49th. So there are consequences to these. We have
got to understand when we debate these issues we are all
sensitive that there are consequences with it. And I don't
understand yet, I have not been able to find a good response
back for the coal miners across this country, but particularly
in West Virginia, what did they do to cause this? Why is it
they are losing their jobs? Why are there bankruptcies
involving them? We have got to be more sensitive to the
individuals when we set policy here that they are going to lose
their jobs.
So Ms. Linde, if I could ask you a question. If we leveled
the playing field and got rid of these tax subsidies that sweep
all across our utilities could the traditional baseload power
generators be better able to compete?
Ms. Linde. Thank you. The PSEG is not, certainly is not
encouraging the extension of those credits, but I also want to
be clear that the existence of those credits are not what is
causing our nuclear plants to be at risk. It is an aggravating
factor perhaps but certainly not the main driver. The main
driver is that there are fuel diversity and there are
environmental attributes which some people also value are not
being valued right now in the marketplace.
Mr. McKinley. And that is why I wanted to get to that
point, because you mentioned that several times, your main
driver. So my question to you would be, you talked about the
main driver or the economic stress on base plants and you
mentioned nuclear in particular, because I think that is a
solid baseload provider as is coal, is that the market fails to
adequately value and compensate baseload.
Ms. Linde. It does. There is----
Mr. McKinley. So shouldn't we do something about that?
Shouldn't we--again, my next--is in the market value,
reliability, and resiliency, but we are not.
Ms. Linde. We are not currently in the competitive
marketplace. And it is not because there is an intention not to
do it, it is just the market wasn't designed to do it. And we
are pointing that out that--and for policy makers to make
decisions. And we are pointing it out to you today, and we hope
that the policy direction given to FERC is that fuel diversity
and resiliency is important and we hope that that direction
will cause changes and fill that gap in the market.
But we are also pointing it out to New Jersey, because
states have an important role here. Some states like Illinois
and New York have already taken action. They are not waiting
because once these plants shut down they are gone forever. They
are closed permanently, and we don't think that is good public
policy.
So our ask is to recognize that these plants without a
change either from the state or the federal government or some
change in the price of natural gas which is certainly outside
all of our control, that without some change these plants, we
will see a shutdown, a continued and regular shutdown of these
plants until it is too late and we shouldn't let that happen
without deciding that we want----
Mr. McKinley. And if I could, rather than allow this to go
back up to 30,000 feet, what are specifics? Can you provide me
or this committee some specifics of how we might be able to
address the reliability and value that in our cost base?
Ms. Linde. Absolutely. And we can do that separately
outside of this committee, but FERC has been looking at this
issue. The DOE as was commented before is working on a report.
I think both of those places, FERC through their proceeding and
the DOE through their report, those are vehicles to identify
fuel diversity and resiliency as an important public policy
because it is a choice that is going to be made.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
calls upon the gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. There has been some talk
about that diversity that assists the whole equation here. And
while I am sure there are differing views on how it should be
done, do witnesses agree that it is important to maintain a
diverse fuel supply for the sake of reliability? Maybe go
across the board starting to our left here.
Mr. Kelliher. In general, yes, but we have diversity now
not because it was a goal, it is a byproduct of building the
next increment of supply is looking for the technology that is
lowest cost at the time and these tend to be long-lived
facilities, so it is not as if in 1960 we had a certain
electricity supply pie we planned to. I would say in general,
yes.
Mr. Tonko. OK.
Mr. Kelliher. In general, yes.
Mr. Tonko. If we would just go across the board and just
give us a specific yes or no. Thank you.
Ms. McAlister. Yes. Grid reliability is crucial and fuel
diversity is one aspect of that.
Mr. Tonko. OK.
Mr. Schleimer. I would agree with that that fuel diversity
is crucial but it is not single dimensional. You can't say one
fuel, you looked at one fuel versus another and it is more fuel
diverse. You have to look at flexibility, startup times,
shutdown times, ability to integrate renewables, so there is
eight or nine dimensions to fuel diversity, but absolutely.
Mr. Tonko. OK.
Mr. Reasor. Diversity is always good. You just have to be
careful that you don't start regulating and controlling
diversity and create winners and losers. That is a very risky
slope to go down.
Mr. Tonko. Ms. Linde?
Ms. Linde. I think you know my answer that fuel diversity
is important.
Mr. Tonko. We heard you.
Ms. Linde. And it can be a public policy without creating
winners and losers. A fuel diversity doesn't mean nuclear for
everyone. In some places nuclear doesn't exist. In New Jersey,
fuel diversity means nuclear continues at least for the life of
the licenses that they have.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Mr. Schisler?
Mr. Schisler. Of course fuel diversity is good, but I do
worry that we go down a path of sort of central planning and
picking winners and losers which is ultimately going to lead to
inefficiency. So fuel diversity is good, but I think we need to
use market forces to achieve it as far as possible.
Mr. Tonko. OK.
And Mr. Glenn?
Mr. Glenn. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. OK, thank you very much.
Ms. McAlister, do you believe the RTO operated markets have
provided the proper signals for a diverse array of electricity
resources?
Ms. McAlister. I do not. That is really not what they were
designed for as we have talked about a number of times. They
were really designed for least-cost dispatch and that is what
they are achieving, but they are not providing incentives for
diverse fuel sources.
Mr. Tonko. And again across the board, what would the
reaction be to that about the RTOs?
Mr. Kelliher. They were not designed to achieve a certain
level of fuel diversity, no.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Schleimer?
Mr. Schleimer. PJM actually looked at fuel diversity in a
report they released a couple months ago and they found that
fuel diversity, I think Mr. Kelliher referred to this already,
is actually increasing in PJM, not decreasing.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Mr. Reasor?
Mr. Reasor. Again, that wasn't their design.
Ms. Linde. Yes, I agree. It was not their design.
Mr. Schisler. It was not their primary design, no.
Mr. Tonko. And Mr. Glenn?
Mr. Glenn. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. OK. And obviously state policy decisions can
affect the fuel supply. Should state policies seek to promote
or maintain fuel diversity anyone?
Mr. Glenn. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. Ms. Linde or Mr. Glenn?
Mr. Glenn. Yes, just to put it in perspective, one dollar
for MMBTU increase in the price of natural gas for our
customers in Florida will increase a fuel bill by $200 million.
So if you think about that, fuel diversity and overall
diversity in your generation planning is critically important.
Mr. Tonko. And Ms. Linde, I believe you wanted to respond?
Ms. Linde. Yes. I do believe that states have a role in
fuel diversity. Ideally, it should be handled on a regional or
a federal basis because electricity markets are interconnected,
but states have a legitimate role and the courts have been
supporting that.
Mr. Tonko. Should the states give preference to reach
environmental goals?
Ms. Linde. Our view at PSEG is that it depends on the
state. States, that is a local issue. Some states have
renewable portfolio standards, others do not, and it is up to
the constituents in those states to decide what they believe is
most important. Ultimately, we have to do what is right for the
customers and for our nation, and a state is going to respect
what their customers and their citizens want.
Mr. Tonko. I believe my time is up, so Mr. Chair, I yield
back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman's time has expired. The chairman
calls upon the gentleman from the Commonwealth of Virginia, Mr.
Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much. I appreciate the
chairman from Texas recognizing Virginia and do appreciate
being with you all. I apologize that I have been in another
committee hearing for part of the time, so I apologize in
advance if I go over some previous territory.
I will say based on the opening statements and so forth
that I recognize that we need fuel diversity, but I also
recognize that I have some differing opinions with some of the
members of the panel because while market forces certainly have
played a role, the regulatory scheme in relationship to whether
or not a utility continues to use an existing, or what was then
an existing, coal-fired power plant has clearly been affected
by regulation as well.
And some of those, because of the cost to their ratepayers,
would have continued to use some of those coal-fired power
plants for some time in the future if--and I believe it will be
a low-cost natural gas supply for a number of years in the
future--as they went to replace those facilities they would
have replaced them probably with some mixture including a
higher amount of natural gas, but it was artificially moved
forward, in my opinion, by regulation. So I do disagree there.
I do think though that we should let the market work it
out, trying to keep a diversity including coal because coal
still accounts for 30 percent of our power source and that if
we eliminated subsidies in the marketplace for all of the
different potentials that coal would be in a much better
position to play a role in that marketplace.
OK, so I got all that off my chest and I do believe that
coal is going to need to be important when we look at high
usage periods, because you may be able to build a lot of
pipelines but you can't build enough pipelines to handle all
the aspects of a polar vortex. And yet you can put coal in the
back 40 and have it there ready to go in cases of emergency and
when things don't work out quite the way, which is why in the
eastern part of Virginia they just allowed two coal-fired power
plants to fire back up because they haven't gotten the other
supply there yet and they have got a transmission problem, so
we are going to have to go back to coal in a place where it had
already been eliminated.
So that being said, let me move on. I am going to call you
Senator Reasor because that is how I knew you originally. It is
good to see you. We talked earlier today. But Mr. Reasor and I,
Senator Reasor and I served at one point in time in our past in
the Virginia legislature, he in the Senate and I in the House.
It is good to have you here today.
Having missed some of it, I have got a question for you but
I am also going to give you an opportunity right now, is there
anything that you haven't had an opportunity to speak on that
you desire to speak on here today?
Mr. Reasor. I think I am good, Congressman.
Mr. Griffith. All right.
Mr. Reasor. I appreciate the opportunity.
Mr. Griffith. All right, so my question deals with
procuring capacity is necessary for a healthy wholesale market.
As a PJM member, I understand you may be unable to self-supply
the capacity that is required. Is this true and how would you
resolve the situation? And I am really curious how the self-
supply issue got turned on its head. But you can talk about
that some more.
Mr. Reasor. Thank you, Congressman, for the opportunity and
you are exactly right. And I would go back to basically just
saying this. PJM under their original structure did allow
utilities like us who are load serving entities to have the
opportunity to first look to our self-supply, and then if there
was not enough capacity within PJM they would obtain that
capacity and we would pay those costs as members of PJM. That
worked fine. We liked that situation, we thought it worked
well.
We are not sure--well, we have some ideas as to why the
changes were made because other parties and participants within
PJM saw the markets differently and wanted to kind of move the
system around a little bit and so they convinced PJM that they
should maybe do away with the idea of looking first to self-
supply, but look first to the capacity markets that PJM
instituted.
Now I will say that after a period of time we were able to
reach a compromise and they made some exceptions to that rule
that did allow us to look first to our self-supply and as long
as that was in place that worked, but the courts have now said
that may not be exactly because of a FERC ruling the way it
will be allowed, so we are a little concerned about the future.
Mr. Griffith. And would I be correct, and I am going to
need a yes or no on this one because I am running out of time,
but would I be correct if that makes it more difficult for you
all to look for, say, investments in the coal fields where you
might put a closed-loop hydro project inside of a coal mine
that policy makes it more difficult for you to even consider
that, doesn't it?
Mr. Reasor. It makes it more difficult for future planning
and long-term planning and a facility like that would have to
fit that category.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate it.
Ms. McAlister, real quick. Public power utilities like the
city of Salem and the town of Richlands are governed by their
city councils. How is the role of these elected officials and
local decision making respected within the capacity construct,
and you have got 10 seconds. Oh, you can get a little more, got
a little more.
Ms. McAlister. Thank you. I don't think it is in
particular, because the construct as we have talked about was
designed to do least-cost dispatch and it is not conducive with
local decision making.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate that.
And thank you for the extra time, Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
calls upon the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Ms. McAlister, thank you for being here today. As a
public power producer owning generating units throughout my
home state of Ohio and a few hydro sources as well along the
Ohio River adjacent to my district, I have appreciated your
thoughts and insights today.
In your testimony you state that we must not lose sight of
improving our current price formation processes regarding
transparency of operator decisions, modeling, all known
constraints, and more accurate price formation rules during
periods of transmission congestion and volatile fuel prices.
Can you elaborate just a little bit and explain what modeling
all known constraints might entail?
Ms. McAlister. Thank you, Congressman Johnson. What we are
really getting at there is that there actions that can be taken
on the energy market and we have focused today on the capacity
construct that we think needs a lot of work, but there is also
work to be done on the energy market side of it. And FERC has
been taking proactive actions to improve price formation
through a series of technical conferences and we are very
supportive of those actions and think that there is still more
to be done as far as modeling and ensuring that during times of
constraints we are getting the best least-cost energy.
Mr. Johnson. OK, all right. You talked about churning of
RTO rules. How frequent are these rules changed and what is the
impact of this churning that you describe?
Ms. McAlister. Well, since 2010, in PJM there have been 27
significant changes that were filed at FERC that fundamentally
have changed the nature of PJM's capacity construct. And the
effect of those is that the construct has become increasingly
complex and it also doesn't ensure transparent or stable prices
and it makes long-term planning very difficult.
So we think that it is time to acknowledge the capacity
construct as designed might not be cutting it and we need to go
back and do a comprehensive evaluation of whether we need to
change.
Mr. Johnson. OK, all right. Thank you, one more. You also
mentioned in your testimony that ``new energy products must
also incentivize the retention of sufficient nonvariable
resources to ensure load continues to be served at all times.''
Can you elaborate on this? What would that entail?
Ms. McAlister. Well, what we were talking about there is in
PJM with the recent capacity performance changes the definition
of what a capacity resource changed and in order to qualify as
a capacity resource you have to be available 24/7/365. And what
that does is it negatively impacts intermittent and renewable
resources.
And so one idea that we have is through bilateral
contracting it would value those resources on par with some of
the other resources that do meet the capacity performance
definition.
Mr. Johnson. Let me make sure I understood this. So you
would say that alternative sources that are not necessarily
available 24/7/365 would be evaluated on the same basis as
other sources, or is it the opposite of that?
Ms. McAlister. No, no. Well, I think what we would do is if
you allow bilateral contracting to have broader use then those
customers that value those attributes pay what they think it is
worth. And then the other resources, for example, coal, the
customers that value coal resources would pay through bilateral
contracts the value of what they see coal being worth.
Not exactly on par, I mean they have different values. Some
can't, if the wind isn't blowing it doesn't operate. So I am
not saying that they are equivalent as resources, just that
they should be allowed to be valued by the customers who want
those particular attributes.
Mr. Johnson. OK, all right.
Mr. Glenn, you mentioned most permitting regulations do not
impose a timeframe for agency action. Can you elaborate on the
reasonable shot clock for decisions that you mentioned in a
project delay your company is facing?
Mr. Glenn. Thank you. To give you a little context, we had
a hydro----
Mr. Johnson. You have about 25 seconds.
Mr. Glenn. We had a hydro relicensing matter. It started,
we filed our application 2 years before the license was to be
issued pursuant to the law. That was in 2005, I believe. 9
years later we receive that permit, so to me that is not a
reasonable shot clock. It has to be something less than that
and obviously it is a balance. But we need to have some type of
deadlines imposed.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right, well, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Walberg [presiding]. I thank the gentleman and now I am
pleased to recognize the fully repaired and recuperating
gentleman from Missouri, a man we respect and glad to have you
back with us, Mr. Long.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Glenn, you state in your testimony that the
original principles and the needs-based application of PURPA
have been overtaken by dramatic advances in the energy
marketplace and many of the requirements of PURPA are
unnecessary. Can you expand on why market changes have made
much of PURPA unnecessary?
Mr. Glenn. Yes. I would use North Carolina as a good
example of this, so when we look at 7 years ago, North Carolina
had----
Mr. Long. You might want to stay on your mic. I know you
can't see me through them, but it is fine. You are not missing
much.
Mr. Glenn. So 7 years ago we had 20 megawatts of solar
capacity in North Carolina. Today we have 2,000 megawatts and
it is largely due to PURPA-mandated contracts that we have to
take and pay for those contracts even though we may not need
those resources. We have another 5,000 megawatts in the queue.
To put that in perspective, that covers roughly three-
quarters to almost the entire square footage of Washington,
D.C. with solar panels and that comes at a cost to our
customers. And we currently believe right now that contracts
that we signed not 2 or 3 years ago are out of money and will
be over the 10 to 15 years by about a billion dollars. That is
a billion dollars that our customers are going to pay more than
they otherwise would have.
Mr. Long. So that kind of explains my next question, how
you tell these experience and operational challenges due to
PURPA, correct?
Mr. Glenn. The operational challenges are significant and
they are becoming more and more significant because there are
no ground rules on where those utilities are placed. It placed
it where the cheapest land may be and so our system wasn't
designed to handle a significant concentration, for example, of
PURPA solar contracts in one area of our state. That is
starting to have operational impacts on the way our system can
handle that type of influx that comes online just like that and
goes away with cloud cover or a thunderstorm just like that.
Mr. Long. What are some of the recommendations for updating
PURPA to reflect the changing marketplace you have?
Mr. Glenn. I think any updates to PURPA should be guided
by, really, two principles and that is affordability to
customers and reliability to the grid. And I think within that
there are ways in which I think PURPA could be amended that
will get at and really be a benefit to all of our customers.
Mr. Long. OK. You also highlight the need to address
workforce readiness giving the changing industry and new
investments and grid modernization. Can you discuss Duke
Energy's efforts to close this workforce skills gap?
Mr. Glenn. Yes. Right now we have roughly 30 percent of our
employee base is retirement-eligible and so we are going to
need to replace that workforce and with the grid modernization
investments that we are making that is going to require a whole
new cadre of employees to come online.
So what we are doing in our various states in which we
operate is working with community colleges, working with
technical schools, and working with universities to turn out
more relay technicians, more qualified people who can do this
type of work, more engineers.
So this is, for example, in North Carolina alone, this is
going to be a jobs driver of our $13 billion investments just
in that state alone, about 14,000 jobs a year. And those are
good wage, good quality jobs. And so we are working with the
university systems all throughout and the high school systems
to get a qualified good workforce who live and work in those
communities.
Mr. Long. And so it is kind of a double whammy. You are
losing 30 percent, 30 percent of your people are retirement-
eligible and you are going to add a whole new section to your
company.
Mr. Glenn. So we have got to replenish the old and we have
got to infuse it with new employees as well.
Mr. Long. And I appreciate your use of community colleges
and such. I know they are very successful in my area. But what
can you do to ensure workforce training programs reflect the
changing industry needs?
Mr. Glenn. I think we have got to work hand in hand with
our school systems, K-12 as well as high school as well as our
community colleges in developing curriculums. And that is what
we are doing, actually, in a lot of these community colleges is
we develop curriculums. We find professors, so to speak, and we
will donate money and resources, transformers, for example,
that they can work on. So it needs to be hand in glove with, it
is really a public-private partnership.
Mr. Long. OK, thank you.
And I am out of time, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman and I recognize myself
for my 5 minutes of questioning now.
I certainly appreciate the hearing, the context of the
hearing today, and I would like to thank the panelists for what
you brought to the table, literally, for us this morning.
Yesterday evening I saw a white paper by former FERC
Commissioner Tony Clark that called for the reform of the
outdated Public Utilities Regulatory Policies Act of 1978,
otherwise known as PURPA, and I appreciate the gentleman from
Missouri's questions on PURPA. It is an important issue I think
we need to discuss today. I don't believe this committee has
taken a comprehensive look at this policy since 2005, and I am
very concerned about the negative impacts this law is having on
Michigan ratepayers, my own included, and potentially on grid
reliability.
Mr. Glenn, I appreciated your comments on PURPA and have a
few questions for you as well. You stated in your testimony
that PURPA's mandatory purchase obligation is directly
increasing electricity prices for customers. Would you please
elaborate further on this?
Mr. Glenn. Yes. As I responded to Congressman Long from
Missouri, we are seeing in North Carolina alone about a billion
dollar increase above what our customers otherwise would pay.
Mr. Walberg. A billion.
Mr. Glenn. A billion. And that is just in 2,000 megawatts
of contracts that have been signed to date. There is another
5,000 megawatts of these contracts that are in the queue that
have not yet been built or signed. So this we see as a growing
issue and that is just one state in which we operate in.
Mr. Walberg. What are some other impacts PURPA mandatory
purchase obligation is having on utilities' ability to plan and
deliver the lowest cost, reliable energy to America's
electricity customers?
Mr. Glenn. What we are seeing now is an increase in what we
believe we will continue to see in the future are some
reliability issues. For example, next year we project with all
of the PURPA contracts that are coming online in North
Carolina, for example, that we are going to have to dump power
generated by some of our nuclear plants to other consumers of
power or we are going to have to ramp down a nuclear plant. And
a nuclear plant is not made----
Mr. Walberg. To ramp down.
Mr. Glenn [continuing]. To cycle and to ramp-run. And so
those are significant reliability issues and a nuclear plant is
our lowest cost operating plant for our customers.
Mr. Walberg. And this is because of outdated PURPA rules
and standards?
Mr. Glenn. That is correct.
Mr. Walberg. Are traditional baseload resources such as
nuclear energy that can operate 24/7 as you mentioned being
undermined in any other ways? This is important to me. We have
Fermi in my districts. We have Fermi 3 licensing already in
place, a lot of uncertainty how we move forward.
Mr. Glenn. And it places, you know, the dispatch ability of
a nuclear plant that is a baseload that runs 24/7. So that has
an adverse impact on our long-term ability to plan in how do we
use and operate and maintain those resources.
Reliability and affordability and increasingly clean energy
will always be our mission at our company and we will not
compromise that at all. But we have to go in with open eyes at
PURPA and really look at the facts and see what can be changed
for the benefit of our customers.
Mr. Walberg. Along that line then let me ask you, I have
heard that developers are taking advantage of PURPA to force
you utilities to purchase increasing amounts of electricity
from them more so than originally required by law, more
specifically, the one-mile rule. Could you explain this and the
impacts it is having on the utility industry, the one-mile
rule?
Mr. Glenn. The one-mile rule what we are seeing is
developers in some of their projects are gaming the system
where you can place your systems just beyond one mile of each
other to get under the PURPA requirements. So I think it would
be well served for the committee to just review on a fact basis
what does this look like and how might it be addressed in the
future so that customers aren't paying more than they should
otherwise.
Mr. Walberg. So the one-mile rule they are splitting up
multiple parts of their grid responsibilities and capabilities
to game the system?
Mr. Glenn. That is what it appears to be.
Mr. Walberg. Appears to be, yes. OK. Well, I appreciate
that information. I would also, in lieu of the fact we are
waiting for--well, I would certainly yield to my friend from my
own home district where I grew up in for additional questions.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Glenn, you said something that really kind of piqued my
interest. Not that you said, but it is one thing. You were
describing your job development approach at Duke Energy. Can
you expound on that a little bit more and is that an approach
that is shared by the industry in terms of utility companies,
your approach in terms of job creation? I thought it was pretty
invigorating.
Mr. Glenn. It is something that we have shared among our
utility colleagues, but it is something that we have focused on
in the last, particularly in the last 10 years as we have seen
our workforce and the demographics of our workforce.
What we are also doing is, because we are in seven states
in which we are vertically integrated electric utilities, our
folks live and work and play and coach Little League in those
communities and we want to represent and we want to be those
communities and represent who they are and so that dictates how
we hire as well.
And so we are very proud of the fact that we are--and our
last, 13 percent of our last new hires have been veterans, for
example, and 30 percent have been women. In a traditionally
male-oriented industry, 30 percent of new hires is a phenomenal
accomplishment, 31 percent minorities of all of our new hires
through June of this year.
So we are taking a global approach not only K-12 and then
in our community colleges with certain skill sectors, but we
are making a concerted effort to try to broaden our pool of
candidates who are coming in. And I think it helps that the
energy industry right now is an incredibly dynamic and exciting
place to be.
You know, maybe not everybody might think that but we hire
people for careers and not jobs and then so that I think helps
as well, so we are very proud of that fact.
Mr. Rush. I certainly want to commend you and do for this
approach and I think that this approach probably should be
duplicated across the industry. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walberg. Reclaiming my time and I thank you. I thank
the gentleman, and those are good points. These are good jobs
we are talking about and they are worth affronting and getting
people to understand that.
Now I am pleased to recognize the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, the subcommittee chairman where I spent part of
my morning, I am glad that you have made it back here. I
recognize you, Mr. Murphy, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the
panel and indulge me if I ask for some things you already
answered. I have spent the last few hours delving into
prescription drug costs and several organizations so we have to
multitask and make these quantum leaps in our actions.
But I do want to ask about some jurisdictional boundaries.
I was previously a state senator and so I am aware of a lot of
things on those issues and also the wholesale and retail
markets. But let's look at, do you think states and federal
regulators are even on the same page sometimes, or are there
some problems that occur when it comes to jurisdictional
issues? Can anybody answer that for me, anybody have concerns?
Mr. Kelliher. I am happy to start.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Kelliher.
Mr. Kelliher. There is always some level of tension between
federal and state electricity regulators and part from the
structure of the industry and what the states and federal
governments are regulating. It is different than, say, in the
natural gas business where producers are not really regulated,
the local gas utilities are regulated only by the states and
then the pipelines are regulated only by FERC.
In the electric industry you have a lot of vertical
integration and parts of a vertical integrated utility's
activities are regulated by the state, parts are regulated by
FERC, and then the line is not clear. It is the point where
there have been three Supreme Court decisions in the last 2
years trying to mark the line.
And this is, the core acts have been enacted in 1935, so
since 1935 there is still not perfect clarity on the
jurisdictional lines between the federal and state to the point
where the Supreme Court had to parse through that three times.
Mr. Murphy. Do they share the same goals or are they
different kind of goals when it even comes to such things as
providing assistance to economically struggle generation,
generating units? Do they have the same goals, federal, state?
Mr. Kelliher. They have different legal duties. I mean FERC
regulates the wholesale power markets and its basic duty is to
assure that prices are just and reasonable. Well, what does
that mean? It means they have to be high enough to support
continued investment in the generation that is needed to meet
customers' needs but not so high that they reflect market power
abuse.
But sometimes it can mean high prices. When natural gas
prices were high, wholesale power prices were high. Those
wholesale power prices weren't bad because they were driven by
high natural gas prices. So the price can be high and still
just and reasonable, whereas the state utility it is charged
with retail rates and in some cases states have maintained
vertically integrated utilities. So you go through the classic
cost of service regulation and what costs are prudent and not
prudent.
In other cases, states have broken up their utilities and
required them to divest so the utility is a pure wires entity
and they are buying power, typically relying on some kind of
RTO market and the state role there is different. The
vertically integrated state role, they are involved in resource
adequacy and what is the supply mix of each regulated utility.
A state role in a competitive market is different. It is,
is there enough megawatts, is there enough capacity to meet
their needs? So sometimes those duties clash, but I think many
times they don't.
Mr. Murphy. Does anybody else want to weigh in on that
issue? Yes, Ms. Linde?
Ms. Linde. I agree with the description that Mr. Kelliher
provided about the legal structure, but to respond to your
question about are their goals the same, I think the
fundamental goals, from my experience, have been the same. The
regulators that I deal with at the state level, and I have been
at PSEG for 27 years so I have dealt with a lot of different
regulators at the state level and at the federal level, their
fundamental goal is to make sure that the power is there when
needed and it is a reasonable price. That is a very commonly
shared goal among state regulators and federal regulators.
How to address different policy initiatives, sometimes
there is a difference because there is a difference in timing
on when the state has a particular initiative. We have seen a
lot of states develop renewable portfolio standards to
encourage development of renewables, and now we are seeing some
states like New York and Illinois and some others take action
to preserve baseload generating units.
The dialogue is occurring at the federal level and there is
a dialogue about what is causing that premature retirement of
baseload. PSEG believes that it is driven by a market flaw. And
that dialogue needs to continue to occur because right now we
have the federally regulated market that is not valuing fuel
diversity and that lack of recognition of fuel diversity is
causing a premature retirement of nuclear and some other
baseload units and states reacting much more quickly in some
cases as a bridge until the federal government and the federal
regulators can solve that problem. So sometimes there are
timing differences.
Mr. Murphy. I appreciate that.
Mr. Chairman, I reflect back on some of the fuel crises and
energy crises we had in the 1970s and we were going to make all
these great changes to the markets and we tried them for a
while and then dropped them suddenly.
So the issue of diversity is incredibly important because
the sun sets, the wind dies. We lose coal plants. We can go for
a surge for a while with natural gas and then we see prices go
up in that and then companies say, OK, we have to raise the
price now, but we also need natural gas to export for chemicals
and lots of other things there.
So diversity is the way to go then to make the market more
competitive, so thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman. Seeing there are no
further members wishing to ask questions, I would like to thank
our witnesses again for being here today and going through this
process. You are very helpful to us.
Pursuant to committee rules, I remind members that they
have 10 business days to submit additional questions for the
record, and I ask that witnesses submit their response within
10 business days upon receipt of the questions.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:37 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
