- EXAMINING THE ROLE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES IN HEALTH CARE CYBERSECURITY

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE ROLE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES IN
HEALTH CARE CYBERSECURITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 8, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-37

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

26-585                  WASHINGTON : 2018
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            GENE GREEN, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                       Massachusetts
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             TONY CARDENAS, California
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           RAUL RUIZ, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania
Chairman
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas                    JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             PAUL TONKO, New York
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                RAUL RUIZ, California
MIMI WALTERS, California             SCOTT H. PETERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia        officio)
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Tim Murphy, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the state
of Colorado, opening statement.................................     4
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, prepared statement.............................     8
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    10

Witnesses

Steve Curren, Director, Division of Resilience, Office of
Emergency Management, Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Preparedness and Response, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.......................................................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Answers to submitted questions...............................    47
Leo Scanlon, Deputy Chief Information Security Officer, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services........................    22
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Answers to submitted questions...............................    59
Emery Csulak, Chief Information Security Officer and Senior
Privacy Official, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services,
Co-Chair, Health Care Industry Cybersecurity Task Force........    23
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Answers to submitted questions...............................    78

EXAMINING THE ROLE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES IN
HEALTH CARE CYBERSECURITY

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 8, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:17 a.m., in
room 2322 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Tim Murphy
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Murphy, Griffith, Burgess,
Brooks, Collins, Walberg, Walters, Costello, Carter, Walden (ex
officio), DeGette, Castor, Tonko, Ruiz, Peters, and Pallone (ex
officio).
Staff present: Jennifer Barblan, Chief Counsel, Oversight
and Investigations; Elena Brennan, Legislative Clerk, Oversight
and Investigations; Katie McKeough, Press Assistant; John Ohly,
Professional Staff, Oversight & Investigations; Jennifer
Sherman, Press Secretary; Hamlin Wade, Special Advisor,
External Affairs; Jessica Wilkerson, Professional Staff,
Oversight and Investigations; Julie Babayan, Minority Counsel;
Chris Knauer, Minority Oversight Staff Director; Miles
Lichtman, Minority Policy Analyst; Kevin McAloon, Minority
Professional Staff Member; Dino Papanastasiou, Minority GAO
Detailee; Andrew Souvall, Minority Director of Communications,
Outreach and Member Services; and C.J. Young, Minority Press
Secretary.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TIM MURPHY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Murphy. Good morning. Commencing a hearing here on
``Examining the Role of the Department of Health and Human
Services on Health Care Cybersecurity.'' Welcome.
We are here today to continue our examination of
cybersecurity in the health sector as we discussed at our
hearing in April about the role of public-private partnerships.
Cybersecurity in this sector ultimately comes down to patient
safety. We had a glimpse just weeks ago at what a large-scale
cyber incident could do the health care sector including the
impact upon patients during the WannaCry ransomware event.
Today, we turn to the role the Department of Health and Human
Services, HHS, has in health care cybersecurity.
Recognizing the critical importance of cybersecurity in
this sector, 2 years ago in the Cybersecurity Act of 2015
Congress asked HHS to undertake two evaluations: one evaluating
the department's internal preparedness for managing
cyberthreats and a second done alongside industry stakeholders
examining the challenges with cybersecurity in the health care
sector. These evaluations are now complete and give not only
the Congress but the entire health care sector an opportunity
to better understand the agency's approach to cybersecurity.
The reports also allow us to establish a baseline for
evaluating HHS' progress, moving forward.
HHS' internal preparedness report sets out the roles and
responsibilities of various HHS offices in managing
cyberthreats, among other information. For example, the report
identified a single HHS' official--the cybersecurity designee--
assigning primary responsibility for cybersecurity efforts
across agency. But what precisely does this mean and how does
the cybersecurity designee work with the 11 components
identified by HHS as having cybersecurity responsibilities? In
addition, the committee has learned that many of the details
may already be obsolete due to recent and ongoing changes in
HHS' internal structure.
For example, HHS' creation of a Health Cybersecurity and
Communications Center, or HCCIC, modeled on the National
Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center, or NCCIC,
operated by the Department of Homeland Security could
dramatically change how HHS handles cyberthreats internally. It
is our understanding that the HCCIC will serve as a focal point
for cyberthreat information, collection and dissemination from
HHS' internal networks as well as external sources. However,
details about this new function remain limited. Therefore, how
HCCIC fits in the department's internal structure and
preparedness as well as its role with respect to private sector
partners will be a focus of today's discussion.
The second report released late last week focused broadly
on the challenges of cybersecurity in the health care industry.
This report reflects the findings and recommendations of the
Health Care Industry Cybersecurity Task Force. The task force
members were selected from a wide range of stakeholder
including federal agencies, the health care sector and
cybersecurity experts. And the report does not mince words,
broadly concluding that health care cybersecurity is in
critical condition. The report identified six imperatives such
as defining leadership and expectations for the industry,
increasing the security of medical devices and health IT and
improving information sharing within the industry. It made 27
specific recommendations. Many of these recommendations call on
HHS to provide more leadership and guidance for the sector as a
whole.
It is clear from these reports that there is much HHS can
and should do to help elevate cybersecurity across the sector.
The importance of meeting this challenge head on was
illuminated in recent weeks by the widely publicized WannaCry
ransomware. Frankly, we are lucky the United States was largely
spared from this infection, which temporarily crippled the
National Health Service in England. Doctors and nurses were
locked out of patient records there and hospitals diverted
ambulances to nearby hospitals and cancelled nonemergency
services after widespread infection of the ransomware.
This incident was an important test of HHS' response to a
potentially serious event and thus far the feedback has been
positive. Reports suggested HHS took a central role in
coordinating resources, disseminating information and serving
as a nurse in the public-private response efforts. But this was
just one incident and HHS must remain vigilant. The WannaCry
infection was not the first widespread cyber incident nor will
it be the last.
Therefore, a commitment to raising the bar for all
participants in the sector no matter how large or small needs
to be embraced. This is a collective responsibility and HHS has
an opportunity to show leadership and to set the tone. Because
this is no longer just about protecting personal information or
patient data. This is about patient safety.
So I want to thank our witnesses for appearing today and
look forward to learning more about HHS' efforts on this
important topic.
I want to also say we recognize that this is a very, very
serious threat and we will be asking more details about that
later. But one that has had that impact upon the National
Health Service in England, I shudder to think what happens
here.
If we are talking about threats to patients' medical
records, prescribing records, medical equipment, et cetera,
none of this should be taken lightly. This is a very serious
problem.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Murphy follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Tim Murphy

We are here today to continue our examination of
cybersecurity in the health care sector. As we discussed at our
hearing in April about the role of public-private partnerships,
cybersecurity in this sector ultimately comes down to patient
safety. And we got a glimpse just weeks ago at what a large-
scale cyber incident could do to the health care sector-
including the impact on patients-during the WannaCry ransomware
event. Today, we turn to the role of the Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS) in health care cybersecurity.
Recognizing the critical importance of cybersecurity in
this sector, two years ago, in the Cybersecurity Act of 2015,
Congress asked HHS to undertake two evaluations-one evaluating
the Department's internal preparedness for managing cyber
threats, and a second done alongside industry stakeholders
examining the challenges of cybersecurity in the health care
sector. These evaluations are now complete, and give not only
the Congress, but the entire health care sector, an opportunity
to better understand the agency's approach to cybersecurity.
The reports also allow us to establish a baseline for
evaluating HHS' progress moving forward.
HHS's internal preparedness report sets out the roles and
responsibilities of various HHS offices in managing cyber
threats, among other information. For example, the report
identified a single HHS official--the cybersecurity
``designee''--as having primary responsibility for
cybersecurity efforts across the agency. But what precisely
does this mean, and how does this cybersecurity designee work
with the eleven components identified by HHS as having
cybersecurity responsibilities? In addition, the Committee has
learned that many of the details may already be obsolete due to
recent and ongoing changes in HHS's internal structure.
For example, HHS's creation of a Health Cybersecurity and
Communications Integration Center (HCCIC), modeled on the
National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center
(NCCIC) operated by the Department of Homeland Security, could
dramatically change how HHS handles cyber threats internally.
It is our understanding that the HCCIC will serve as a focal
point for cyber threat information collection and dissemination
from HHS's internal networks, as well as external sources.
However, details about this new function remain limited.
Therefore, how the HCCIC fits in to the Department's internal
structure and preparedness, as well as its role with respect to
private sector partners will be a focus of today's discussion.
The second report, released late last week, focuses broadly
on the challenges of cybersecurity in the health care industry.
This report reflects the findings and recommendations of the
Health Care Industry Cybersecurity Task Force. The Task Force
members were selected from a wide-range of stakeholders,
including federal agencies, the health care sector and
cybersecurity experts. The report does not mince words, broadly
concluding that health care cybersecurity is in critical
condition. The report identified six imperatives-such as
defining leadership and expectations for the industry,
increasing the security of medical devices and health IT, and
improving information sharing within the industry-and made 27
specific recommendations. Many of these recommendations call on
HHS to provide more leadership and guidance for the sector as a
whole.
It is clear from these reports that there is much that HHS
can and should do to help elevate cybersecurity across the
sector. The importance of meeting this challenge head-on was
illuminated in recent weeks by the widely-publicized WannaCry
ransomware. Frankly, we are lucky that that United States was
largely spared from this infection, which temporarily crippled
the National Health Service in England. Doctors and nurses were
locked out of patient records. Hospitals diverted ambulances to
nearby hospitals and cancelled non-emergency services after
widespread infection of the ransomware.
This incident was an important test of HHS's response to a
potentially serious event and thus far, the feedback has been
positive. Reports suggest that HHS took a central role in
coordinating resources, disseminating information and serving
as a nerve center for public-private response efforts. But this
was just one incident, and HHS must remain vigilant. The
WannaCry infection was not the first widespread cyber incident,
nor will it be the last.
Therefore, a commitment to raising the bar, for all
participants in the sector--no matter how large or small, needs
to be embraced. This is a collective responsibility and HHS has
an opportunity to show leadership and to set the tone. Because
this is no longer just about protecting personal information or
patient data. This is about patient safety.
I want to thank our witnesses for appearing today and look
forward to learning more about HHS's efforts on this important
topic. I now recognize the Ranking Member, Ms. DeGette, for her
opening statement.

Mr. Murphy. So I now want to recognize the ranking member,
Ms. DeGette of Colorado, for her opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DEGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The country's vital infrastructure is under attack by
actors with malicious intent. We are constantly seeing new
headlines about vulnerabilities and cyberattacks against our
systems and these attacks are becoming more frequent and more
sophisticated.
In the health care sector, cyberattacks are particularly
devastating, obviously because they can harm patients. Just
last month, as the chairman mentioned, WannaCry ransomware
crippled information systems around the world.
Hackers infected an estimated 200,000 computers in more
than 150 countries. For the systems affected in the health care
sector, the WannaCry attack meant that patients could not get
their prescriptions at pharmacies and doctors even could not
conduct surgery in their hospitals.
Cyberattacks in this sector are unfortunately not a new
problem. For example, in 2015 more than 113 million medical
records were reportedly compromised by a cyber intrusion.
In one widely publicized case involving a health insurance
company, the personal information of nearly 79 million people
was compromises.
Cyberthreats have become a new reality that we must all
face. Information systems connected to the internet are vital
to the operation of our economy and our government. While this
interconnectedness is essential, it brings vulnerabilities and
unique challenges.
Just this last week, an HHS task force released a major
report on how to address cyber vulnerabilities within the
department and the health care sector.
This report identified many cybersecurity problems
confronting the industry, the department and its multitude of
health-related agencies.
These problems include a lack of cybersecurity expertise in
the workforce, a reliance on outdated legacy equipment and a
failure of certain organizations to address vulnerabilities
that can harm patients.
Our witnesses from HHS today will speak about their ongoing
efforts to address these threats both within the department and
within the larger health care sector. I am also aware that HHS
is working on a health care cyber center which I expect we will
also address today.
As with our previous hearing on information-sharing
analysis centers, I think it's so important that we look for
solutions. But toward that end I also want to make sure that
our solutions are measurable, efficient and effective in
protecting our nation's networks and systems. Defending our
nation's health care sector against a wide range of cyber
threats requires a coordinated effort involving many players
and approaches.
Because this is such an important area, we must continue to
find ways to strengthen our cybersecurity systems, particularly
relating to health care, including the problem of ransomware
and the threat of insurance and medical records theft.
Mr. Chairman, I am looking forward to continuing to work
closely on these issues with you as we do our work in this
vital area, and I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
I now want to recognize the chairman of the full committee,
Mr. Walden.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. I thank the gentleman for having this very
important hearing. This is really critical work we are all
engaged in together.
Our lives continue to become more interconnected every day.
This explosion of digital connectivity and information
technology provides us with previously unimaginable
convenience, engagement, capabilitiesm and opportunities for
innovation.
But for all its benefits, the digitization of our daily
lives also comes with risk. The internet information
technologies are inherently insecure. With time, motivation,
and resources, someone halfway around the world can find a way
into almost any product system.
As the opportunities for attackers proliferate, the
potential consequences of their actions are becoming more and
more costly and severe. As more products, services, and
industries become connected to the digital world, we must
acknowledge that the threat is no longer just data and
information. It is literally public health and safety.
For the health care sector, these factors present a very,
very real threat and equally daunting challenge. As we
witnessed with the recent WannaCry ransomware outbreak,
portions of the National Health System in the U.K. had to turn
away patients except for emergency care after vulnerable
systems fell victim to the exploit.
WannaCry did not appear to be a targeted attack on health
care but the potential consequence of the exploit on health
care--including patient safety--was far more severe. If this
had been a more sophisticated exploit or a target attack on the
health care sector, the consequences, as we all know, would
have been far worse.
The health care sector is starting to grasp this new
reality but, as noted in the recent task force report, which we
will discuss today, health care cybersecurity is in ``critical
condition'' and requires ``immediate and aggressive
attention,'' which brings us to today's hearing.
Clearly, the sector needs leadership. HHS is uniquely
situated to fill this void. Historically, the department has
struggled to effectively embrace this responsibility but that
trend cannot continue.
More recently, HHS has started to demonstrate a commitment
and focus to addressing the rampant challenges in health care
cybersecurity. For example, the department's actions in
response to the WannaCry ransomware--coordinated through the
newly established HCCIC--have generally received praise from
the sector.
This and other recent actions are positive signs that the
department is heading in the right direction. But HHS has a
long way to go to demonstrate the leadership necessary to
inspire change across the sector. It needs to be open and
transparent about who is in charge and provide clarity about
the roles and responsibilities, not only internally but across
the sector. They need to make sure that a small rural hospital
not only knows exactly who to call but also has access to the
resources and information to keep their patients safe.
This hearing provides an opportunity for HHS to provide
some much-needed clarity about your internal structure, as well
as outline plans to elevate cybersecurity across the sector.
The sector is operating on borrowed time. Cyber threat is
spreading and left unchecked it will pose an increasingly
greater threat to public health. So we appreciate your
guidance, your testimony and your leadership on this.
We look forward to continuing the partnership to make sure
that Americans are safe and secure wherever they are as it
relates to the internet.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Our lives continue to become more interconnected every day.
This explosion of digital connectivity and information
technology provides us with previously unimaginable
convenience, engagement, capabilities, and opportunities for
innovation.
For all its benefits, however, the digitization of our
daily lives also comes with risk. The internet and information
technologies are inherently insecure. With time, motivation,
and resources, someone halfway around the world can find a way
into almost any product system.
As the opportunities for attackers proliferate, the
potential consequences of their actions are becoming more
severe. As more products, services, and industries become
connected to the digital world, we must acknowledge that the
threat is no longer just data and information--it is public
health and safety.
For the health care sector, these factors present a very
real threat--and equally daunting challenge. As we witnessed
with the recent WannaCry ransomware outbreak, portions of the
National Health System in the U.K. had to turn away patients
except for emergency care after vulnerable systems fell victim
to the exploit.
WannaCry did not appear to be a targeted attack on health
care, but the potential consequence of the exploit on health
care--including patient safety--was far more severe. If this
had been a more sophisticated exploit, or a targeted attack on
the health care sector, the consequences could have been far
worse.
The health care sector is starting to grasp this new
reality but, as noted in the recent task force report, which we
will discuss today, health care cybersecurity is in ``critical
condition'' and requires ``immediate and aggressive
attention.''
Which brings us to today's hearing. Clearly, the sector
needs leadership. HHS is uniquely situated to fill this void.
Historically, the Department has struggled to effectively
embrace this responsibility, but that trend cannot continue.
More recently, HHS has started to demonstrate a commitment
and focus to addressing the rampant challenges in health care
cybersecurity. For example, the Department's actions in
response to the WannaCry ransomware--coordinated through the
newly established HCCIC--have generally received praise from
the sector.
This and other recent actions are positive signs that the
Department is heading in the right direction. But HHS has a
long way to go to demonstrate the leadership necessary to
inspire change across the sector. It needs to be open and
transparent about who is in charge and provide clarity about
the roles and responsibilities, not only internally but across
the sector. They need to make sure that a small rural hospital
not only knows exactly who to call, but also has access to the
resources and information to keep their patients safe.
This hearing provides an opportunity for HHS to provide
some much needed clarity about its internal structure, as well
as outline its plan to elevate cybersecurity across the sector.
The sector is operating on borrowed time. The cyber threat
is spreading and, left unchecked, it will pose an increasingly
greater threat to public health.

Mr. Walden. With that, I would yield time to the chairman
of the Health Subcommittee, Dr. Burgess.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
yielding. Chairman Murphy, thank you for holding the hearing.
It's a timely topic and, of course, it has real physical
consequences.
I am glad to see the recently published Health Care
Industry Cybersecurity Task Force Report, which we have now had
available. It's produced by the Health Care Industry
Cybersecurity Task Force and it's a step in the right direction
in improving our ability to prevent and respond to
cybersecurity events. It identifies the challenges posed by the
health care and public health sector in maintaining security
across unique platforms and devices that must work in concert
to enable accurate and timely deliverance of patient care.
It's even more important when we are considering that
health care information or health information isn't something
that can be easily changed like a credit card number or a phone
number. The health information that is there is there for life
and the integrity of the data is paramount to protecting
patient safety. I can only imagine the consequences of changing
a person's blood type, their allergy list or their disease
diagnosis in a system that is relying upon that information to
treat patients.
Overall, the health care and public health sector has
improved its ability to manage cybersecurity events including
the HHS' management of the WannaCry malware. But the balance
between security important data and protecting patient privacy
needs continuous evaluation and adjustment. It is indeed a
delicate balancing act.
Is there a point where information sharing creates more
vulnerability in identifying entities as targets of attack?
What happens when a health care organization limits the
reporting of breaches of a sharing of information for fear of
losing customer confidence or becoming a target. How do we
increase the availability of cybersecurity professionals in the
health sector?
So I thank our witnesses for being here. I look forward to
these discussions and it should be an eventful morning.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Michael C. Burgess

Good morning. Cybersecurity in the health care sector is a
timely topic that has real, physical consequences. In almost
three decades as a practicing physician, ransomware was never
an issue I faced. Now, the threats posed by malicious actors
are almost universal across the sector due to legacy systems,
poor cyber hygiene, and a severe shortage of qualified
cybersecurity professionals.
Most cyber attacks have the potential to cause real harm,
depending on the severity and target. However, in health care
cybersecurity, it is a certainty. Anytime information in the
health care and public health sector is compromised, it poses a
risk to providers, patients, and all those who serve and supply
them.
The recent WannaCry ransomware infected thousands of
computers across the world and severely impacted the health
care sector in the United Kingdom. While the U.S. health sector
was largely spared from this paralyzing malware, some
organizations continue to deal with the effects of trying to
eradicate this virus from their systems. The ease with which
WannaCry was able to infect so many systems is alarming--and it
was entirely preventable. While this particular malware only
sought to lock information until a ransom was paid, the
threshold remains low for more malicious actors to access
critical health systems. We must work to acquire the cyber
expertise, resources, and structure to combat such
vulnerabilities.
The report produced by the Health Care Industry
Cybersecurity task force is a step in the right direction in
improving our ability to prevent and respond to cybersecurity
events. The report also identifies the challenges posed by the
health care and public health sector in maintaining security
across unique platforms and devices that must all work in
concert to enable accurate and timely patient care.
This is even more important when considering that health
information isn't something you can easily change, such as a
credit card or phone number. Your health information is your
information for life, and the integrity of this data is
paramount to protecting patient safety. Can you imagine the
consequences of altering a person's blood type, allergies, or
disease diagnosis in a system relied up on by providers to
treat patients?
Overall, the health care and public health sector has
improved its ability to manage cybersecurity events, including
HHS' management of the WannaCry malware that resulted in
minimal effect on U.S. health organizations. But the balance
between securing important data and protecting patient privacy
needs continuous evaluation and adjustment. Is there a point
where information sharing creates more vulnerability by
identifying entities as targets of attack? What happens when
health care organizations limit reporting of breaches or the
sharing of information for fear of losing customer confidence
or becoming a target? How do we increase the availability of
cybersecurity professionals in the health sector? I look
forward to discussing these and other issues with the witnesses
today. Thank you.

Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Pallone for an opening statement of 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This committee has a long history of examining
cybersecurity. The federal government continues to make
progress towards addressing vulnerabilities in the health care
sector. But it's clear that we still have a lot of work to do.
For example, the 2015 Anthem attack highlighted the need
for all industry members to come together and find solutions to
cyberthreats. More recently, the WannaCry ransomware attack
demonstrated that cyberattacks are real-world consequences that
can place patients at risk. And now with the interconnection of
health records and a network of connected medical devices, the
threat of cyberattacks on critical parts of our health care
infrastructure is ever present.
While there is no single solution, it appears the
Department of Health and Human Services is making some traction
in assisting its own agencies and private stakeholders in
confronting cyberthreats. We must make sure that HHS has the
resources it needs to develop and implement a robust
cybersecurity strategy, something I hope we can explore today.
Just this past week, an HHS task force released a long-
awaited report that describes challenges and makes
recommendations to address cyberthreats facing the health care
sector. The task force determined that the health care sector
must pay immediate and aggressive attention to cybersecurity.
It also made a host of important recommendations to the health
care industry and HHS to consider.
There are no easy solutions for the issues highlighted in
this report. I look forward to hearing how the administration
intends to address them and, importantly, how this committee
intends to hold HHS accountable for progress or lack of
progress on this issue. I am also interested in learning about
how HHS plans to develop its newly proposed Health
Cybersecurity and Communication Integration Center and what
challenges it faces in establishing and operating it.
And finally, Mr. Chairman, I am interested in understanding
whether HHS has the budgetary resource it needs to
appropriately address its cybersecurity responsibilities. This
includes efforts to prevent cyberattacks. It also includes the
HHS' responsibilities to hold regulated entities accountable,
especially when those entities fail to protect the sensitive
health care information that we trust them to safeguard.
And in conclusion, Mr. Chairman, we need to up our game if
we intend to defend against a growing number of cyberattacks
facing the health care sector.
I am pleased to welcome our witnesses from HHS and I look
forward to hearing from them about how HHS can enhance our
health care cybersecurity. But that being said, I believe we
still have a long way to go to improve our preparedness in this
area and I look forward to hearing how this committee intends
to hold HHS accountable moving forward.
And I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing today.
This Committee has a long history of examining
cybersecurity. The federal government continues to make
progress toward addressing vulnerabilities in the health care
sector, but it is clear that we still have a lot of work to do.
For example, the 2015 Anthem attack highlighted the need
for all industry members to come together and find solutions to
cyber threats. More recently, the ``WannaCry'' ransomware
attack demonstrated that cyberattacks have real world
consequences that can place patients at risk.
And now, with the interconnection of health records--and a
network of connected medical devices--the threat of
cyberattacks on critical parts of our health care
infrastructure is ever-present.
While there is no single solution, it appears the
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is making some
traction in assisting its own agencies and private stakeholders
in confronting cyber threats. We must make sure that HHS has
the resources it needs to develop and implement a robust
cybersecurity strategy-something I hope we can explore today.
Just this past week, an HHS task force released a long-
awaited report that describes challenges and makes
recommendations to address cyber threats facing the health care
sector.
The task force determined that the health care sector must
pay ``immediate and aggressive attention'' to cybersecurity. It
also made a host of important recommendations for the health
care industry and HHS to consider.
There are no easy solutions for the issues highlighted in
the report. I look forward to hearing how the administration
intends to address them--and, importantly, how this Committee
intends to hold HHS accountable for progress, or lack of
progress, on this issue.
I am also interested in learning about how HHS plans to
develop its newly proposed Health Cybersecurity and
Communications Integration Center, and what challenges it faces
in establishing and operating it.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, I am interested in understanding
whether HHS has the budgetary resources it needs to
appropriately address its cybersecurity responsibilities. This
includes efforts to prevent cyberattacks. It also includes the
HHS's responsibilities to hold regulated entities accountable,
especially when those entities fail to protect the sensitive
health care information that we trust them to safeguard.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, we need to up our game if we
intend to defend against a growing number of cyberattacks
facing the health care sector.
I am pleased to welcome our witnesses from HHS, and I look
forward to hearing from them about how HHS can enhance our
health cybersecurity. But that being said, I believe we still
have a long way to go to improve our preparedness in this area,
and I look forward to hearing how this Committee intends to
hold HHS accountable moving forward.
Thank you and I yield back.

Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
And so now I ask unanimous consent that the members'
written opening statements be introduced into the record and
without objection the documents will be entered into the
record.
Now I'd like to introduce our panel of esteemed federal
witnesses for today's hearing. Mr. Steve Curren, director of
the Division of Resilience Office of the Emergency Management
Office of the assistant secretary for preparedness in response.
Welcome here.
Mr. Leo Scanlon, deputy chief information security officer
and designee for cybersecurity for HHS under the Cybersecurity
Act of 2015, welcome. And Mr. Emery Csulak--did I say that
right? OK. Chief Information Security Officer and Senior
Privacy Official, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
and Co-chair of the Health Care Industry Cybersecurity Task
Force.
Thank you all for being here today and providing testimony.
We look forward to a very productive discussion on this.
Now, I understand, Mr. Curren, you'll be the one presenting
the initial testimony? But since you all may be asked to
comment we will ask you all to be sworn in.
You're all aware that since this committee is holding an
investigative hearing when so doing it has the practice of
taking testimony under oath. Do any of you have objections to
taking testimony under oath? Seeing none, the chair then
advises you that under the rules of the House and rules of the
committee you are entitled to be advised by counsel. Do any of
you desire to be advised by counsel during testimony today? And
seeing none there, too. In that case, will you all please rise
and raise your right hand. I'll swear you in.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Thank you very much. Seeing that all have answered in the
affirmative you're now under oath and subject to the penalties
set forth in Title 18 Section 1001 of the United States Code.
So members are aware, I mentioned that the department has
submitted one written testimony on behalf of all three
witnesses. Each plays a distinct cybersecurity role within the
department.
They will give a brief opening statement describing their
roles and responsibilities. Mr. Curren will begin before
turning to his colleagues. Each witness' opening statement is
reflected in the department's written testimony.
Mr. Curren, you are recognized for an opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF STEVE CURREN, DIRECTOR, DIVISION OF RESILIENCE,
OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT, OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT
SECRETARY FOR PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES; LEO SCANLON, DEPUTY CHIEF
INFORMATION SECURITY OFFICER, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES; EMERY CSULAK, CHIEF INFORMATION SECURITY
OFFICER AND SENIOR PRIVACY OFFICIAL, CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND
MEDICAID SERVICES, CO-CHAIR, HEALTH CARE INDUSTRY CYBERSECURITY
TASK FORCE

STATEMENT OF STEVE CURREN

Mr. Curren. Good morning, Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member
DeGette and distinguished members of the House Energy and
Commerce Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations.
I am Steve Curren, director of the Division of Resilience
within the Office of Emergency Management in the Office of the
Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response, or ASPR.
Today I will be discussing ASPR's functions and cybersecurity
mission within the Department of Health and Human Services.
ASPR was authorized by the 2006 Pandemic and All-Hazards
Preparedness Act and works within HHS with federal, state,
tribal, territorial and local partners to protect the public
from the health and medical impacts of emergencies and
disasters. ASPR's responsibilities are broad and include
overseeing advanced research development and procurement of
medical countermeasures leading federal public health and
medical response efforts under the national response framework.
Serving as the federal lead agency for the health care and
public health sector under the National Infrastructure
Protection Plan and providing integrated policy and strategic
direction under the national health security strategy.
ASPR's Office of Emergency Management is responsible for
many of ASPR's core preparedness, response and disaster
recovery capabilities. OEM provides communities with the
resources necessary to support disaster planning efforts and
ensures that the health care system can respond to a wide
variety of emergencies. Within OEM, I am responsible for ASPR's
continuity of operations program which works to ensure the
resilience of HHS' systems and programs in the faces of
emergencies and disruptions. I am also responsible for the
critical infrastructure protection program which focuses on the
security and resilience of private sector health care partners.
ASPR works with all levels of government and the private
sector to mitigate risk from all hazards including physical and
cyberthreats. Over the past 5 years, few infrastructure issues
have challenged the health sector more than the proliferation
of cyberattacks. Within our modern system of health care,
nearly everything is connected through a system of systems
including dialysis machines and electronic health records.
Cyber is both a direct and a secondary threat. It could impact
everyday patients in health care delivery by locking down
access to important medical information and lifesaving
equipment. It can also exacerbate an existing emergency where
hospitals and emergency first responders are already working a
frantic pace to save lives. It cannot afford to lose access to
communications or risk further delays in their response.
Since 2014, the sector has been hit with a wave of large
health care information breaches, compromising the personal
information of hundreds of millions of individuals. In 2016, we
started to see the rise of health care ransomware attacks. In
these attacks, computer malware is used to lock up the files of
health care organizations while criminals demand payment in
exchange for restored access. These attacks shifted the threat
landscape considerably as they no longer threaten just personal
information but the ability of health care organizations and
thus communities to provide patient care.
When the massive WannaCry ransomware attack hit dozens of
hospitals in the United Kingdom just a few weeks ago, ASPR took
immediate action to engage broader U.S. health sector and
ensure that IT security specialists had the necessary
information to protect against, respond to and report
intrusions. This effort included calls with up to 3,100
participants each, daily messages with answers for frequently
asked questions, resources from other federal departments and
agencies and guidance on how to report attacks.
Beyond specific threats, ASPR and our partners have decided
to organize a joint public and private sector working group for
cybersecurity to implement national policies such as the
National Institute for Standards in Technology in the
cybersecurity framework and the National Cyber Incident
Response Plan. We have also benefited from the Cybersecurity
Act of 2015 which provided the sector with a structure to drive
its continued engagement in cybersecurity.
ASPR led HHS' efforts to establish and support the Health
Care Industry Cybersecurity Task Force, which has completed its
term and recently delivered its report to Congress.
In closing, HHS' cybersecurity mission is a national
response requiring broad collaboration. The department is
committed to safe, secure, and resilient cyber environment that
promotes cybersecurity knowledge, innovation, confidentiality,
and privacy in collaboration with government, private sector,
and international partners.
While the cyber realm is ever evolving and presenting new
challenges, please be assured that HHS and our partners are
moving in the right direction.
Mr. Murphy. All right. Thank you very much.
I will now recognize myself for some opening questions for
5 minutes. Oh, we are going to hear from the other ones? All
right. I am sorry. I didn't realize how much this was going to
go.
Mr. Scanlon.
[The prepared statement of Messrs. Curren, Scanlon, and
Csulak follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT OF LEO SCANLON

Mr. Scanlon. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member DeGette, and
members of the subcommittee. I am Leo Scanlon, Deputy Chief
Information Security Officer and the designated Senior Advisor
for Health Care, Public Health Sector Cybersecurity at the
Department of Health and Human Services.
I am also the designated Senior Advisor of Public Health. I
already said that. I will be discussing the agency's response
to CISA, in particular the designation of senior advisor and
the establishment of the Health Care Cybersecurity
Communications Integration Center--otherwise known as the
HCCIC.
Both of these actions will support enhanced public-private
partnerships through regular engagement and outreach to the
sector. These actions are consistent with Executive Order 13800
and are a direct response to the Cybersecurity Act of 2015.
These critically important steps will leverage HHS
capabilities and outreach to help the HPH sector improve its
preparedness for and response to security incidents now and
into the future.
The senior advisor of cybersecurity will align and
coordinate the internal stakeholders to collaborate with the
private sector, the U.S. Department of Commerce's National
Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST, and the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security, DHS, to develop voluntary
guidelines to support adoption of the NIST cybersecurity
framework and to support the HPH sector risk reduction and
resilience.
DSA is the chair of the HHS Cybersecurity Working Group,
which is the principal forum for coordinating cybersecurity
support and response across all HHS operating divisions and
staff divisions. DSA and the CSWG are tasked with the job of
establishing a one-stop point of access to HHS cybersecurity
capabilities--a cyber 311 that will allow access to HHS for the
entire sector, especially the small and rural provider entities
who rarely interact with the federal government and who need
sector-specific mitigation strategies, guidance, and follow-on
assistance in response to cyberattacks.
The HCCIC is designed to be the central location for HPH
information sharing and will allow HHS to extend internal
threat sharing and analytic capability to our federal partners,
law enforcement and intelligence partners, the National
Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center, the NCCIC,
and our private sector partners at the NHISAC and other ISALs.
The most important outputs of the HCCIC, though, are products
and guidance that are human consumable by entities that do not
have the sophisticated technology that supports machine speed
reaction to threat indicators. Smaller entities need
information that they can use no matter what their capabilities
are. This includes basic cybersecurity guidance, how-to
instructions as well as assistance in contacting specialists
within HHS and assistance in accessing federal capabilities
such as those that are available through the DHS and the NCCIC.
In the recent WannaCry mobilization, HCCIC analysts
provided early warning of the potential impact of the attack
and HHS responded by putting the secretary's operation center,
the SOC, on alert. This was the first time that a cyberattack
was the focus of such a mobilization and HCCIC was able to
support ASPR's interactions with the sector by providing real-
time cyber situation awareness, best practices guidance and
coordination with US-CERT and the IRT teams at the NCCIC.
Sector calls generated by ASPR reached thousands of health
care organizations and providers. One call had more than 3,000
lines open and continued for more than two hours of questions
and discussion. The experiences provided a rich set of lessons
learned and has highlighted the disturbing reality that the
true state of cybersecurity risk in the sector is under
reported by orders of magnitude and the vast majority of the
HPH sector is in dire need of cybersecurity assistance.
The SA, the HCCIC, and the CSWG have the long-term task of
assisting the sector to shift from a compliance-oriented
security posture to a dynamic risk management approach. This
means different things at different levels of the sector, but
one thing is clear. The regulatory mechanisms that served to
call attention to the need to protect PHI and PII are
fundamentally challenged by the technical capabilities of
threat actors who operate at scale and machine speed and who
have brought the specter of life-threatening impact from a
cyberattack into the operating rooms and ambulances of our
providers and first responders.
HHS is prepared to play a leading role in addressing that
challenge.

STATEMENT OF EMERY CSULAK

Mr. Csulak. Thank you.
Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member DeGette and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the work
of the department's Health Care Industry Cybersecurity Task
Force.
In addition to my role as the chief information security
officer and senior official for privacy at the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services, for the last year I served as
the government co-chair of the task force.
The Cybersecurity Act of 2015 required the Department of
Health and Human Services to convene top subject matter experts
from across industry and government to address the growing
challenges of cybersecurity attacks targeting health care.
The task force spent a year receiving and reviewing input
from experts from inside and outside the health care industry
and the general public in order to develop recommendations and
action items for a congressional report that was released
earlier this month. I want to thank the 21 task force members,
including 17 from private sector organizations, whose
contributions made this report possible based on their passion
to improve the sector.
The task force worked diligently to balance the industry
and government perspectives. The task force discussions
resulted in the development of six imperatives along with
cascading recommendations and action items. All of these
reflect the need for a unified effort among public and private
sector organizations of all sizes and across all subsectors to
work together to meet an urgent challenge. They also reflect
shared understanding that for the health care industry
cybersecurity issues are, at the heart, patient safety issues.
I want to take this opportunity to provide a brief overview
of some of the report's most important recommendations. These
are the steps that can be taken within the industry as well as
by the federal government, including recommendations for HHS to
consider in addressing the cybersecurity challenges facing the
sector. A few key themes emerged from these recommendations.
First, the task force identified the need for cybersecurity
leadership. The report outlines the importance of leadership to
drive organizational change and ensure adequate visibility
across organizations. For HHS cybersecurity leadership focuses
on aligning programs to ensure a consistent message and
standards across HHS with engagement of industry.
The task force also addresses the need to reduce burden for
small and rural providers who may have additional challenges in
meeting HHS regulations. For industry, leadership focuses on
communication with executives, driving change, and taking a
comprehensive look at the threats facing an organization.
Industry needs cybersecurity governance models that work for
organizations of all sizes and provider types.
Second, the task force report highlights the importance of
protecting medical devices and other health IT. Medical devices
and electronic health records expand the attack service which
can directly impact patient safety. Some issues raised in the
report include taking a total life cycle approach to
recommending a mix of regulation, accreditation, information
sharing, and voluntary development and adoption of standards to
promote system security from product design and development
through product end of life.
Third, the task force found that HHS needs to make the
discussion, oversight, and engagement around cybersecurity
clearly and consistently messaged. This includes completing
work on a voluntary cybersecurity framework established in the
Cybersecurity Act of 2015 and harmonizing regulations and
guidance as part of HHS' sector engagement. By speaking the
same language, barriers to education and improvement of the
sector will be lowered. It is clear to members of the task
force that we must consider the unique needs of small and rural
organizations as well as new entrants and innovators. These
organizations can have different and sometimes more acute needs
than large organizations who have already invested in
cybersecurity and infrastructure. Harmonizing regulations can
help to reduce burden on these organizations in particular and
thus increase patient safety.
Finally, the task force calls for continuing to strengthen
public-private partnerships. In particular, the task force
calls for the establishment of an ongoing public-private forum
similar to the task force to further the discussions of health
care industry cybersecurity as the industry evolves.
Task force members found this engagement with federal
partners beneficial to understand our common cybersecurity
challenges and concerns.
These efforts will also enable an ongoing conversation and
develop strategies to identify resources and incentives that
would help to overcome the barriers faced by small and rural
organizations.
While much of what we recommend will require hard work,
difficult decisions, and commitment of resources, we will be
encouraged and unified by our shared values as health care
industry professionals in our commitment to providing safe
high-quality care.
Thank you for the opportunity to share the task force work
and I am happy to answer any of your questions.
Mr. Murphy. I thank all of our panel for your statements.
I want to read the opening sentence here from the Health
Care Industry Cybersecurity Task Force, where it says the
health care system cannot deliver effective and safe care
without deeper digital connectivity.
If the health care system is connected but insecure, this
connectivity could betray patient safety, subjecting them to
unnecessary risk and forcing them to pay unaffordable personal
costs.
To that end, Mr. Curren, want to highlight why this is
important? In your opinion, what is at stake when health care
information is compromised by a cyber threat? How bad does this
get?
Mr. Curren. Thank you very much for the question.
It is an issue that's very important to us and that we take
very seriously because the risk of attacks to the health care
infrastructure from cyberattacks really is confidence in the
health care system in general and we think that patients should
have confidence in the system to provide care, also to provide
protection to their information.
You asked about the need to balance two very important
concerns. One concern is the use of electronic medical records
and other health technologies to advance care, to link
information, to provide medical devices that provide excellent
care to individuals as well as provide the security to keep
those systems and those devices safe and that is the commitment
I think that the task force made as we were involved in their
discussions was to advance those issues together because really
we can't do one without the other. We need to rely on these
technologies. We also need to focus on keeping them safe.
Mr. Murphy. But along these lines--in terms of what could
happen here, whether it is like what happened in the United
Kingdom--blocking a system from working entirely so voluntary
surgery and others and emergency care was all diverted. But it
could also affect things like information about what is in a
medical records, medications a person may take and it could
also interfere with the functions of a wide range of medical
devices. Am I clear on that?
Mr. Curren. There's always potential for patient safety
issues related to cybersecurity incidents and we like to put
that into context.
We don't think the patient should overweigh the concern of
cybersecurity risk when they go seek care. We do believe the
benefits of care, the benefits of these devices and these
systems greatly outweigh the risks that are there.
However, we do need to take the risks seriously. What I can
say is that HHS--we are set up to respond to both the cyber
impacts of these attacks as well as the potential physical
impacts, impacts on health care. Through our program ASPR, just
to give the WannaCry example as one example, we worked very
closely with Leo's organization and the HCCIC. They were active
in getting the latest information on the threat, analyzing it,
understanding what the issues were and communicating that to
our partners in the health care sector.
Meanwhile, we were working out of the secretary's operation
center and prepared for any type of health care impact that
there might have been to provide resources that ASPR has to
assist in those responses.
Mr. Murphy. And I appreciate it. I will get to that in a
minute and you did play a vital role here. But I'm concerned
about that information about the various roles and capability
of HHS.
Has it been adequately conveyed to industry yet? And this
has got to be a public-private partnership. So we are aware you
created the HCCIC and to serve as the nexus for cybersecurity
efforts.
But to date there has been little public information about
this new center to start. So why did HHS decide to establish
the HCCIC? Did someone recommend this and is there a reason for
this recommendation?
Mr. Curren. Let me start out, then I will hand it to my
colleague, Leo Scanlon. We have had a partnership with the
private sector for many years in critical infrastructure
protection since Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7 in
2003 started these infrastructure partnerships across 16
critical infrastructure sectors.
What has changed in the past several years is the
importance of the cyberthreat and HHS is evolving to meet that
threat.
So we work very closely with our partners both internal to
HHS as well as externally. So, Leo, maybe expand on the HCCIC.
Mr. Scanlon. Yes, sir.
The impulse to establish the HCCIC, continuing on what
Steve just pointed out, is really based on the evolution of the
way defense against these threats is carried out.
We've learned over the past few years that the machine
generated information that we now have from our log files and
our firewalls and other defensive devices is an enormous
firehose of information and ultimately has to be analyzed by
analysts who are specialists who can interpret, understand and
put context to this information and that's best carried out in
a collective environment where people sit together and can
communicate in real time and be in touch with their external
organizations and other partners and this is what the NCCIC
floor, for example, is all about.
That's what it does at a national level. It allows
different sectors and organizations and intelligence
organizations to be present, communicate and share information.
The HCCIC is designed to do that both across the HHS
operating divisions to knit together the very formidable
capabilities that exist in each of our operation divisions of
CMS, CDC, NIH and put them together in real time and then
provide real-time links to our partners externally and that's
the fundamental purpose of it.
Mr. Murphy. Who recommended this?
Mr. Scanlon. It was our internal decision to take the
existing capabilities that we have that were set up in a
disparate fashion, unite them in a common place and take this
model of threat sharing which has now become an industry
standard and apply it to the challenge that we face.
So it was an immediate response in that sense to the CISA
Act requirement that we develop the capacity to share threats
in real time with the sector.
So that's the capability that the HCCIC provided and that
was the form that we determined was the most efficient and
effective way to do that.
Mr. Murphy. OK. Thank you.
Ms. DeGette, 5 minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, the WannaCry
cyberattack was really a wake-up call. So I want to talk for a
minute about what we are doing to prevent and to respond to
these types of attacks in the health care sector.
As we heard, HHS is launching the HCCIC, or the Cyber
Center, and in your testimony you said that HCCIC was an
integral part of ASPR's coordinated response to the WannaCry
incident.
So I just wanted to ask you, Mr. Curren, as you stated and
also I noted in my opening the Cyber Center was established to
address gaps in cybersecurity and also to help prevent attacks
like this WannaCry attack. Is that right?
Mr. Curren. And this would be the HCCIC.
Ms. DeGette. Yes.
Mr. Curren. Yes, and Leo could talk more to that. Within
ASPR we coordinate for the WannaCry incident response. Whether
it's a hurricane, tornado, or cyber event, we coordinate for
the department. But the HCCIC was one capability within that
for this cyberattack to coordinate the sharing of cyber
information and response.
Ms. DeGette. So how do you think this will happen? How do
you think the Cyber Center can be effective in protecting HHS'
health networks and systems? Go ahead, Mr. Scanlon.
Mr. Scanlon. Thank you. Yes. So the value of the HCCIC is
evidenced in the way we were able to work in the WannaCry
incident.
There's a broad and very deep communications capability
that ASPR has to the sector. We were able to get another
component of information gathered through cybersecurity
specialists to provide situational awareness, which is the most
important thing in a dynamic event.
Facts are very hard to grab when an attack like this is
going on. Attribution, who is doing it, what their intentions
are and exactly what's going to happen next all disappears on a
fog of activity.
We were attempting at all times to bring the best knowledge
that was available across the sector from US-CERT, from the
NCCIC, from our sector partners and communicate that out.
That's a capability that did not exist in a formalized way
until we created the HCCIC and the intention of the HCCIC was
to support the ASPR capability. They have all-hazards response.
So this is a cybersecurity function that we wanted to bring
into the all-hazards response capability.
Ms. DeGette. Yes. Now, can you talk about FDA's information
technology systems? Is that something you can talk about?
Mr. Scanlon. I can tell you about what we did to
communicate FDA's and the most important concerns that were
raised in the----
Ms. DeGette. OK. Yes. Well, there was this GAO report last
August that said there were major weaknesses in the FDA's
information technology.
So what I was wondering is, number one, why were the FDA's
IT systems allowed to be so plagued with the security issues
and, number two, what's the agency doing about it?
Mr. Scanlon. I think that it would be more appropriate for
us to take that back and get back to you with specific. None of
us are from the FDA.
Ms. DeGette. Right.
Mr. Scanlon. So it would be not very----
Ms. DeGette. OK. So you don't know the answers to that?
Mr. Scanlon. I couldn't give you an authoritative answer.
Ms. DeGette. So from the HSS perspective though, you didn't
have very good visibility into what was happening over there.
Is that right? At the FDA.
Mr. Scanlon. You're referring to the GAO audit and the
findings of the audit?
Ms. DeGette. Right. Yes.
Mr. Scanlon. This is not in any of our purview, honestly.
Ms. DeGette. OK. If you can get back to me that would be
good because----
Mr. Scanlon. We would be very happy to do that.
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. What we really worry about is
that cybersecurity attacks they're going to come throughout all
the government. They're not just going to focus on one agency.
And so that's why we have to really----
Mr. Scanlon. Well, ma'am, I could say to you though that
one of the functions of the HCCIC has been to enhance the
existing capabilities across our operating divisions, which are
formidable and have been very effective in many, many ways.
And so this is where the agency is taking steps constantly
to evaluate, assess and improve our cybersecurity capabilities
in all of our operating divisions.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Do you think there's more we could be
doing?
Mr. Scanlon. There's always more we could be doing.
Ms. DeGette. And what do you need from us to do more?
Mr. Scanlon. I don't have to say we are always looking for
funds to help us support these activities.
Ms. DeGette. So if you want funds to support the activities
what would be helpful to us is to know what those activities
you need additional funding for.
Mr. Scanlon. We could certainly get back to you with
specifics.
Ms. DeGette. Great. OK. Thank, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
I now recognize the vice chair of the committee, Mr.
Griffith, for five minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
all for being here this morning. I am curious, as Congresswoman
DeGette was talking about the FDA and she's right. They're not
going to just try one door. They're going to try all the doors.
So I would hope that they would be included.
Maybe you all can help me out. I'm listening to all these
initials being thrown around and this is not an area I'm
comfortable with. HCCIC versus Health Care in Industry
Cybersecurity Task Force that was called upon to be set up as a
part of the Cybersecurity Act. What are the differences in
those two?
Mr. Scanlon. Yes. So the HCCIC is simply an easy way to say
the large mouthful. The HCCIC is an organization within HHS and
it is responding to, as I mentioned, in specific the
recommendations in the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act,
which requested the agency or required the agency to establish
the ability to do real timesharing of threat indicators with
the sector. So that is what the HCCIC does with respect to the
CISA Act.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Any of you all can answer this who
feels comfortable with it--but the Health Care Industry
Cybersecurity Task Force that was supposed to be set up, what
is that doing and how often do they meet?
Mr. Csulak. OK. The Health Care Industry Cybersecurity Task
Force, again, was established as part of the Cybersecurity Act
of 2015. It had a very segmented period of time. It was
literally by the legislation to only last 12 months. So we
completed our work earlier this year and during that time we
met at least monthly with both industry as well as the
government to inform and advise the 21 members of the task
force in the creation of this report of really looking and
analysing the challenges facing health care sector in----
Mr. Griffith. And we appreciate that the report came out.
So you're telling me that you met at least 12 times during the
year, maybe some more?
Mr. Csulak. A lot more than 12 but the minimum was 12.
Mr. Griffith. Could you get us a number on how many times
you met?
Mr. Csulak. It is actually in the appendices of the report.
Mr. Griffith. Excellent.
Mr. Csulak. You will see every single meeting that we had
and who attended it.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I appreciate that.
And can you tell me how the representatives were selected
to be on the task force from both the health care sector and
from the federal government?
Mr. Csulak. We did an open call of interested individuals
for that. I believe Mr. Curren actually arranged the scheduling
of all of that but we had over a hundred candidates who were
self-nominated or nominated by their organizations.
We formed a joint working group with NIST, DoD, DHS and HHS
to look at the candidates and find candidates who represented
cyber security practitioners in the field.
Each of those four agencies I just mentioned nominated one
person to represent the agency and then those representatives
along with members on the task force identified 17 of the over
100 candidates who were interested in the positions who had
clear cybersecurity roles as part of their duties, were not
just executives but were actual practitioners and would
represent various parts of the industry.
If you look at the legislation we needed to represent
certain fields, we wanted to look at medical devices. We wanted
to look at providers. There was a range of capabilities that we
wanted to deal with so that's how they were done. We narrowed
those down. We made sure that all of those members could be
committed for a year and that's how it started.
Mr. Griffith. Well, I appreciate that. Now, they came out
with a number of recommendations and six imperatives and
curious what action is now being taken to see that those six
imperatives are addressed. Fortunately, it's in the stuff that
we have and the first one is define and streamline leadership,
governance and expectations for the health care industry
cybersecurity. What steps do we take now? We've got a report.
What's next?
Mr. Csulak. When we look at it, basically the department,
HHS, has had representatives throughout the course of this
activity supporting the program. So although I was the
government co-chair for the activities, each of those
organizations have leadership representatives. They have
membership on the Cybersecurity Working Group established
within HHS and everybody is basically looking at those. And the
task force recognizes there's a lot there, more than we could
ever possibly do in one year, and really each of the groups are
now stepping back and saying, how do we prioritize these, where
do we find the resources for these and that is kind of an
ongoing conversation that's going through the Cybersecurity
Working Group.
Mr. Griffith. And as that conversation goes on, as Ms.
DeGette said earlier, you all need to let us know what we need
to do, whether it's legislation or otherwise, so that we can
assist you in that because making sure that, as you heard from
some of the other questions, making sure that our health
records are secure and making sure that we don't have folks who
block us from getting to those records or using them for ill
purpose is extremely important to all of us.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
I now recognize Ms. Castor for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all
of you for helping to keep Americans' health records safe and
secure. It's clear the health care sector faces increasing
threats from cyberattacks and I'm concerned about the
implications for sensitive patient information. HHS has a large
role to play in protecting those records. Mr. Csulak, the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services is responsible for
the Medicare and Medicaid electronic health records and I
understand CMS helps eligible entities adopt and use electronic
health records. Is that right?
Mr. Csulak. How do we help them do that? Again, we
published some standards that we do when we are working with
any organization. The level and engagement is interpreted to
what's appropriate for the various programs.
Ms. Castor. So entities that handle electronic health
records must comply with federal privacy and security
regulations. It's crucial that companies are held accountable
when they fail to protect consumers' private health
information. Do you share that view?
Mr. Csulak. Absolutely.
Ms. Castor. And when a cyberattack occurs and private
health information is compromised, HHS has the power to
investigate. Specifically, the HHS Office for Civil Rights is
empowered to investigate how the breach happened and demand
changes so that it doesn't happen again. Is that correct?
Mr. Csulak. Correct, for privacy breaches under HIPAA.
Ms. Castor. So do you know what is in the president's
proposed budget for the HHS Office of Civil Rights?
Mr. Csulak. I can't speak outside of CMS and the task
force. I don't know if one of my other speakers could speak to
that.
Ms. Castor. Well, that's OK. I looked it up. The president
is proposing a budget cut of more than $6 million to HHS'
enforcement of civil rights and health privacy information.
Would these proposed make it more difficult for HHS to take
action against entities that fail to safeguard electronic
health records?
Mr. Csulak. I think it's a tough question. Let me answer it
from the task force perspective. The task force perspective
recognized that this is going to be an ongoing challenge and
how do you actually have an oversight role that scales to the
size of this industry with so many providers and health care
small businesses out there. Can any one organization really
scale up to be an oversight body for over a million providers
in the United States?
So the task force approach said look, regardless of the
money and the resources of the Office of Civil Rights, as you
mentioned, HHS probably needs to step back and look at other
ideas.
What are some of the other private partner--private-public
partnerships that we can look at? Can we look at models like
the SEC's stuff for audit account financing? How do we bring in
other audit models? How do we look at other ways to do this
without just relying on a large audit body within the
organization.
So the task force approach really looks at saying
regardless of the money there how do we leverage the private
industry to more effectively contribute to that knowledge base
and to that body of work.
Ms. Castor. But you'd have to say that when you take cops
off the beat that's not helpful in holding companies
accountable that have violated their responsibility for privacy
records.
I realize you're not with the HHS Office of Civil Rights
but here is the budget justification about the proposed cuts
and it says the budget reduction would require decreases in
authorized regional investigators which would limit OCR's
capacity to resolve complaints and perform other related agency
functions such as investigations and compliance reviews.
So isn't that the impression you get that cops would be
taken off the beat here?
Mr. Csulak. I really can't say, around the budget
formulation for that activity. All I can say is that from the
task force perspective there are options out there and we
should be exploring those.
Ms. Castor. Well, according to an article from the HIPAA
journal it reports that, ``Those budget cuts could affect the
agency's HIPAA enforcement activity.''
So as we focus on the role of HHS and health care
cybersecurity we must not forget the important role that HHS
plays in enforcement privacy and security rules. I would hope
that if the administration is serious about health care
cybersecurity it would make sure that it has all the resources
necessary for its cybersecurity responsibilities.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. I'm curious. If you had that information from
the HIPAA journal and you could share that with me I'd
appreciate that. Thank you very much.
Ms. Brooks, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Curren and Mr. Scanlon, I'm curious what lessons have
been learned since the WannaCry attack. How are you taking the
lessons learned and internalizing them within HHS, Mr. Curren,
since the WannaCry attack?
Mr. Curren. I can mention too and I'm sure we could talk
about many that we learned in the WannaCry attack.
We are an emergency response organization in ASPR. We learn
lessons from every emergency we respond to and this is no
different. We are actually going through an after action
process, which we call it, to get information on what we can
enhance for the next response.
Two things we did that I think worked very well and we want
to repeat. One is operating a cybersecurity response as an
emergency response that marshalled the resources of the entire
department, and the secretary's leadership in that was
instrumental to working this issue out of the secretary's
operation center sitting next to Leo and working calls with
thousands of industry participants, getting information from
other departments and agencies really was a helpful way to do
it.
I think the second is that the public-private partnerships
are essential and we can't just stand them up during
emergencies. We say in emergency management that disaster is
not the time to exchange business cards and that's no different
for a cyber incident. We were able to exchange information with
partners who trusted us and we trusted them with the
information. We don't want to have to wait to have the final
polished version of every piece of information we want to share
before we share it. It's uncomfortable.
But in instances like this when time is of the essence,
when systems needed to be patched we needed to get information
out there immediately and having those trusted partnerships,
being open, having a call on the first day with our partners
really helped us to establish those relationships and get that
information out there.
Ms. Brooks. And before Mr. Scanlon answers, are there any
rules or regulations or policies within HHS that are impeding
those lessons learned?
Mr. Curren, before we go on to Mr. Scanlon, are there any
things that are impeding or obstacles to those lessons that
you've learned?
And with respect to public-private partnerships, that was
the reason that in 2003 your office was created, if I recall--
--
Mr. Curren. Yes.
Ms. Brooks [continuing]. Was to create those public-private
partnerships across all sectors between government and
industry. And so it should just--it should just be how we
operate, shouldn't it?
Mr. Curren. That is correct, and that is something we've
been doing for a long time. I think if anything has evolved in
the past several years it's just the number of organizations
involved in cybersecurity that we've continued to partner with
and we've really grown that part of the partnership and that
came into play with WannaCry.
In terms of regulations or challenges that we are going to
address, we are working through a number of issues that we
think can help enhance the response and some of the matters we
are looking at include protections for information and they
come into the federal government. We know the private
organizations don't always look to the federal government as
the first place to share and they're concerned about legal
liability with doing so. Even when we have protections in place
it's essential that we are able to communicate those
protections in real time so they can understand them,
appreciate them, and be compelled to or feel free or feel open
to share that information with us.
So that's something that we need to do because it's a
voluntary mechanism going to the federal government in most
cases for this type of sharing. So the protections that were
provided in the Cybersecurity Act I think take us a long way. I
think we still have some work to do in terms of implementation
and really communicating that to our partners.
Ms. Brooks. Thank you.
Mr. Scanlon.
Mr. Scanlon. To your question as to policies that may
impede, our experience in WannaCry was not so much that there
were policies inside HHS that impede the communication in this
emergency but it was misunderstanding of HHS policies as
they're currently formulated widely through the sector that
caused people to have a number of false ideas that we heard on
the calls.
For example, many medical device manufacturers and even
users of those devices believe that FDA does not allow you to
patch a device. This is absolute incorrect. FDA makes great
efforts to demystify that problem. But it is widely believed
through the sector. We found that there was a tremendous need
to communicate and will be an ongoing need to communicate
broadly and deeply what FDA's policies actually are.
Similarly, with OCR, and to Representative Barton's
questions, there are many beliefs or misunderstandings about
what you can and cannot report. But the statutes--PCII, HIPAA
and CISA--are very, very clear in their encouragement of
reporting of cybersecurity information during an incident.
And, again, we feel that there's a need for much better
communication. We are undertaking an effort internally to look
at how we are presenting these policies to put them into more
plain language and to provide plain languages guidance that is
agreed upon by us and other partners that we can get to the
sector, that we can get to the incident response teams and
really give them a framework in which they can communicate with
us.
Ms. Brooks. Thank you. My time is up. I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I now recognize the gentleman from
New York, Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you and
Representative DeGette for this hearing. I think the topic is
extremely important.
Cybersecurity is a serious and multifaceted issue that will
require an investment of significant resources and you began to
get into that with earlier questioning from Representative
DeGette.
And I understand that the president's budget includes some
additional funding for cybersecurity efforts at HHS. Mr.
Scanlon, how much of this new additional funding would be used
to support the new Health Cybersecurity and Communications
Integration Center?
Mr. Scanlon. Well, sir, I don't know exactly the dollar
figure of the new funding, we have built the HCCIC essentially
out of hide. We have taken existing capabilities and
investments that have been planned and executed and realigned
and repurposed those things to achieve this capacity and then
we've added in some of our additional technical spending.
But we are anticipating budget increases and proposals to
be put into a line item so that we can get a direct picture of
what HCCIC needs and we would be looking forward to give you
any more detail that we could about that.
Mr. Tonko. OK. And also, Mr Scanlon, and I'm asking this
question because we want to make certain that our house is in
order and that HHS has sufficient resources for its own IT
security internally. The Office of Management and Budget
estimates that HHS is pending $13 billion on information
technology. During fiscal year 2016, only about $373 million,
as I'm informed, or 3 percent of the HHS IT budget, was devoted
to IT security.
So my question to you, Mr. Scanlon, is can you give us an
updated figure as to how much of the HHS budget for IT is
devoted to IT security for fiscal year 2016?
Mr. Scanlon. So I think we could get back to you. The CIO
is actively working the budget right now and we'd be glad to
get back to you with a detailed picture of the planned and
current spending.
Mr. Tonko. OK. That was fiscal year 2018. I think I might
have misspoken and said 2016. So you can get back to us. Can
you give me an answer in writing after this hearing?
Mr. Scanlon. Certainly.
Mr. Tonko. And will you give me an answer?
Mr. Scanlon. Yes, sir. I will.
Mr. Tonko. OK. To make it a little more defined.
Thank you. I'm happy to hear that you will provide us with
a response to my question, especially since I've been reading
reports that a White House lawyer is telling agencies not to
answer questions from Democrats. So it's reassuring.
GAO recently found serious weaknesses in the security
computer systems at the Food and Drug Administration. GAO also
found that FDA spent only about 2 percent of its IT budget on
information security.
Mr. Scanlon, what assurances can you give us that HHS is
appropriately prioritizing cybersecurity as part of its overall
IT efforts?
Mr. Scanlon. I can tell you, sir, that the FDA response at
the GAO audit was robust and vigorous and continues to this
day. They have developed what we believe is a world class
implementation of a network operating and security operating
center to support their ongoing cybersecurity activities.
They are major partners with us in malware analysis. They
have one of the strongest groups of malware analysts in the
agency and they continue to proceed to respond to that audit
and to the generalized threat.
The CIO has in the last year gotten agreement--this is a
milestone agreement for HHS for all CIOs to sign on to a IT
strategic plan. It includes an investment plan that places IT
security at the center of the strategy for the agency and at
the center of the work plans for each of the CIOs.
This was developed collaboratively over a period of time,
was signed on to by the CIOs, supported by the CISOs and is
being executed and as part of the budget plan of what the
agency is doing. The HCCIC itself is another element of a
response to further enhance, consolidate and strengthen the
ability of the agency to utilize the resources, find the
strongest resource that we've got in any one OpDiv and make it
available as a force multiplier to other operating divisions.
So we are reimagining, if you will, or reorganizing the way
we deal with cybersecurity so that we have the strongest and
most effective use of the resources that we have.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And when will that all be
implemented? Is there a target date?
Mr. Scanlon. The IT strategic plan is a continuous process
that goes on the course of the strategic planning of the CIOs
across the board.
The HCCIC is targeted for what we call initial operating
capability the end of this month. That means that we will have
our full initial technical capability in place.
We will have our funding understood and we will have
messaged--through our organization we are now in the process of
gathering input from the operating divisions and from senior
leadership and that once that message is completed by the end
of June we'll be able to have a much more concrete and
documentable picture of where we are.
Mr. Tonko. Right. Well, I thank you and I look forward to
hearing from you about the IT budget at HHS and whether HHS is
devoting enough resources internally to Cybersecurity. So I
thank you again. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Collins of New York for 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
witnesses.
This is a very timely topic we are talking about. Now, one
of the more important parts of health care cybersecurity in our
conversation is the capabilities of small and medium-sized
health care organizations and device manufacturers.
All of you today have briefly touched on the topic in your
written testimony and there are recommendations within the task
force report that address the concern for small and medium-
sized businesses. The fact of the matter is many of these small
health care organizations do not have the resources to address
cybersecurity. Even more problematic, they don't have the
qualified personnel working for them to help them understand
what's even at risk.
So if you could in our limited time, if maybe I could start
with Mr. Curren and ask you--maybe spend a minute and talk
about that issue directly as it's small and medium-sized
businesses that struggle to make payroll.
They're having to make trade-offs each and every day
whether it's R&D, manufacturing and then here's this
cybersecurity and I think the reality is too often it's the
last thing they're going to think about and yet, so if you
could maybe discuss briefly your thoughts maybe for a minute or
so about that and I'd like the other two to also speak to that.
Mr. Curren. Thank you very much, and I'm certain we would
all agree with that that the small and medium and rural health
care organizations really have a critical need for health care
cybersecurity information and resources, and the cybersecurity
task force, of course, pointed that out. I think it also
provided some good potential solutions or at least options to
look at that maybe Emery can fill in on. We actually have
looked at that within ASPR in terms of our sharing of
information with health care organizations. It's very hard for
small health care organizations to process the amount of
information that's out there to know what they need to do to
protect their systems.
We put out a planning grant in 2015 to Harris Health System
in the Houston area. They took a look at their colleagues in
the entire health care system, small, medium and large-sized
businesses to look at what are the information challenges that
are out there and who would we need to reach most. And one of
the findings from that study was that the small and medium
organizations, exactly those issues that the task force pointed
out, are where we need to focus our efforts. Based on that, we
issued this last year in 2016 a grant to the National Health
Information Sharing and Analysis Center, the NHISAC. That was a
competitive grant that they won to help them to increase their
information sharing specifically for small and medium-sized
organizations that may not have the resources to a be a member
of their information sharing organization.
So it's an issue we continue to look at and that we want to
really address.
Mr. Collins. That's encouraging.
Mr. Scanlon.
Mr. Scanlon. Yes, sir. I'd point to the WannaCry event
where during the course of that we at the HCCIC were able to
produce--we called them one-pagers, 101s, to begin to answer
questions from the small organizations that were on the phone--
how do I patch, how do I detect, what should I look for, what
is the main vector that I should.
So we were able to provide this sort of information in real
time to folks who don't have sophisticated cybersecurity teams
to back them up and answer their questions. We look forward to
continue to do that as a series of products.
I would like to just mention we once spoke to an
administrator of a hospital in Indian Health Service, the third
largest health care organization in the country, I believe, and
very, very underfunded in many ways. And this administrator
said to us, we know their social engineering, we are catching
the phone calls, we know they're phishing us, we see the e-
mails. We don't know who they are, what they're going to do
next and what we should do about it. Those three questions are
the questions that HCCIC is committed to answer in conjunction
with our partners with the support of our colleagues in ASPR
and I think that is exactly what the task force was looking for
as well.
Mr. Csulak. Yes. When we looked at the task force, this was
clearly seen as a major challenge where cybersecurity is a
collateral duty in many of these small- and medium-sized
organizations. They're overwhelmed with information sharing.
How do we curate that information and simplify it and make it
easier for a smaller number of people to adopt and embrace. How
do we look at comprehensive education for these organizations?
It can't just be an IT security person in there. We need to
educate the patients. We need to educate the clinicians. We
need to bring this to the boards. How do we bring that to a
comprehensive thing to make sure we do that?
And the report also talks about how do we look at shared
services to offload the burden particularly on these small
organizations? How do we partner with industry, with the NHISAC
and High Trust on their initiatives that they're doing around
this challenge of small- and medium-sized businesses? The task
force looked at a comprehensive view and there are many ways
and many areas, obviously, that they tried to address in the
report.
Mr. Collins. Well, thank you, that's all great. We are all
focused on the same thing and the unfortunate fact is small
businesses sometimes don't survive a cybersecurity attack that
actually puts them down.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time has expired. I yield
back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
I recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Peters, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to ask some questions about the WannaCry event,
which crippled 200,000 computers in 150 countries.
What assurances do the current U.S. policies requiring
cyber protections provide that weren't present for medical
systems in Europe during that attack and basically how are we
doing--how are we better comparatively and how are we not
better comparatively? Can you address that?
Mr. Scanlon. So I think you're referring to the difference
and the disparity between the effect on Europe and the effect
on the United States.
Mr. Peters. Was there something that we are doing better
than them because we didn't get--or was it just good luck?
Mr. Scanlon. In part, it was probably good luck. There's a
great deal of analysis to try to determine exactly what
happened and why in the course of that event. But there was
certainly a point in time where the effect of the attack
changed. I don't believe we were spared from everything we've
seen in an analytical standpoint we were not spared the spread.
We were spared the impact.
Mr. Peters. OK. Can you help us distinguish which sort of
medical industry cyber systems are most vulnerable to
Cybersecurity threats like electronic health records,
administrative systems, medical devices or machines, telehealth
systems?
Mr. Scanlon. This is a very, very important question. The
health care sector is somewhat unique--not entirely unique but
it is particularly sensitive to the phenomena of the internet
of things and also the fact that many devices were developed
and have been developed not with the intention of being on the
internet and when they were put into service, when they were
designed it was never intended that they would be able to talk
to other devices or be attacked yet they are.
So this represents a major investment problem and it
produces another problem that on the normal operating
standpoint we can deal with quite easily. We can patch our
systems without a great deal of difficulty. We can roll out
automated patches across tens of thousands of machines on a
basis. You can't quite do that in a hospital when you don't
know what the impact of that patch is going to be in an
operating room or on a medical device that is unique in the way
it's designed and structured.
So the health care sector has a very different type of
vulnerability that requires a lot of thought and a lot of
effort to begin to address and this is part of the problem that
we saw in the WannaCry event is that the devices that were
unpatched were impacted by this in a very severe way and the
difficulty of getting those patches to them was very, very
profound for the users of the devices.
Mr. Peters. The way you've answered that question is more
systemic than I asked it. So I'm going to take that as implied
that we have to continue to figure out what's going to be
happening?
Mr. Scanlon. Yes, sir.
Mr. Peters. But there's many, many points of entry now,
given these different devices and open source practices and it
seems to me that that's going to be part of HHS' role, I
assume, is in corralling this information and spreading best
practices?
Mr. Scanlon. Yes, sir. And we did that during WannaCry. The
HCCIC and especially the Cybersecurity Working Group has--which
represents the security practitioners across the agency from
FDA, from CMS, from OCR, ONC and elsewhere.
We have an effort and a task to basically get on the road
and talk to the sector about what we know and help them
understand where we have resources that can assist and how to
put them in touch with resources that we don't have.
Mr. Peters. In one sense, it's more challenging than
Britain because Britain's health system is much more
centralized and we have a much more decentralized system.
So can you elaborate on the partnerships and what Congress
needs to do to make sure that everyone's engaged?
Mr. Curren. I can say that we are working with our partners
to enhance the understanding of this issue, especially at the
executive level.
Mr. Peters. Who are you referring to as your partners?
Mr. Curren. The partners would be the--we have a sector-
coordinating council, which is the major trained associations
in the health care industry as well as large-, medium-, and
small-sized companies. We----
Mr. Peters. Hospitals?
Mr. Curren. Hospitals are part of that but also
associations like American Hospital Association, which help us
reach out to--as a force multiplier to their members.
Mr. Peters. Right.
Mr. Curren. So those are the organizations that we are
working aggressively with to help spread this message to--that
it's an important issue, an issue we need investment in in the
private sector as well.
Mr. Peters. I'm just taking as a takeaway is that we must
be at a very early stage of this because we don't have a lot of
specifics about it.
I do hope that you have the resources that you need, that
you are sharing best practices among hospitals. Mr. Scanlon, do
you have anything further you wanted to add?
Mr. Scanlon. Yes, sir. I just wanted to emphasize the point
that you're making is that the development of communications in
this area is very important to us.
We saw during WannaCry that there's a lot to be learned and
a lot to----
Mr. Peters. In the sense of information sharing?
Mr. Scanlon. Information sharing and also alerting. We
discovered that it's very difficult. The sector, as you noted,
is very diverse and very disparate. So there is no one single
channel that you can just broadcast out to. We have to find
ways to reach down into the smaller organizations.
One of the things that we would, of course, like to ask in
your help in the future any advice and assistance you can give
us to reach the constituents in your district who need to know
this. We stand ready and would really like to assist in that.
Mr. Peters. Well, my time has expired but I'm sure you'd
find everyone on this panel desperate to make sure that you're
getting this information to their districts. So I don't think
that'll be a problem.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your indulgence.
Mr. Murphy. I now recognize Mr. Costello for 5 minutes.
Mr. Costello. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My question is for all witnesses. It's a little long. Bear
with me.
During our hearing on this topic a few months ago we asked
our witnesses whether the fact that many different pieces of
HHS are responsible for regulating different pieces of the
health care sector causes confusion or duplication for
companies trying to remain compliant.
I'd like to read to you what one of the witnesses at that
hearing said, because I think it sums it up pretty well:
``While many regulations that apply to cybersecurity in health
care are well-meaning and individually effective, taken
together they can impose a substantial legal and technical
burden on health care organizations. These organizations must
continually review and interpret multiple regulations, some of
which are vague, redundant, or both. In addition, organizations
must dedicate resources to implement policy directives that may
not have a material impact on reducing risks.''
This observation was also made in the task force report
that just came out. Now that HHS has received this feedback
from the industry, a twofold question. Will there be a review
that looks at cybersecurity regulations across the department
to make sure that they are aligned? Second, if duplicate,
confusing, contradictory, or ineffective regulations are
discovered, as I imagine they probably already have been
discovered, how will the department address them?
Will you look to streamline, supersede, or otherwise make
workably clear the various regulations so that the issue is
addressed?
Mr. Curren. I can start off with some comments related to
the high-level implementation of the task force report and be
happy to have additions from my colleagues.
The task force report really was a milestone both for
industry and for HHS. It really set a marker down to say here
are all the things that we can do to improve cybersecurity in
this nation. There are more than 100 imperatives,
recommendations, and action items in the task force report.
About half relate to the government and about half relate to
the private sector.
So there's a lot of work for everyone to do. HHS right now
is taking a look at the report and all the recommendations that
are there, looking at which recommendations might relate to our
current authorities and resources where we have programs
available, where we can do good work, which ones may be of
interest to our partners where we can work with them to help in
implementation and also look at a time frame.
There is so much to do and many have very long time frames
in terms of the action items. So we'll need to prioritize and
sequence how we do things. I think that for us the regulatory
review would certainly be part of that overall look. We do need
to go through the whole report though and find out where all
the priorities are for HHS and for our partners.
Mr. Csulak. I think as you called out in the report, the
task force and two of the task force members who spoke in April
highlighted these points is that harmonization of the
regulations is a key piece and a key challenge of that.
I think as we've looked even before the task force report
was completed, we had already been discussing some of these
challenges in the Cybersecurity Working Group in HHS to try to
address some of these challenges.
So this has already come up. We are really looking at the
potential negative impacts of regulations and how can we change
this from a negative to a positive. Why are we punishing people
for trying to do the good thing when we should be encouraging
them to make improvements and so forth?
So do we have an answer for those right now? No. But I know
that ONC and OCR and the other regulatory bodies within HHS
were clearly engaged with the task force activities and the
recommendations. They heard directly from the industry partners
where they were having challenges and we are hoping very much
so that those will come back through the working group as
solutions and activities in the near future.
Mr. Scanlon. Yes. Echoing what my colleagues have said, we
are very well aware of two things. One, the reporting on the
impact of these regulations is not what we would like it to be.
We don't know exactly how big, bad or indifferent this impact
is. We would like to know that. But we do know that it's very
real and we are taking it very seriously. The second thing is
there's another part of the answer to the question is that we
are engaged in an effort through the discussion about the
cybersecurity framework, the NIST risk management approach, and
shifting the sector from a cybersecurity focus that is merely
based on compliance and which is largely risk avoidance or fine
avoidance into an actual dynamic management of the risks and to
determine what is needed for them to do that.
So we hope that that effort will help shape this and give
us a greater insight into where regulations are impeding the
ability of organizations to shift out of a pure compliance
mode. And also the extent to which the type of threat--the
regulations that exist were not really designed to deal with a
cyberthreat of the type that affects us and as one of the
members pointed out, all these systems are vulnerable.
So it's very, very hard to avoid under some circumstances
the sense that we are victimizing the victim and we very much
want to get away from that and move people into an active role
in the defense of their systems in conjunction with us.
Mr. Costello. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. I now recognize Dr. Burgess for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, and that's an excellent place to
start, Mr. Scanlon, or really any of you--the concept of
victimizing the victim.
Now, Ms. Castor from Florida talked about the Office of
Civil Rights in Department of Health and Human Services. When
we had our hearing here several weeks ago in April with the
public-private partnerships in the health care sector and,
again, as Mr. Costello was bringing up, the dual role of HHS
and the regulator as well as being responsible for the sector-
specific integrity, it came up that there is, under the Office
of Civil Rights under their portal there is what's called the
Wall of Shame. Are you guys familiar with that? Is it helpful?
Mr. Scanlon. Sir, we heard you loud and clear at that
hearing and we took that matter back to the secretary. He has
taken it very seriously and is working on an effort to address
the concerns that you raised. We'd like to get back to you in
more detail. The work is not complete but it is underway.
Mr. Burgess. Is that something that can simply be taken
care of within the agency?
Mr. Scanlon. Yes, sir.
Mr. Burgess. Or would, perhaps, it be better to have
legislation? What concerns me is this thing's been out there.
The first infraction was October of 2009.
Mr. Scanlon. It's still up there.
Mr. Burgess. A facility in Texas. Yes, and it's still up
there.
Mr. Scanlon. Yes, sir.
Mr. Burgess. And you reach the threshold of 500 charts or
whatever affected and you're up there. I don't know how that
affects someone's ability to--does it affect their ability to
stay in business.
I don't know what kind of follow-up there's been done on
whether or not access to capital has been limited because they
appear on the Office of Civil Rights' Wall of Shame at
Department of Health and Human Services. I can just imagine
that that is a big deal and, again, we are victimizing the
victim again. Why wouldn't we be helping people rather than
continuing to penalize them?
Mr. Scanlon. Sir, we are with you 100 percent and we are--
both what we are doing with the HCCIC to try to reach out to
help people understand first how to avoid those. There are
things that can be done to avoid the problems that people end
up on the wall.
At the same time, I think you asked about legislation. This
is a matter to be considered at some point. The threat has
changed. The nature of the problem has changed.
Mr. Burgess. Correct.
Mr. Scanlon. There are certainly matters of due diligence
that need to be brought to attention and need to be publicized
and people need to be called to account for those things. There
are the matters where people are being are being attacked by
attackers who far overwhelm their capabilities to defend
themselves and we need to distinguish between those.
Mr. Burgess. Sure.
Mr. Scanlon. We did that initially. We've done that in our
approach to cybersecurity in the federal government.
We've adopted the risk management framework where we use a
risk assessment approach to evaluate these to determine
severity and to apply resources to the most severe problem
rather than just shotgun at anything we find. So we think that
this is a model that can be applied. That's why the task force
and others are recommending the adoption of the cybersecurity
framework approach and we would like to see that reflected. We
hope to see that reflected in the way that the agency
approaches these regulatory matters and we would like to
continue talking with you about that as well.
Mr. Burgess. Very well. I haven't gotten enough in-depth
research. I don't know if the Office of Personnel Management is
on your Wall of Shame or not. They were actually involved in a
breach a couple of summers ago, as you may recall.
Let me just ask you then on--and I've got a number of
questions and I will submit them for the record because I've
got too much to get through in this context. We had the
ransomware attack. Fortunate in this country that it wasn't as
bad as it could have been. But aren't there still a couple of
sites that are having ongoing damage from that attack where
that malware is continuing to try to lock down their files?
Mr. Scanlon. Yes, sir, and we did a call last week to the
sector to talk about that. There's a peculiar feature of the
malware is that the virus itself and its encryption payload are
two separate parts of the attack. The encryption payload has
been defused largely or is being caught in many cases by
antivirus and other detection systems. But the virus may have
already been present on a system and even if the system was
patched, when it reboots for whatever reason the virus goes
into action and the attempt of the virus to activate itself can
knock over certain Windows systems and bring them down and
crash the device and that's happening globally.
So there's an iterative process of discovering which
machines are still vulnerable, where the virus is resident, not
just patching but then reimaging and rebuilding the machines
and that that's what is happening in the instances that we know
about.
That's basically what's going on and it's going to take
some time for everybody to get this problem rooted out of their
systems because of the virulent nature of it.
Mr. Burgess. And I assume you'll have ongoing help with
that. Good. Let me just be sure I understood you correctly. So
we can look forward to being able to take a field trip to HCCIC
at the end of June. Is that correct?
Mr. Scanlon. We'd be delighted to have you.
Mr. Burgess. All right. Well, we will await the invitation.
Thank you very much. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Carter for 5
minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank all of you
for being here. As a health care provider for many years I can
tell you this is extremely important and of concern to all
health care providers for a number of reasons, not the least of
which are the penalties involved with HIPAA and everything else
that we are acutely aware of.
Let me ask you, Mr. Csulak, you're the co-chair of the
Health Care Industry Task Force and that task force has the
charge of coordinating industry and the government side to
cooperate with and secure digital networks. Is that correct?
Mr. Csulak. Well, we would a task to analyse the challenges
and create the report for action. It was, again, a one-year
limited version of a task force to come up with these
recommendations and is not necessarily and ongoing activity
under the current legislation.
Mr. Carter. OK. Well, can you describe for me your
experiences when you first heard about the WannaCry attack and
your interaction with industry? Can you walk me through that?
Mr. Csulak. Yes. When we looked from a task force
perspective on the challenges there, what we really see is, the
task force identified and, repeat that, industry and government
need to work together about promoting and promulgating best
practices in cybersecurity and really, I think when you look at
the action items that came out of WannaCry, they clearly lined
up with the task force recommendations of focusing on those
best practices, how do we roll those out, making sure that we
have good cyber hygiene on our computers.
So, I think the recommendations around WannaCry really do
line up and successfully match to the task force
recommendations.
Mr. Carter. Can you give me an idea about the quality of
the devices that hospitals are using now? Are they pretty well
prepared, or the health care facilities, they've used a lot of
these devices for many years. Are they up to date? Are they
prepared? Do we need----
Mr. Csulak. The task force members really said they run the
gamut. We've got some organizations which are using state of
the art information but there's a lot of large technology like
x-ray machines and other big bill items that really are legacy
applications, legacy operating systems which are a challenge.
So I think when you look at the task force report it looks
at some of those challenges. It was, like, look, we need to do
a better job developing new stuff, secure operating systems do
that. But we also have to look at architecture and security
design issues around how do we segment these systems which are
older. We still need to operate on them. Small organizations
may not be able to really easily replace a scanner. How do we
help them segment that stuff so it becomes less risky?
Mr. Carter. Do you feel like we are making progress?
Mr. Csulak. I think we are making progress. I think if you
look at the task force report they really see this as a goal
that industry recognizes and can embrace about coming up with
better best practices for this. So they were very confident
that this is an area where industry really can be a leader in
this area and I think what we are doing is we are seeing
progress in there but, obviously, there's a lot of room to
grow.
Mr. Carter. Good. Mr. Scanlon, very quickly, you're deputy
chief information security office at DHS and the HHS designee
for cybersecurity. One of the things in the cyberthreat
preparedness report it identified a number of findings,
including the fact that there are 11 components within the
department that contribute to the health care sector threat
preparedness. But a consistent concern that we found in
preparing for this hearing was that there's a confusion out
there about who to call and with some of the outside groups.
What are we doing about this to try to clear that up?
Mr. Scanlon. Well, sir, step one--and we are acutely aware
of that internally ourselves. I would like to say, though, on
the one hand there is an advantage to this large array of
organizations that we have a 360-degree view of the sector. So
internally our intention is to be able to get that view as a
single view that can go out and provide a 311 capability and
this is what the Cybersecurity Working Group is primarily
tasked with doing.
That, of course, takes work. That takes time. But we are
underway doing that. We are going to be looking to you for
support in that effort as it goes forward. But that is exactly
a problem that we intend to solve and we saw that very clearly
in the WannaCry event. We have solid proof of why that needs to
be addressed and we think we have a path forward to do it.
Mr. Carter. Great. Well, I'm out of time and I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
I will now recognize Ms. Walters for 5 minutes.
Ms. Walters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As you mentioned in the testimony, HHS coordinated with
NCCIC following the WannaCry attack. I have toured NCCIC and
understand the role it plays in the cybersecurity space.
Mr. Scanlon, I'd like to get your thoughts on how the HCCIC
fits into the public-private partnership for the health care
sector, specifically how it will work with NCCIC and NHISAC. On
the surface, it appears that this could create confusion by
adding another layer or could be duplicative of these
organizations.
Can you elaborate on how the HCCIC will work with the NCCIC
and NHISAC?
Mr. Scanlon. Yes. Thank you very much.
Yes, the HCCIC's function is to be able to reach into what
we were just describing as a very diverse and complex sector
and to leverage what exists at the NCCIC level.
So the NCCIC has the capability to coordinate across the
sectors, across into the intelligence community and at the
federal level through law enforcement.
So the HCCIC's function is to start to provide a
communication channel from the sector, especially the smaller
and medium-sized organizations that don't necessarily know
about NCCIC or don't really know how to get to US-CERT or might
when they contact their local law enforcement official might or
might not get in touch with some federal level capability.
The HCCIC can leverage what ASPR already has, which is this
tremendous ability to reach into the sector and become a
transmission vehicle up to the NCCIC and do something that
NCCIC on its own as an organization is really not quite
designed to do. It's got a different function.
Ms. Walters. Right.
Mr. Scanlon. At the same time, the HCCIC is a vehicle to
coordinate with private-sector partners. There are many ISALs.
Emery mentioned High Trust as one that's very active. NHISAC is
the grant award organization that is building out a portal that
we intend to share with and provide as another major point of
contact.
The sector works with many, many channels. Different
organizations communicate in different ways. What we are trying
to do in the course of this is get out the word that this is
where you can get coordinated information and we would like to
be able to and intend to be able to reach to each of these
partners and work with them and we did do that during the
WannaCry event.
High Trust was on the call. NHISACs were on the calls. They
were able to provide insight and information that they had from
their activities to the rest of the sector and we would like to
make that not just an emergency event but an ongoing activity
that the department carries out on a daily basis.
Ms. Walters. OK. Were these organizations involved in the
discussions or decision to establish the HCCIC?
Mr. Scanlon. Not directly. We knew that the grant from ASPR
and ONC was going to ask somebody to do that. So we didn't
discuss with any of the bidders or the grant recipients. But we
did discuss among ourselves how we would then be able to
respond once that grant was awarded what would the agency do on
its side to be able to work with that partner.
Ms. Walters. OK. So HHS does not have any discussions with
the Department of Homeland Security about the establishment of
the HCCIC prior to----
Mr. Scanlon. We had extensive discussions. In fact, it was
people in the Department of Homeland Security who suggested
that we move and think in this direct.
We have talked to Department of Homeland Security about
developing CONOPS. This is a work in progress now. We have
talked with them about the very concerns you raised are
concerns for us, obviously.
We don't want to duplicate. We don't want to reproduce
capabilities that DHS already has. We very much want to
leverage their capabilities out to, like, the cyber hygiene
program, which is a very scalable and valuable thing for the
entire sector, and we want to work with DHS to figure out the
actual escalation, communication and integration of these
capabilities both on the emergency management side, because
that's another aspect of DHS that's, again, well established
and the cybersecurity side through NCCIC and US-CERT.
Ms. Walters. OK. A second question I have is a concern that
we've heard raised with regards to the HCCIC is that
information shared with the center might not receive viability
protections provided under the Cyber Information Sharing Act of
2015.
Has HHS determined whether or not information shared with
HCCIC will receive CISA liability protection?
Mr. Scanlon. Our lawyers have reviewed that and we had
ongoing work during the WannaCry to clear that up because that
is a widespread believe it is not correct. There are very, very
strong protections and PCII, HIPAA, and the CISA that encourage
the sharing of indicators and defensive measures and identify
what information should not be shared--PII, PHI, attributable
information. And from our standpoint, we need nothing of that
type nor do we even need to know entity information in order to
carry out the evaluation in analytic work that we do.
So as I mentioned, we are working with our legal teams and
review organizations to develop plain language descriptions of
how those protections work and what they would provide to the
sector so that we can have that available for people to
understand and be clear about it.
Ms. Walters. OK. Thank you. I'm out of time.
Mr. Murphy. I think that concludes all of our questions for
this panel.
I do want to say this. I want to commend you all for the
work you did on dealing with the WannaCry threat that occurred.
Granted, it was not as mature or developed as it could have
been but it was perhaps a good test run of some of your work.
So thank you for that, and it was helpful to hear the lessons
learned from this as you moved forward on this.
I want to thank all of you for being here participating in
today's hearing. I remind members they have 10 business days to
submit questions for the record.
I would ask that all the witnesses please agree to respond
promptly to those questions.
And with that, this committee remains adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:53 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
