- CONCERNS OVER FEDERAL SELECT AGENT PROGRAM OVERSIGHT OF DANGEROUS PATHOGENS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CONCERNS OVER FEDERAL SELECT AGENT
PROGRAM OVERSIGHT OF DANGEROUS
PATHOGENS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 2, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-73

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
28-141                     WASHINGTON : 2018

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          GENE GREEN, Texas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     JERRY McNERNEY, California
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            PAUL TONKO, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL FLORES, Texas                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana                 Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           TONY CARDENAS, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       RAUL RUIZ, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              SCOTT H. PETERS, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota           DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

VACANCY
Chairman
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas                    JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             PAUL TONKO, New York
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                RAUL RUIZ, California
MIMI WALTERS, California             SCOTT H. PETERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia        officio)
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. H. Morgan Griffith, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Virginia, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the state
of Colorado, opening statement.................................     4
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7

Witnesses

Mary Denigan-Macauley, Acting Director, Health Care, Government
Accountability Office..........................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Answers to submitted questions...............................    67
Samuel Edwin, Director, Division of Select Agents and Toxins,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.....................    24
Prepared statement...........................................    26
Answers to submitted questions...............................    71
Freeda Isaac, Director, Agriculture Select Agent Services, Animal
and Plant Health Inspection Service............................    36
Prepared statement...........................................    38
Answers to submitted questions...............................    77

Submitted Material

Committee memorandum.............................................    58

CONCERNS OVER FEDERAL SELECT AGENT PROGRAM OVERSIGHT OF DANGEROUS
PATHOGENS

----------

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:45 a.m., in
room 2322 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Morgan Griffith
(vice chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Griffith, Burgess, Brooks,
Collins, Barton, Walberg, Walters, Costello, Carter, Walden (ex
officio), DeGette, Tonko, and Ruiz.
Staff present: Jennifer Barblan, Chief Counsel, Oversight &
Investigations; Kelly Collins, Staff Assistant; Zachary
Dareshori, Staff Assistant; Ali Fulling, Legislative Clerk,
Oversight & Investigations, Digital Commerce and Consumer
Protection; Brighton Haslett, Counsel, Oversight &
Investigations; Katie McKeogh, Press Assistant; Jennifer
Sherman, Press Secretary; Alan Slobodin, Chief Investigative
Counsel, Oversight & Investigations; Hamlin Wade, Special
Advisor, External Affairs; Everett Winnick, Director of
Information Technology; Christina Calce, Minority Counsel;
Chris Knauer, Minority Oversight Staff Director; and Miles
Lichtman, Minority Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA

Mr. Griffith. Good morning. I call the meeting of the
Oversight Subcommittee to order.
Today the subcommittee examines the concerns over federal
oversights of labs working with dangerous viruses and bacteria
for research needed to protect public health and national
security.
The Federal Select Agent Program under the joint management
of the CDC and the USDA's Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Services was established by legislation enacted in 2002,
shortly after the 9/11 attacks and the anthrax mailings. These
events supported Congress to conclude that certain dangerous
pathogens, such as anthrax, smallpox, and plagues called select
agents and toxins required regulation of its possession, use,
and transfer.
The program oversees 276 registered laboratories and almost
4,000 individuals involved with vital research in the
diagnostics, vaccines, and medical countermeasures that save
lives, protect American agriculture, and help protect the
safety and security of the American people. In 2016, the
program conducted 181 inspections of registered laboratories,
and was notified of 177 separate incidents involving potential
exposures with 998 lab workers monitored but, fortunately, with
no illnesses developed.
Because of the importance of this work and its potential
dangers, this subcommittee has convened hearings in recent
years on safety lapses in federal high-containment
laboratories: the anthrax incident at CDC that potentially
exposed more than 80 CDC workers; a mistaken CDC shipment of
deadly bird flu to a USDA lab; a U.S. Army lab's mistaken
shipments of live anthrax samples for a decade to almost 200
different locations in the United States and around the world;
and the FDA's discovery of decades-old, undeclared, and
unregistered smallpox vials in a storage room the FDA had been
renting from NIH and was missed by annual NIH safety
inspections.
The pattern has been: incident involving handling of select
agents, news stories, committee hearings, outrage, reaction,
and short-term reform. Wash, rinse, repeat. The question before
the subcommittee this morning is how do we break this pattern
and instill a systematic approach toward oversight of federal
select agents that improves safety and enhances the public's
confidence.
The GAO's latest report adds urgency to this question. The
GAO found that the program did not fully meet all key elements
of effective oversight. That is troubling. Select agents are
dangerous materials, posing a severe threat to human and animal
health. One would have assumed that the oversight program for
select agents would meet at least some of the effective
oversight elements found at other government oversight programs
for dangerous research, such as work involving radioactive
materials and nuclear weapons. That is not the case.
For example, the GAO concluded that the program is not
independent. Both CDC and APHIS, the joint managers of the
program, have high-containment laboratories registered with the
program. As a result, experts advise the GAO that the program
cannot be entirely independent, as oversight of their own
laboratories may represent a conflict of interest. One wonders
whether or how this has impacted the program's oversight. Two
years ago, the HHS Office of Inspector General reported to the
committee was the CDC was the entity with the most referrals to
the program--for program violations.
The GAO also found that experts and laboratory
representatives raised concerns that the program's reviews did
not target the highest-risk activities, such as anthrax
inactivation, in part because it has not formally assessed
which activities pose the highest risk. Thus, lab
representatives told the GAO that the program focused on
inventory controls and conducted time-consuming reviews so that
nicknames such as Rob matched with registered names such as
Robert.
On the other hand, as the subcommittee learned at its
hearing in September of 2016, the incomplete inactivation of
select agents, particularly anthrax, was a recurring problem in
recent high-profile lab incidents. Unfortunately, the program
has not focused on the need for more specific reporting and
investigation of incomplete inactivation of anthrax.
Technical expertise is another concern. Even with the
recent extra hires, workforce and training gaps remain. The GAO
has also noted the program did not have joint strategic
planning documents to guide its oversight. It is perplexing how
the CDC and APHIS operated for nearly 15 years without a joint
strategic plan.
Finally, the GAO reviewed effective oversight approaches in
selected foreign countries and regulatory sectors. For example,
in Great Britain, oversight of laboratories that work with
pathogens is under an independent government agency focused on
health and safety. Under this structure, the agency has direct
access to a department head with control over defining its own
budget and staffing need without organizational conflict of
interest.
The subcommittee will examine whether administrative
responses are sufficient to help the program meet the key
elements of effective oversight. However, it is also fair to
ask whether Congress has a legislative role. This Program, at
its inception, was created in a fragmented state, a marriage of
two divisions from two sub-Cabinet agencies in different
Cabinet departments. The program was created with a security
emphasis of guards/guns/gates in response to terrorist attacks.
Fifteen years later, does this regulatory model for bioresearch
laboratories make the most sense with more concern about
biosafety and the growing public health threat of emerging
infectious diseases?
I welcome and thank our witnesses for appearing here today.
I look forward to their testimony.
And with that, I yield back and now recognize the ranking
member of the subcommittee, Ms. DeGette of Colorado.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Griffith follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. H. Morgan Griffith

Today, the subcommittee examines the concerns over federal
oversight of labs working with dangerous viruses and bacteria
for research needed to protect public health and national
security.
The Federal Select Agent Program (``Program'') under the
joint management of the CDC and the USDA's Animal and Plant
Health Inspection Service was established by legislation
enacted in 2002, shortly after the 9/11 attacks and the anthrax
mailings. These events spurred Congress to conclude that
certain dangerous pathogens such as anthrax, smallpox and
plague--called select agents and toxins--required regulation of
its possession, use and transfer.
The Program oversees 276 registered laboratories and almost
4,000 individuals involved with vital research into
diagnostics, vaccines, and medical countermeasures that saves
lives, protects American agriculture, and helps protect the
safety and security of the American people. In 2016, the
Program conducted 181 inspections of registered laboratories,
and was notified of 177 separate incidents involving potential
exposures with 998 lab workers monitored but fortunately with
no illnesses developed.
Because of the importance of this work and its potential
dangers, this Subcommittee has convened hearings in recent
years on safety lapses in federal high-containment
laboratories:

the anthrax incident at CDC that potentially
exposed more than 80 CDC workers;

a mistaken CDC shipment of deadly bird flu to a
USDA lab;

a U.S. Army lab's mistaken shipments of live
anthrax samples for a decade to almost 200 different locations
in the U.S. and around the world; and

the FDA's discovery of decades-old, undeclared and
unregistered smallpox vials in a storage room that FDA had been
renting from NIH and was missed by annual NIH safety
inspections.
The pattern has been: incident involving handling of select
agents, news stories, committee hearing, outrage, reaction, and
short-term reform. Wash, rinse, repeat. The question before the
subcommittee this morning is how do we break this pattern, and
instill a systematic approach toward oversight of federal
select agents that improves safety and enhances public
confidence.
The GAO's latest report adds urgency to this question. The
GAO found that the Program did not fully meet all key elements
of effective oversight. That is troubling. Select agents are
dangerous materials, posing a severe threat to human or animal
health. One would have assumed that the oversight program for
select agents would meet at least some of the effective
oversight elements found at other government oversight programs
for dangerous research, such as work involving radioactive
materials and nuclear weapons. That is not the case. For
example, the GAO concluded that the Program is not independent.
Both CDC and APHIS, the joint managers of the Program, have
high-containment laboratories registered with the Program. As a
result, experts advised the GAO that the Program cannot be
entirely independent as oversight of their own laboratories may
represent a conflict of interest. One wonders whether or how
this has impacted the Program's oversight. Two years ago, the
HHS Office of Inspector General reported to the committee that
the CDC was the entity with the most referrals for Program
violations.
The GAO also found that experts and laboratory
representatives raised concerns that the Program's reviews did
not target the highest-risk activities such as anthrax
inactivation, in part because it has not formally assessed
which activities pose the highest risk. Thus, lab
representatives told the GAO that the Program focused on
inventory controls and conducted time-consuming reviews so that
nicknames such as ``Rob'' matched with registered names such as
``Robert.'' On the other hand, as the subcommittee learned at
its hearing in September 2016, the incomplete inactivation of
select agents (particularly anthrax) was a recurring problem in
recent high-profile lab incidents. Unfortunately, the Program
had not focused on the need for more specific reporting and
investigation of incomplete inactivation of anthrax.
Technical expertise is another concern. Even with recent
extra hires, workforce and training gaps remain.
The GAO also noted the Program did not have joint strategic
planning documents to guide its oversight. It is perplexing how
the CDC and APHIS operated for nearly 15 years without a joint
strategic plan.
Finally, the GAO reviewed effective oversight approaches in
selected foreign countries and regulatory sectors. For example,
in Great Britain, oversight of laboratories that work with
pathogens is under an independent government agency focused on
health and safety. Under this structure, the agency has direct
access to a department head, with control over defining its own
budget and staffing needs without organizational conflict of
interest.
The subcommittee will examine whether administrative
responses are sufficient to help the Program meet the key
elements of effective oversight. However, it is also fair to
ask whether Congress has a legislative role. This Program at
its inception was created in a fragmented state--a marriage of
two divisions from two subcabinet agencies in different Cabinet
departments. The Program was created with a security emphasis
of guards/guns/gates in response to terrorist attacks. Fifteen
years later, does this regulatory model for bio-research
laboratories make the most sense with more concern about
biosafety and the growing public health threat of emerging
infectious diseases?
I welcome and thank our witnesses for appearing here today.
I look forward to the testimony.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DEGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, I can't really agree with you more that we need to
look at this. You talk about when these protocols were put into
place 15 years ago. I was on this subcommittee 15 years ago
when we started having these hearings. And we have had quite a
number of these hearings. Over the years, I have had quite a
number of visits to the CDC in Atlanta. I was regaling
Democratic committee staff last night with my stories of when I
went to the former CDC lab up in Fort Collins, which deals with
vector-borne diseases and where they had these vector-borne
diseases, aka West Nile, stored in modular units behind the
building. And the units had grass growing up through the boards
of the trailers and there were flies flying around in the
trailers.
I am pleased to say that the Congressman from that area at
that time, Bob Schaffer, and I were able to secure funding for
a beautiful new facility up there in Fort Collins and they do
have the vector-borne agents stored appropriately now.
But this just goes on and on and it is something that this
subcommittee has to revisit over and over again. We have had so
many near misses, as the chairman said, with pathogens like
live anthrax, Ebola, most recently last November, the toxic
form of ricin that was sent to a FEMA training center multiple
times between 2011 and 2016.
At some point, something very bad is going to happen unless
the CDC acts. And if that means that Congress has to assist in
streamlining and improving the way that we handle these agents,
then this committee and, I am sure--I see the chairman of the
full committee here. I am sure the full committee would be
eager to help because we can't just keep stumbling along like
this from year to year.
The Select Agent Program has the vital task of ensuring
that critical biodefense research proceeds without any danger
to the health and safety of American citizens. And the Centers
of Disease Control and the Animal and Plant Inspection Service,
which jointly oversee the program, have to make sure that there
is adequate oversight. But as the chairman just said, we are
left today with the question of whether oversight of the Select
Agent Program by both of these agencies is sufficient to
guarantee that, on a consistent and long-term level, these
high-containment labs are safely managing pathogens.
We have to remind ourselves that these pathogens have to be
handled every time with utmost safety and security. We don't
have room for error. We don't have room for accidental shipment
of ricin here, hither, and yon. If these pathogens fall into
the wrong hands or if infection occurs in the general public,
it literally will be very difficult to put that genie back in
the bottle. And so any amount of uncertainty in this area is
just unacceptable.
I am glad that the GAO is here again today to discuss the
most recent report on the Select Agent Program's oversight of
dangerous pathogens. Like all of us, I am concerned about some
of the findings of this report, particularly GAO's observation
that the Select Agent Program may still not be applying the
most effective approach to oversight at the laboratories that
handle these programs.
For example, GAO concluded in the report, ``The Program's
reviews may not target the highest-risk activities, in part,
because it has not formally assessed which activities pose the
highest risk.''
According to the report, the Select Agent Program
inspectors may focus on concerns at laboratories, such as
measures to deter theft, to the exclusion of biosafety concerns
like how to handle or transfer pathogens. Both safety and
security are essential concerns and both of these things are
things that we have to work on together.
Now, I also want assurances that certain components of the
CDC and APHIS are adequately staffed to oversee the Select
Agent Program. For example, according to the GAO report, there
has been a shortage of inspectors which has delayed the
issuance of a number of post-inspection reports. If that is
true, then some laboratories are allowing poor practices to
continue for a longer period than necessary.
There are a number of other issues that are identified in
the GAO's report that I am eager to hear the agency's response
to. And in conclusion, I am pleased that they have continued
their report on behalf of this committee to examine safety and
oversight issues.
I am looking forward to hearing from everybody so that we
don't have to come back here again next year or the year after,
so that our constituents can rest easy and take this off of
their ever-growing list of things that keep them up at night.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentlelady.
I now recognize the chairman of the full committee, Mr.
Walden of Oregon.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman, for holding this
hearing on a really important issue involving how we can
improve federal oversight of high-containment laboratories
working with dangerous pathogens such as anthrax.
Our Federal Government needs to conduct critical research
on diagnostic tests or vaccines to protect us from diseases,
while safeguarding national security against bioterrorism.
These are twin goals that are very important. To ensure the
safety of lab scientists and the public, while also building
confidence and support for this research, oversight of federal
select agents is a matter that we need to make sure that we all
get right.
In recent years, this subcommittee has held hearings on
several safety lapses at federal labs that potentially exposed
federal personnel and other individuals to hazardous biological
agents. While the executive branch has taken several steps to
improve lab safety since these lapses were first detected, the
GAO's report on the Federal Select Agents Program oversight of
dangerous pathogens shows that there are fundamental problems
that have not been addressed by reactive short-term responses.
After nearly 15 years of existence, the program does not
meet key elements of effective oversight and the co-managers of
the program, the Centers for Disease Control and the USDA's
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, lack a joint
strategic document. The GAO's past work has found that such
strategic planning is an essential tool to help agencies align
their workforces with their missions and develop long-term
strategies for recruiting, training, and retaining staff.
The GAO's report also provides potential solutions for
improving select agent oversight. The Government Accountability
Office reviewed alternative effective oversight approaches from
the selected foreign countries. For example in Great Britain,
oversight of the labs that work with pathogens is under an
independent government agency. Both Great Britain and Canada
focus their oversight on biological safety, as opposed to the
emphasis on biosecurity in the Federal Select Agent Program.
Other regulatory sectors, such as the regulation of nuclear
reactors, also offer potential solutions for improvement.
Finally, the GAO findings also suggest that it may be time
for Congress to reexamine the structure and operations of the
Federal Select Agent Program. Currently, the program is run by
two different sub-Cabinet agencies from two different
departments. Both agencies have high-containment labs
registered with the Select Agent Program, an organizational
conflict of interest because the overseers are not structurally
distinct and separate from all the labs they oversee. So to
address these concerns, the subcommittee needs to consider
whether a legislative restructuring of the program is in order.
This program was also created in the immediate aftermath of
9/11 and those attacks and the attacks through anthrax
mailings, with an understandable emphasis on biosecurity and
close scrutiny of those who possess and transfer select agents
and how the agents are secured. I was here when all that
happened and, in fact, excluded from my own office because the
anthrax had made its way into the Longworth Building.
However, nearly 15 years later, incidents at the high-
containment labs have shown that primary risk lies with
maintaining safety in the handling of these dangerous
pathogens. And at a time of increased risk of emerging
infectious diseases and the advent of gene editing, does an
overhaul of the Federal Select Agent Program require
legislation?
That is why we are here today, is to learn more from those
of you involved. And I certainly appreciate the great work of
the GAO so I want to thank you all for your participation and
look forward to working in a bipartisan way to improve the
Federal Select Agent Program.
With that, Mr. Vice Chair, I yield back the balance of my
time.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman, for holding this hearing on
the very important issue of improving federal oversight of
high-containment laboratories working with dangerous pathogens
such as anthrax.
Our federal government needs to conduct critical research
on diagnostic tests or vaccines to protect us from diseases
while safeguarding national security against bioterrorism. To
ensure the safety of lab scientists and the public, while also
building confidence and support for this research, oversight of
federal select agents is a matter we need to get right.
In recent years, this subcommittee held hearings on several
safety lapses at federal labs that potentially exposed federal
personnel and other individuals to hazardous biological agents.
While the executive branch has taken several steps to improve
lab safety since these lapses were detected, the GAO's report
on the Federal Select Agents Program oversight of dangerous
pathogens shows that there are fundamental problems that have
not been addressed by reactive, short-term responses.
After nearly 15 years of existence, the program does not
meet key elements of effective oversight, and the co-managers
of the program--the Centers for Disease Control and the USDA's
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service--lack a joint
strategic document. The GAO's past work has found that such
strategic planning is an essential tool to help agencies align
their workforces with their missions and develop long-term
strategies for recruiting, training, and retaining staff.
The GAO's report also provides potential solutions for
improving select agent oversight. The GAO reviewed alternative
effective oversight approaches from the selected foreign
countries. For example, in Great Britain, oversight of labs
that work with pathogens is under an independent government
agency. Both Great Britain and Canada focus their oversight on
biological safety, as opposed to the emphasis on biosecurity in
the Federal Select Agent Program. Other regulatory sectors such
as the regulation of nuclear reactors also offer potential
solutions for improvement.
Finally, the GAO findings also suggest that it may be time
for Congress to re-examine the structure and the operations of
the Federal Select Agent Program. Currently, the program is run
by two different subcabinet agencies from two different
departments. Both agencies have high-containment labs
registered with the Select Agent Program, an organizational
conflict of interest because the overseers are not structurally
distinct and separate from all of the labs they oversee. To
address these concerns, the subcommittee needs to consider
whether a legislative restructuring of the program is in order.
This program was also created in the immediate aftermath of
the 9/11 attacks and anthrax mailings, with an understandable
emphasis on biosecurity and close scrutiny of those who possess
and transfer select agents and how the agents are secured.
However, nearly 15 years later, incidents at the high-
containment labs have shown that the primary risk lies with
maintaining safety in the handling of these dangerous
pathogens. At a time of increasing risks of emerging infectious
diseases and the advent of gene-editing, does an overhaul of
the Federal Select Agent Program require legislation?
I thank the witnesses for their participation, and look
forward to working in a bipartisan way to improve the Federal
Select Agent Program.

Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate that.
I would ask unanimous consent that members' written opening
statements may be made part of the record. Without objection,
they will be entered into the record.
I would now like to introduce our panel of witnesses for
today's hearing. First we have Dr. Mary Denigan-Macauley, the
Acting Director for Health Care at the Government
Accountability Office. Next, is Dr. Samuel Edwin, who serves as
the Director of the Division of Select Agents and Toxins at the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. And finally, we
have Dr. Freeda Isaac, who is the Director of Agriculture
Select Agent Services at the Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service.
Thank you all for being here today and providing testimony.
We look forward to the opportunity to discuss concerns, and
hopefully solutions, over the Federal Select Agent Program. As
you are aware, the committee is holding an investigative
hearing and when doing so, we have the practice of taking
testimony under oath. Do any of you have objection to
testifying under oath?
Seeing no objection, the Chair then advises you that you
are under the rules of the House and the rules of the
committee. You are entitled to be accompanied by counsel. Do
any of you desire to be accompanied by counsel during your
testimony today?
Again, seeing a negative response that they do not wish to
have counsel, I would then, in that case, ask you if you would
please rise and raise your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Griffith. All right, thank you very much. I am putting
this down for the record that each of the witnesses has
responded in the affirmative.
You are now under oath and subject to the penalties set
forth in Title 18, Section 1001 of the United States Code. You
may now give a 5-minute summary of your written statement.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Griffith. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. Before we start with the statements, can I ask
unanimous consent to put Mr. Pallone's opening statement in the
record?
Mr. Griffith. Absolutely. Without objection, Mr. Pallone's
opening statement is placed into the record.
All right, we are going to start with Dr. Denigan-Macauley.
If you would, give your 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF MARY DENIGAN-MACAULEY, ACTING DIRECTOR, HEALTH
CARE, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE; SAMUEL EDWIN, DIRECTOR,
DIVISION OF SELECT AGENTS AND TOXINS, CENTERS FOR DISEASE
CONTROL AND PREVENTION; AND DR. FREEDA ISAAC, DIRECTOR,
AGRICULTURE SELECT AGENT SERVICES, ANIMAL AND PLANT HEALTH
INSPECTION SERVICE

STATEMENT OF MARY DENIGAN-MACAULEY

Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Good morning, Vice Chairman Griffith,
Ranking Member DeGette, and other subcommittee members. Thank
you for the opportunity to testify today on the federal
oversight of the Select Agent Program.
GAO has, for many years, identified challenges and
recommended ways for improving the oversight of high-
containment labs. These labs work with the most dangerous
pathogens, such as the Ebola virus, requiring the highest
safeguards. Agencies have made progress implementing our
recommendation. However, my main point today is that oversight
of these pathogens is not as strong as it should be,
potentially allowing for grave consequences.
In our most recent review, we found that the Federal Select
Agent Program does not meet criteria for effective oversight.
These criteria have been used to assess oversight of other
areas with low probability adverse events that can have
significant consequences. An example of such an event is the
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident in Japan in 2011.
Of the five criteria, I would like to highlight two this
morning: independence and the ability to perform reviews.
First, according to our criteria, the organization
conducting oversight should be structurally distinct and
separate from the entities it oversees. The Select Agent
Program is not. Both CDC and APHIS have labs registered with
the program. CDC and APHIS have taken steps to reduce conflicts
of interest. For example, in 2012, the agencies developed an
MOU under which APHIS leads inspections of CDC labs. However,
there was no reciprocal agreement for CDC to lead inspections
of APHIS labs until 3 years later and we found that the
agreement was not always followed.
Second, according to our criteria, the organization
conducting oversight should have the ability to perform
reviews. The Select Agent Program performs several types of
reviews, including inspections. There is concern, however, that
inspections do not target the highest risk activities. The
program, in its current form, was borne from the horrific
incidents of 9/11. Therefore, it is focused on security and
inspectors spend considerable time assessing compliance with
inventory controls and reviewing records. While this can be
helpful to know what is stored in the lab, it does little to
reduce the risk of theft.
Very small amounts of material can be removed from vials
and replicated without being detected. Moreover, recent high-
profile incidents have been related to biosafety rather than
security and no thefts have been reported in well over a
decade.
It's interesting to note that other countries and
regulatory sectors we reviewed approach oversight differently.
For example in Great Britain, an independent government agency
oversees labs and they apply a risk-based approach to
inspections, targeting those with a history of performance
issues or those conducting higher risk activities. They also
focus on biosafety rather than biosecurity.
Besides not meeting the criteria, the program also does not
have joint planning documents to guide its oversight efforts.
Notably, it does not have a joint workforce plan to help it
manage workforce challenges that we found. For example, CDC and
APHIS have faced challenges hiring and retaining sufficient
staff with the necessary expertise. Inspectors have a large
workload and intensive travel schedule that has led to delays
in issuing inspection reports.
In 2016, CDC took up to 224 days to issue some of its
inspection reports, far exceeding the program's 30-day target
and delaying fixes to any identified problems. Workload issues
have also sometimes resulted in staff from APHIS being assigned
responsibilities outside their area of expertise.
In conclusion, CDC and APHIS share a critical role ensuring
that important work with select agents can be conducted in a
safe and secure manner. The bottom line is that oversight needs
to be strengthened.
Moving forward, the Federal Select Agent Program needs to
take several steps, including assessing the potential risks
posed by placing the program within APHIS and CDC, identifying
and aligning efforts with activities that carry the highest
risks, and developing a joint workforce plan. As these steps
are taken, consideration could also be given to alternate
oversight approaches.
Vice Chairman Griffith, Ranking Member DeGette, and other
subcommittee members, this concludes my statement. I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Denigan-Macauley follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentlelady for yielding back.
I now recognize Dr. Edwin for a 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENT OF SAMUEL EDWIN

Mr. Edwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member DeGette,
and members of the subcommittee. I am Dr. Sam Edwin, Director
of the Division of Select Agent and Toxins, which resides
within the Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response at
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. I, along with
my counterpart, Dr. Freeda Isaac, direct the Federal Select
Agent Program.
I have held this position for just over 1 year and welcome
this opportunity to testify before you. I appreciate the
subcommittee's continued interest in improving oversight of
laboratories that work with select agents and toxins.
Laboratory research on select agents and toxins plays a
critical role in saving lives and protecting Americans. It is
also an important part of our nation's contribution to support
preparedness and defense against naturally-occurring diseases
and potential bioterrorism events. Maximizing safety and
security through our oversight is a complex and unending
endeavor, not something that can be checked off a list.
I would like to acknowledge the important contributions
that GAO's continued engagement and recommendations have made
in our work to improve the program. We accept and will
implement each of the five recommendations for CDC in the
current GAO report. This morning, I will highlight actions that
we have already taken in several of the areas addressed in the
report.
First, our program has taken a number of steps to identify
highest risk activities conducted at the registered
laboratories and ensure that these activities are targeted
during inspections. We determined risk based on the type of
work being done by a particular entity and modify the frequency
and focus of the inspections based on the findings at each
inspection. When our program identifies what appears to be a
commonly used processes that present a high risk, we target
inspection to reduce that risk across all of the registered
entities.
We are in the process of transitioning to a new electronic
information system which will provide real-time access to each
registered entity's key program information and documents.
After it is fully implemented, we will have the ability to
monitor and analyze the data in real-time to identify potential
risks, improve the inspection process, and continually enhance
overall biosafety and security oversight.
Second, in the area of enforcement authority, we are taking
steps to assess risk from violations at individual facilities,
as well as identify and address recurring violations. We
recently finalized an effort to evaluate categories of
noncompliance with select agent regulations, group them
according to the level of severity, and enforcement options. We
used this information to ensure consistency between
inspections.
Third, regarding the technical expertise, our program has
inspectors who have the necessary practical experience and
advanced professional degrees. That said, continued training of
inspection staff is a key priority that we continually refine
to address training needs.
In addition, we are in the early stages of developing a
joint strategic plan for the Federal Select Agent Program. This
includes assessment of workforce and training needs for staff
across the program.
Fourth, we have taken a number of steps to increase
transparency and collaboration with the regulated community,
including developing a process where we respond to requests for
clarification regarding the select agent regulations. We also
share draft policies and guidance documents for their input
prior to finalizing, and we also implemented a process for
dispute of inspection findings, and analyzing and reporting of
the aggregate program data annually. The most recent report was
just published last week.
We are committed to further strengthening oversight of
laboratories that handle select agents and toxins and
appreciate the involvement of GAO and others that have provided
recommendations toward that end. We value of the subcommittee's
input as we continue to improve our oversight and enhance the
safety and security of this work.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be glad
to answer any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Edwin follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. Thank you so much.
I now recognize Dr. Isaac for a 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DR. FREEDA ISAAC

Dr. Isaac. Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, I
appreciate the opportunity to testify at today's important
hearing. I am Dr. Freeda Isaac. I am the Director of USDA
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Agriculture Select
Agent Services.
AGSAS, along with our counterparts at the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention oversee the Federal Select Agent
Program. Together, our two agencies oversee the possession,
use, and transfer of biological select agents and toxins. These
select agents and toxins have the potential to pose a severe
threat to public, animal, or plant health, or to animal and
plant products. I can assure you that this is a mission we take
very seriously. Our goal is the same as yours. We want to have
a program that allows our nation's scientists and researchers
to safely and securely conduct important work and development
with select agents and toxins.
Over the last few years, we have worked hard to strengthen
our oversight of this program. Aside from our own efforts, we
have received recommendations from outside experts, such as
from GAO and the Federal experts Security Advisory Panel. We
take these recommendations very seriously and we have used them
to improve oversight of our program. I can confidently say that
biosecurity and biosafety are stronger today than they were
when I started.
I do appreciate this latest GAO report on our select agent
program. We cooperated fully with the audit, and agree with its
recommendations, and we have already taken steps towards
implementing them.
We agree with the report that the independence of the
Select Agent Program is important and that we must minimize
potential conflicts of interest. We had taken steps in the past
to reduce potential conflicts of interest. Notably, APHIS
inspects CDC laboratories that use select agents and toxins and
CDC inspects ours.
We also agree with the recommendation to develop a plan to
identify the types of laboratory activities that pose the most
safety and security risks and to align inspection and
assessment activities in line with those risks. However, I will
note that our current inspection process does include some
efforts to evaluate and analyze risk. For example, we analyze
safety and security risks based upon the type of laboratory and
agents it works with and we changed the frequency of
inspections, based upon a facility's compliance history.
Another recommendation urges us to improve transparency
with the regulated community. This has been a priority for us.
We want these labs to clearly know what is expected of them and
to understand how to properly secure select agents.
We helped establish an independent forum to foster industry
collaboration. We have set up new processes that allow
stakeholders to review and provide input on program documents
and policies. This extra communication and transparency helps
them to understand their role and helps create a culture of
safety in these facilities.
APHIS and CDC are committed to having the strongest
possible Select Agent Program. We take these GAO
recommendations seriously and we will use them, as we have all
those previous reviews, to make this program stronger.
This concludes my testimony. I would be happy to answer any
questions you or the members of the subcommittee may have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Isaac follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much and I will now recognize
myself for 5 minutes to start the committee questioning.
Dr. Denigan-Macauley, GAO found that the Select Agent
Program does not have a joint mission statement. Do CDC and
APHIS have the same missions stating what the program seeks to
achieve; yes or no?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. No.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you. The Government Performance and
Results Act of 1993 requires agencies to develop strategic
plans that include documents and planning tools, such as
mission statements, strategic goals, and objectives and
performance measures. Is that correct; yes, or no?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you. Although not binding to the
Federal Select Agent Program, these requirements have been
found by the GAO to serve as leading practices for individual
programs. Is that also correct; yes or no?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. Both CDC and APHIS have performance measures
for their activities and select programs. Isn't that correct?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. Are their performance measures the same?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. No.
Mr. Griffith. Is there any overlap of the performance
measures each agency uses?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. No.
Mr. Griffith. So CDC and APHIS are using different metrics
to measure their own performance in the Select Agent Program.
Is that correct?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. How about collectivity? Does the Federal
Select Agent Program have performance measures to track its
progress?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. No.
Mr. Griffith. Dr. Edwin, the GAO found that the Federal
Select Agent Program does not have a joint strategic plan. Is
the program taking steps to develop a joint strategic plan; yes
or no?
Mr. Edwin. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. Good. Did the program take these steps before
the GAO raised the issue with CDC and APHIS?
Mr. Edwin. We have individual strategic plans but not a
joint one and we are working on a joint strategic plan.
Mr. Griffith. But you didn't take that action before you
got the GAO report.
Mr. Edwin. That is correct.
Mr. Griffith. And I am glad you are following some of those
suggestions and both agencies have agreed that the suggestions
make sense. So I appreciate that.
Would such a step, including hiring an outside contractor
to develop the joint strategic plan--would such a step include
hiring an outside contract to help to develop the joint
strategic plan; yes or no?
Mr. Edwin. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. And has such an outside contractor been hired
yet?
Mr. Edwin. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. Good. Has the outside contractor prepared a
joint strategic plan?
Mr. Edwin. He is working towards preparing that, been in
place for a month or so.
Mr. Griffith. OK but we don't have a plan yet. When do you
expect one?
Mr. Edwin. We are having, actually, meetings with the
leadership, and the staff, and their coordinator. And they are
in the process of developing one, probably within the next few
weeks.
Mr. Griffith. OK, will you let the committee know when that
has happened?
Mr. Edwin. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you.
To avoid a conflict of interest with inspecting CDC labs,
the CDC signed a memorandum of understanding with APHIS in 2012
so that APHIS would take the lead on select agent inspections
of CDC labs. Isn't that correct?
Mr. Edwin. That is correct.
Mr. Griffith. And so for most of the decade, the CDC was
inspecting its own labs. Is that correct, 2003 to 2012?
Mr. Edwin. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. OK. And isn't it true that the CDC signed a
memorandum of understanding to avoid the conflict after the
press and this committee raised concerns about CDC inspecting
itself?
Mr. Edwin. That is correct. After receiving guidance, we
have taken that step.
Mr. Griffith. OK, I appreciate that.
Dr. Isaac, APHIS signed an MOU with CDC in 2012 so that
APHIS would take the lead on select agent inspections of CDC
labs, however, it was not until 2015 that you all signed a
reciprocal MOU with CDC so that CDC would take the lead on
select agent inspections of your labs. Isn't that correct?
Dr. Isaac. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you. At the briefing with the committee
staff last week, you could not explain the 3-year delay on the
MOU for the APHIS lab inspections. Isn't that correct?
Dr. Isaac. That is correct.
Mr. Griffith. And now that you have had time to research it
and think about it, are you in a position today to explain the
3-year delay?
Dr. Isaac. Yes. At that time, after discussing it with my
staff, we did have some concerns regarding the authority of CDC
to oversee some of the APHIS laboratories because those
laboratories contained USDA-only agents and the CDC
laboratories that APHIS takes the lead on have either overlap
or USDA-only agents. So the authority is clear that APHIS has
that authority.
After we discussed that, I think the reason that we have
changed the MOU is that administratively, consulting with our
counsel, we determined that we could administratively have CDC
oversee the inspections and sign the reports, as long it is
done jointly with APHIS.
Mr. Griffith. OK and so I have only got a few seconds left
and I appreciated your statement that things are safer now that
you are there. I appreciate that. I think that is right. We
want to get it even better but I do find it curious that we had
an MOU in place for over a decade with one of the agencies and
your legal staff took about 10 years to come up with the
opinion you now have. Oh, 3 years. OK, excuse me, 3 years to
come up with the plan you now have. They seemed to have drug
their feet a little bit with that.
I have to yield back and now recognize the ranking member,
Ms. DeGette, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Denigan-Macauley, the laboratories we are talking about
hold high-risk biological agents. If improperly handled, these
could result in serious or lethal infection of lab workers or
even the general public. Is that correct?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. And in other words, if we don't operate these
programs with precision, with pretty much zero room for error,
theoretically, we could have risk to both public health and
national security. Is that correct?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Yes, it is.
Ms. DeGette. Now in your most recent audit, you found there
were still problems with the Select Agent Program. In
particular, you found that the program may not be sufficiently
independent from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
and the U.S. Department of Agriculture that it may not have
enough inspectors and the inspectors it does have may not be
targeting the most high-risk activities when they examine
laboratories. Is that an accurate summary of your conclusions?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Yes, it is.
Ms. DeGette. And as you heard in my opening statement, I
have been on this committee a long time, this is not the first
time we have had these hearings. What do you think are the
primary or root cause reasons we keep seeing this happen over
and over again with respect to this program?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Yes, thank you for the question.
There will never be zero risk, unfortunately. There will always
be some risk that has to be taken but we do believe strongly
that the oversight needs to be strengthened to prevent these
safety lapses from happening. And we do also believe, as our
report states, that they really need to look at the highest
risk activities and make that formal determination. While some
steps have been taken, it has not been a full formal assessment
to best understand what those activities are.
Ms. DeGette. And I know you made a number of
recommendations regarding the Federal Select Agent Program. The
CDC and USDA have taken steps to implement the recommendations
but your report shows that there is still work to be done. So
my question is, Can you prioritize the recommendations that you
have made? Which ones are the highest priority to make this a
safer program with the greatest expediency and why?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Generally, GAO does not prioritize
our recommendations. However, today I highlighted two that we
feel very strongly about. The fact that they are not
independent, that both entities are inspecting their own labs,
they have to have inspectors there, according to the agencies
because of the necessary expertise. So we definitely raised
that as a concern.
And we also raised the concern about not knowing what the
highest risk activities are.
Ms. DeGette. Dr. Ewin, what is your agency's response to
those two particular issues?
Mr. Edwin. So we are actually looking at risk. Our
assessment of risk----
Ms. DeGette. Well, number one, about having independent
inspectors. What is your agency's response to that?
Mr. Edwin. So in order to do the inspections, we really do
need the expertise of the agents that we--you know the public
health agents are agents that are involving animal and plant
health. And we are structurally separate from the main CDC and
we work closely, almost on a weekly basis, on compliance and
other issues with the----
Ms. DeGette. You don't think you can have independent
inspectors because of the level of--I don't understand your
answer to my question.
Dr. Denigan-Macauley, the GAO, said number one, independent
inspectors. And what you are saying is well, the inspectors
have to have, obviously, the level of training. Does that mean
you can't have independent inspectors?
Mr. Edwin. Oh, I am not saying that at all.
Ms. DeGette. Then what are you saying? I have got 50
seconds left.
Mr. Edwin. I think you know our inspectors are
professionals, no matter if you are looking at CDC----
Ms. DeGette. All right, can you have independent
inspectors, as the GAO is requiring?
Mr. Edwin. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Now, the second recommendation was that we focus on the
most high-risk activities. Are you implementing that
recommendation?
Mr. Edwin. We are focused and look at all the high-risk
activities, including the type of the agent.
Ms. DeGette. So are you implementing that?
Mr. Edwin. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Mr. Edwin. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. What about you, Dr. Isaac, your agency? What
is your agency's response to her first highest priority, the
independence issue?
Dr. Isaac. Yes, we already currently have two things in
place, which is our reporting structure within APHIS, where the
program reports directly to the APHIS administrator. We also
have CDC inspect APHIS laboratories.
We also are, as the recommendation is, we are pursuing an
option to have an external review of our program to identify
the risks of how we are structured and to develop options to be
able to take care of that risk.
Ms. DeGette. And quickly, with respect to her second most
important recommendation that we look at the most high-risk
activities, is your agency also beginning to work on that?
Dr. Isaac. Yes, we are.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. That will work.
I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentlelady.
I now recognize the vice chairman of the full committee,
Mr. Barton of Texas.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Chairman and thank you and Ms.
DeGette for organizing and holding this hearing.
We have kind of been here before. It looks like every 2 or
3 years we get a GAO report and the subcommittee has a hearing
and you all come and say the appropriate things. And then we
wait another 2 or 3 years and we have another hearing. Maybe
this time it is different. You know I can't speak for anybody
else but I am ready to, if necessary, legislate to change the
law and actually put in the statute some of the recommendations
of the GAO.
My first question is just a generic question. In one of the
footnotes it says that we think we have 276 laboratories in the
United States that handle these toxins. Why do we need 276
laboratories to handle, or study, or whatever something that is
so dangerous? Does anybody want to answer that?
Mr. Edwin. The number of laboratories that are registered
with the Select Agent Program have been decreasing but we, our
authority doesn't dictate the number of laboratories.
And when you talk about the laboratory, when we talk about
the laboratory numbers, there are only a few laboratories that
work with these highly pathogenic----
Mr. Barton. Well 276 is more than a few.
Mr. Edwin. Yes.
Mr. Barton. Do you dispute that number?
Mr. Edwin. No, I do not dispute the number but not all of
them work with all of the agents that we regulate. Some are
just working with----
Mr. Barton. Can anybody start one of these laboratories? Do
one of your agencies have to issue a license? I mean if Diana
DeGette and I decided to quit Congress and go into business and
create one of these laboratories----
Ms. DeGette. A very highly unlike scenario.
Mr. Barton [continuing]. What would we have to do? Could we
just start it up or do we have to go to CDC or the Ag
Department?
Mr. Edwin. So depending on the agents that you are applying
to work with, there is an initial registration process that
involves a very comprehensive----
Mr. Barton. Registration with who?
Mr. Edwin. If you are working with agents of public health
concern, with CDC. And if it is a USDA agent----
Mr. Barton. Can you reject the application?
Mr. Edwin. If the measures that are not in place to safely
and securely handle these agents, yes.
Mr. Barton. But if they appear to be willing to comply,
there is no limit on how many people can set up these
laboratories, if they, on paper, agree to comply with your
requirements. Is that correct?
Mr. Edwin. So on paper and also the physical inspection of
the facilities to have all of these measures in place.
Mr. Barton. Well, I guess to get to the bottom line, should
we put a limit on the number of these laboratories that handle
these highly dangerous materials?
Mr. Edwin. I think that is a bigger question that involves
multiple parties in biodefense and the scientific community to
make----
Mr. Barton. I don't have any frame of reference but it
would appear to me, when you see the potential danger and you
see the way some of these agents have been accidently
transported and handled, I would think it might be advisable to
put some sort of a limit or to go in and really, really look at
the existing facilities with the potential to literally close
some of them.
Because I was stunned. I thought we had maybe 10 or 15 and
that they were all highly classified and under control with the
Department of Defense or some really, really high security
areas. And apparently, anybody that wants to, any
pharmaceutical company, any agriculture company, if they are
willing to put the money up and at least pay lip service, can
set up one of these laboratories.
Mr. Edwin. When the program first started, I think the
number was close to 400. And because of all the requirements,
the number has actually gradually been coming down.
Mr. Barton. Do either of your agencies have the ability to
absolutely close one of these facilities? If you feel they are
totally in noncompliance, can you shut it down permanently?
Mr. Edwin. We can suspend and revoke their registration to
work with select agents and toxins.
Mr. Barton. You can suspend their registration?
Mr. Edwin. Yes.
Mr. Barton. OK. Last question and my time is about to
expire.
And Ms. DeGette and I think Mr. Griffith both alluded to
this. GAO says there needs to be independence. Why couldn't we
just create a separate agency that all it does is inspect
these, take both of your inspection groups and combine them to
a totally independent group? What would be wrong with that
idea?
Dr. Isaac. So----
Mr. Barton. I might even let GAO answer that.
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Yes, we offer many oversight
alternative approaches. We review the program in its current
form but that was one of the reasons our methodology included
going out. For example, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission is an
independent and it was decided years ago that that needed to be
made. And several laboratories in other countries such as Great
Britain are in that----
Mr. Barton. So that is a feasible alternative?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. It is a feasible alternative but not
something that we looked at in detail to know the cost
associated with that.
Mr. Barton. Do either of you want to comment on that before
I yield back?
Dr. Isaac. So if I could just offer a comment is that
because of the extreme scientific technical nature of the work
that we do, and part of our oversight is to understand the
research and the type of work that is being done with these
agents, and understanding the proper use of the agent, where we
are situated within HHS and USDA, we are able to share
resources within those departments for that technical
expertise, as well as administrative and emergency response
activities. We are able to tap into experts to implement
regulations very quickly that require immediate implementation.
Mr. Barton. Well that begs the question an independent
agency could do the same thing.
I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentleman for yielding back.
I would make a point of clarification. Dr. Denigan-
Macauley, we have been talking about 276 labs but so that
people who may watch this now or later will know, 276 labs are
actually entities and those entities may have multiple labs. So
we could actually be talking about 1200 or more labs. Is that
correct?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. That is correct.
Mr. Barton. I appreciate that. Thank you.
And now we will yield or recognize Mr. Tonko, the gentleman
from New York, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Five of GAO's eleven recommendations concern the need to
improve the independence of the Federal Select Agent Program.
As we know, the Federal Select Agent Program is not an
independent agency but a program managed jointly by the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention and an agency under the
United States Department of Agriculture called the Animal and
Plant Health Inspection Service or APHIS.
GAO's report states that while CDC and APHIS have taken
steps to reduce conflicts of interest potentially posed by this
structure, more can be done in this area. So, GAO, let's start
with you.
Dr. Denigan-Macauley, can you please explain why GAO
believes independence is important for an entity like the
Federal Select Agent Program?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Sure. We have previously used these
criteria to look at adverse events with low probability and can
have high consequence. So for example, the foot and mouth
disease outbreak that happened over in the United Kingdom was a
very tragic event, a low probability that it would occur. The
Fukushima Diiachi nuclear reactor incident in 2011 is another
example.
While much research is conducted in this country very
safely and securely, the probability is horrific if something
were to happen. So, therefore, the criteria fit. And we also
vetted the criteria with numerous folks that are experts within
this field.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. I would like to learn more about what
CDC and APHIS have already done to enhance the independence of
the Select Agent Program.
So, Dr. Edwin, what actions have you taken to reduce
conflicts of interest between FSAP and CDC?
Mr. Edwin. So the Division of Select Agents and Toxins is
located in the Office of Public Health and Preparedness. And
the reporting lines to the CDC chief is a separate thing for
us.
And also, being in that particular office, they do not have
any laboratories that we regulate. Being in that office, it
helps us to pivot because the Emergency Operations is also
under the same office. If there is a national incident, then we
can immediately pivot and the entire structure is there to
support such an activity.
So I see that as a very huge advantage that we have and I
have direct access to the CDC Director, if there is anything
that I need to engage with her on.
Mr. Tonko. OK, thank you.
And Dr. Isaac, the same question. What have you done to
reduce conflicts of interest between FSAP and APHIS?
Dr. Isaac. Yes, operationally, the Agriculture Select Agent
Program, we report directly to the APHIS administrator. We have
a face-to-face briefing with the administrator every month,
where we update him on the program activities and other
incidents and enforcement issues that occur with all USDA
laboratories.
And even though under the administrator, there is other
laboratories because of the chain of command of those
laboratories is separate from our chain of command. So with
that direct link, it highlights how important the program is to
APHIS.
The other aspect that we do is we utilize CDC as part of
any concerns we have with USDA laboratories. They accompany us
on those inspections and they will assist us in enforcement
actions or they may actually take the enforcement action
themselves.
Mr. Tonko. OK and turning back to GAO, in terms of the
independence here, Dr. Denigan-Macauley, can you broadly
discuss GAO's recommendations to increasing the independence of
the Select Agent Program? And how would those ideas benefit the
program?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Sure. Dr. Isaac is correct that they
do report directly to their director. However, this was not on
paper. It is not known if it was actually being done. So that
is one of our recommendations is to ensure that this is
documented formally that this is done.
One of the concerns that we have about not being
independent is that this is a small community and they are
there on each other's inspections. They say that the expertise
is needed. We understand that this is a very technical field,
however, there are other options for, that we talk about in the
report, reaching out. Other sectors have come up with other
options such as advisory panels to be able to bring in that
expertise so that they can focus on the regulations and the
expertise can be brought in.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Dr. Burgess of Texas for 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thanks to our
witnesses for being here today.
Dr. Denigan, if I could just continue on Mr. Tonko's line
of questioning for a moment. So the independent inspectors
would, of necessity, come from other laboratories or entities
and people would cross-check each other?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. My apologies. Could you repeat the
question?
Mr. Burgess. Well, just where are the independent
inspectors, where are we to get them?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. There are some advisory committees
here, even in the United States, that could be expanded to
provide that level of expertise. We are not prescriptive in how
that expertise would be obtained. Rather, we ask them to look
at approaches using other regulatory sectors and other
countries to determine how they gather that expertise.
For example, some folks also put more emphasis on the
actual labs to provide their own level of expertise and they
require certification of the biosafety officers.
So there are many different approaches that are out there.
This is not the only one.
Mr. Burgess. It seems to me, and I don't know that I am
sure about this, but for it to truly be an independent
inspector, it probably couldn't be within the agency itself.
That is one part of HHS'--or one part of CDC inspect another
part. Is that a concern?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Yes, it is and that is something that
we noted in our report because the budget still comes from CDC
and it still comes from APHIS. And so the decisionmaking
process is coming from the CDC and APHIS. And this is one small
program, amongst all the other activities that they have to
consider.
So yes, our criteria is that they must be structurally
independent and separate.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you for that.
Dr. Edwin, let me just ask you. It may be a little bit off
topic but you talked in your written statement, on page 4,
receiving reports of theft, loss, or release, and the bottom of
the paragraph, notifying appropriate authorities.
I was not in Congress when the anthrax event happened. I
came the subsequent year after that but I remember reading
about it in the newspapers and how horrific it was because
anthrax, the early symptoms, are the symptoms of common cold,
flu. And the ER doctor, one of the ER doctors, of the story
that is seared into my memory, the ER doctor had seen a lot of
cases of flu that day and this was another case of flu, until
it turned out to be something much, much worse.
So is there any method of notification, be on the lookout
for, when--not for perhaps that situation but if you have got a
breach, if someone finds that ricin has been shipped around the
country, is there a dissemination of this knowledge to first
responders and medical experts in emergency rooms so that
perhaps the unusual symptoms they are seeing is something that
must need to be considered?
Mr. Edwin. So this is one example where you know we have
pivoted to our emergency operations that was providing exactly
that information and connecting them to not only the subject
matter expertise within the CDC, and other departments but also
that the public health officials, and stuff and exactly
providing that information on those types of incidents.
On small ones that occur that we have reported in this, we
make sure that if they need assistance from one of our SMEs on
the list on that particular potential exposure, we try to
connect them. And they, in turn, make sure that a person is
taken care of the way he should.
So because the local physicians that may be treating won't
have that particular expertise, we make sure that we connect
the SMEs with the treating physicians.
Mr. Burgess. At that time, in fact it was the Thanksgiving
holiday of that year, and I was in labor and delivery. And the
emergency room brought up a pregnant woman who was 28 weeks and
for all the world looked like she had viral gastroenteritis. So
I did the normal treatment and was fixing to sign her out and
release her and she said, ``Is it important that I tell you
that my grandfather is a member of President Bush's Cabinet?''
And I thought for a minute and I thought it may be.
So in short order, I was able to call some people and get
some idea about whether or not these GI symptoms could be
related to the same concern that was going in the Nation's
Capital.
But it certainly brought home to me had she not mentioned
that casual reference, I wouldn't have known to look. Now, as
it turned out, it was unimportant. It didn't impact her
clinical course but it could have is the point. And then I
would have been just the same as that poor ER doctor that I
read about who attended the unfortunate postal worker. He has
got to live with that for the rest of his life that he missed
that diagnosis. If there is anything we can do to help people
come to the right conclusion more quickly, I think we should.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Dr. Burgess. That was
compelling testimony of why this is so important, all of this.
With that, I recognize the gentlelady from Indiana, Ms.
Brooks, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks so much to
our witnesses for sharing with us this important testimony.
Going back, actually, to that time frame, I happened to be
a U.S. Attorney in Southern District of Indiana during the
anthrax attacks. And so government offices all across the
country were, rightfully, really alarmed and concerned and, in
fact, received often fake or hoax anthrax packets, including my
own office at that time.
And Dr. Edwin, as I have learned in preparation for today,
prior to your role with the Select Agent Program, you served
from 2008 to 2016 as the responsible official and Biological
Surety Officer for the Select Agent Program at the U.S. Army
Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases. And it was
from that place in July of 2008 that a biodefense researcher
from your institution, Bruce Ivins, died from an apparent
suicide after learning that the FBI was going to file criminal
charges against him for the 2001 anthrax attacks.
In August of 2008, the FBI and Department of Justice
announced that Dr. Ivins was likely solely responsible for the
five deaths and the injuries caused by the anthrax mailings but
in May of 2011, a panel of the National Academy of Sciences, at
the request of the FBI, reviewed the scientific work and
concluded the FBI might have overstated the genetic analysis
linking the mailed anthrax to a flax of anthrax kept by Ivins.
So my question, Dr. Edwin, is, on July 10th of 2008, when
Dr. Ivins lost his security--he lost his security clearance, as
I understand. And as you were the responsible official for the
Select Agent Program at that time, were you aware of any
concerns about Dr. Ivins prior to that date and why he lost his
security clearance on that date?
Mr. Edwin. So, I was the alternate responsible official and
there was a military officer that was the responsible official
at that time. And it was also just you know I started in
January and this is the suitability assessments that the Army
does. Every individual that accesses select agents in the
containment labs have personnel reliability program. So that is
a certifying official that Dr. Ivins was under decertified him
from entering the laboratory.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. And I would like to talk a little
bit about this issue because it involves insider threats in the
information. Is there enough information sharing with the
Select Agent Program about potential or actual insider threats?
Mr. Edwin. So we require insider threat awareness training
for all the entities and this is one place where agent
accountability plays a very important role. You know we make
sure that the agents that they have recorded and what they are
working with. Not only does it help with the insider threat, it
also gives safety priority, biosafety because we know where the
agents are and the people inside the lab that are working are
also aware where they are.
Mrs. Brooks. But what I am concerned about that is
incredibly important I am concerned about the focus on the
personnel that have access to these agents.
And so have there been improvements made in reviewing the
suitability of the personnel who are registered to work with
the select agents? Is there baseline psychological testing? Are
there two rules in the biocontainment suite? Are there
reassessments of their security clearances?
Mr. Edwin. Yes, all of those are true and continuous
monitoring is also in place for people that are working with
the highest threat or tier 1 agents that we call it.
Mrs. Brooks. And since I have learned that there are so
many different places where these labs exist, is this
happening? And are you all confident, including the GAO, with
respect to the amount of oversight there is of what Dr. Edwin
just stated is happening? Is this happening in all of the labs?
Dr. Isaac. Yes, in 2012 we did publish a new regulation
which required for all tier 1 pathogens, which are the highest
risk pathogens, that every entity has a suitability program.
And that is what is part of our inspection process, that we
ensure that they have a robust review of their personnel
suitability and take action.
It is also a requirement in the regulations that if they
remove access for any reason, that that is reported to the
Federal Select Agent Program and that the reason for a person's
removal is reported to us.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you.
Doctor?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Yes, thank you. In 2009, GAO reported
that we did not have a single entity overseeing all of these
labs. It is important to note today that what we are discussing
is the Federal Select Agent Program. There are other pathogens,
other diseases, viruses, bacteria, toxins that do not fall into
the Select Agent Program, such as tuberculosis.
So I do not have confidence that we have a good
understanding of this robust program being implemented in all
of the labs.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. And thank you all for your work. It
is critically important for the country.
I yield.
Mr. Griffith. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize Mr. Walberg of Michigan for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to the panel
for being here.
According to GAO's report, both witness agencies have faced
challenges in hiring and retaining a sufficient number of staff
with appropriate expertise. The report outlined some of the
negative consequences of insufficient staffing, including
inability to meet deadlines and lack of expertise.
But Dr. Denigan-Macauley, could you explain in greater
detail the downfalls your team saw as a result of these
staffing challenges?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Sure. I should mention, again, that
these are very challenging jobs that do require a high level of
expertise and, in general, the program is working to ensure
that they have that level of expertise. However, we did find
that not all folks had the same level of expertise and
sometimes, because of staffing issues, we are pushed out of
their area where they had that level of expertise.
So these are real. On paper it looks like an FTE but these
are real problems that put people in a difficult situation. And
not having these labs, this program sufficient staffed is very
challenging.
Mr. Walberg. I understand both the CDC and APHIS have taken
steps to hire more staff in the past few years and,
specifically, have begun to fill vacancies at their respective
agencies since this report was completed.
I see from the report that the CDC developed a formal
workforce plan for its component of the program in 2016 and was
working to fill those positions. Dr. Edwin, would you tell us a
little more about the workforce plan, and the hiring that you
have done since that plan was developed, and the full size of
your program staff?
Mr. Edwin. So in the last 14 months, we filled 17
positions, including my position. And we also have started with
Dr. Isaac and their staff, the Strategic Workforce Plan that
includes both training and workforce of the entire Federal
Select Agent Program.
Mr. Walberg. With regards to the number of FTEs, are all of
those individuals inspectors?
Mr. Edwin. We have 51 inspector positions and the others
are support staff that look at different security requirements
and other associated tasks within the division.
So when I started with CDC they already had identified this
deficiency and we were given the 16 some positions to fill,
which we successfully filled.
And I also want to say that most of our inspectors have
come from the laboratories, select agent laboratories, and over
50 percent, about 65 percent or so have Ph.Ds. and the others
have master's degrees. So you know we do have that intellectual
capital in the inspectors.
Mr. Walberg. So more specifically then, based upon that
with the academic qualifications they have, the experience they
have, what steps is the agency taking to address workload
issues?
Mr. Edwin. So you know with the addition of the inspectors,
the estimated amount of time for travel and inspections outside
has decreased by about 20 percent. It used to be about 45 and
with the estimate, with the current inspection staff, there is
about 25 percent the last time I spoke to our operations chief,
which was a couple days ago.
And in addition, with the new information system that we
are developing, it is capturing a lot of efficiencies and it is
going to provide the time, additional time for inspectors to be
able to expediently do the inspection reports and increase
efficiency on the performance of our program.
Mr. Walberg. So going in a positive direction.
Mr. Edwin. Yes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you.
Similarly, APHIS developed a 5-year business plan, which
included a plan to hire additional staff. Dr. Isaac, would you
tell us about the 5-year plan and the hiring you have done
since the plan was developed and the full size of your program
staff?
Dr. Isaac. Yes. In 2015 we developed a 5-year plan, which
highlighted, essentially, the goals of the program, and where
we wanted to be, and the type of staffing that we would need to
be able to fully meet all of our goals.
As a result of that, we were able to, and we are very
thankful to Congress, we were able to get additional funds this
year that allowed us to hire eight additional technical staff.
So with that technical staff, we were able to create several
new positions, including a science officer position that deals
with a lot of the in-depth technical scientific questions, as
well as a dedicated facility specialist who has expertise in
that area, additional security specialist, training specialist,
and policy analyst. And we are very grateful for that and we
believe that that is going to help us fulfill and meet all of
our goals for effective oversight.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentleman for yielding back.
I now recognize Mr. Carter of Georgia for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank each of you
for being here.
Dr. Denigan-Macauley, just a second ago I believe that
Representative Brooks asked you about the--or you made the
comment about the pathogens that are covered under the Special
Agent Program--the Select Agent Program. Who makes that
decision on what is covered and what is not covered?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. So CDC and APHIS are probably better
in a position to answer that. However, collectively, they
review what goes in, I believe it is every 2 years or so. But
it is a Board of folks that make that decision.
Mr. Carter. A Board of folks?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Experts in the field, APHIS and CDC
collectively.
Mr. Carter. Dr. Edwin, do you want to expand on that?
Mr. Edwin. Are we talking about the review of the----
Mr. Carter. No, I am talking about the Board that makes
that decision on what is in the Select Agent Program and what
is not in it.
Mr. Edwin. Oh, so the biennial review. We call that process
the biennial review.
Mr. Carter. Right.
Mr. Edwin. It is a group of individuals from various
government agencies.
Mr. Carter. I am sorry.
Mr. Edwin. It is a group of individuals from various
government agencies that look at this you know every 2 years
and give us the guidance to make the changes that are
necessary.
Mr. Carter. OK. In your opinion, is there anything in there
that should be in there or anything that shouldn't be in there?
Mr. Edwin. So you know we look at this every 2 years.
Mr. Carter. I understand you look at it but I am talking
about now, today.
Mr. Edwin. I think that there are some agents that probably
we need to relook at but we are approaching that with the
committees.
Mr. Carter. When is the next time it will be up?
Mr. Edwin. It will be in a year and a half.
Mr. Carter. OK, Dr. Isaac----
Mr. Edwin. We do a lot of preparation before we get to
that.
Mr. Carter. All right. Anything that you think that
probably ought to be in there that is not?
Dr. Isaac. We published a regulation this year and we will
start a review process on the select agent list. We did receive
some recommendations from our scientists, scientific experts
who assess the list of select agents and make recommendations
for removal or addition.
And in this last published, we elected not to remove any
agents based on some concerns regarding security and policy
issues. So we will, this coming year, we will be doing that
assessment again and working through not only our subject
matter panel experts, scientific experts that we work with, but
also interagency experts.
Mr. Carter. OK. Anything, Doctor, that you think?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. No, I think that the point the GAO
has made in the past is that our oversight of pathogens in
general, pathogens and toxins----
Mr. Carter. Right.
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Is not comprehensive.
Mr. Carter. OK.
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. And that is not the same with other
countries.
Mr. Carter. All right, I want to go to something real quick
and that is the incident reporting forms. From what I
understand, between 2003 and 2015 there is a little bit of
controversy as to exactly how many incidents we had. I think it
was reported we had 10 and then they identified 11 more. And
then I believe that GAO made the recommendation that we improve
the incident reporting forms. And I am just wondering, have we
done that? How is that progressing? How are we doing?
Mr. Edwin. So we have made the changes. One of the
significant changes is now if there is an inactivation failure,
at least it can be formally reported to the program, which was
not part of that form.
It is just 2 weeks ago I was approved by the OMB and we
have that in place.
Mr. Carter. So you have it in place and it is working now.
Just out of curiosity, because there was a little bit of
confusion as to how many incidents actually took place between
that time frame between 2003 and 2015, it was either 10 or 21,
which there is a big difference between those. You believe it
was 21.
Since that time, how many have we had, do you have any
idea? Since 2015, how many incidents have we had?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. GAO reported that we had 21 incidents
of inactivation and it is the Form 3. We have not done work to
understand how many more may have occurred since then.
Mr. Carter. Since that time you came up with the 21?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Correct.
Mr. Carter. OK. OK, Dr. Denigan-Macauley, just last month I
believe you came out with a report about the way that other
countries are doing this, going about this process. It seems to
me like the one thing that we are lacking here in America is
that we don't have a national strategy.
Did we learn anything from other countries? I believe you
looked at Great Britain and maybe Canada. Are they doing things
that we need to be doing?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. Yes, we did, actually. We looked at a
variety of different countries and they have very different
approaches that are outlined in our report.
And for example, as I mentioned, Great Britain has a
separate entity that oversees it. It is similar to an OSHA but
with much more teeth and they oversee the safety and security
of a variety of different fields.
So yes, we do outline many options.
Mr. Carter. Are you going to make those recommendations
that we need to be following?
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. We made the recommendation that these
other oversight approaches should be taken into consideration
as they move forward.
Mr. Carter. OK.
Ms. Denigan-Macauley. We did not make a specific
recommendation on a specific change. That is the dialogue that
we believe needs to happen now.
Mr. Carter. OK. All right, thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentleman very much.
Ms. DeGette and I have agreed that I can ask a couple of
oddball science questions. So if you all will bear with me, I
am trying to educate myself.
So you all have all of these pathogens--and I am asking
both Dr. Isaac and Dr. Edwin--and I assume that many of them
are live or living organisms. Is that correct?
Mr. Edwin. That is correct.
Dr. Isaac. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. And when your inspectors are going in, are
they looking for any mutations or to make sure that there is no
possibility of, for lack of a better term, I am going to say
cross-pollination?
And the reason for this is I have just read this
fascinating read called Inheritors of the Earth by Chris
Thomas, a British scientist, who is talking about all kinds of
things. And in there, he talks about a plant that comes over
from Sicily, creates a hybrid, which becomes a separate species
in Great Britain. It took about 300 years. But then, once the
railroads came to town, they have discovered it created another
hybrid in York in a matter of just maybe a few decades.
And so I am worried that we have got all these dangerous
things. Are we making sure there are no mutations or that there
isn't something else going on? Because, apparently, organisms,
as complicated, these are all ragworts and groundsel species.
Well, they are a lot more complicated than some of the
microorganisms. Are we making sure? Is that part of the
inspection, that we are making sure we don't have mutations or
hybridization going on within our own labs?
Mr. Edwin. So we have a process to capture what you are
describing, a strain within an organism and variants. You know
there is that opportunity for them to--our database captures
that information. And as we inspect and look at the
inventories, we also pay attention to that.
It is an ongoing process and we encourage, anytime that
there are differences, to be able to get that. And some of them
actually need approval if they are making an antibiotic-
resistant strain. So it needs to go through the Institutional
Biosafety Committees that have experts locally at the entity
and then the process comes here. And we have an expert panel of
experts from various agencies. We call these sometimes and they
provide us the guidance as well as we look at it internally as
well.
So we are paying attention to those, especially since
science is evolving rapidly.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate that because the concern has a
little bit different look to it and all of a sudden, we have
accidently created something even worse than the original.
Dr. Isaac, are you all doing similar things?
Dr. Isaac. Yes, we are doing similar things. We require
that individual strains be registered and that if there are
variations within their research protocol as to the type of
virus that they are working or creating, and the type of
species, animal species that they are working with, that they
also report that to us. And we review those research protocols.
And that is the same for animal pathogens and plant
pathogens.
Mr. Griffith. All right. With that, I yield back.
Any additional questions, Ms. DeGette?
Ms. DeGette. No, thank you.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Well, that concludes this hearing.
It was, hopefully, not too painful but we do want to make sure
we keep the American public protected and we appreciate the
work of the GAO in helping us with that and your cooperation
with them.
In conclusion, I thank all of you. And the members who
participated in today's hearing. I remind members they have 10
business days to submit questions for the record and I ask that
the witnesses all agree to respond promptly to the questions.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
