- POWERING AMERICA: A REVIEW OF THE OPERATION AND EFFECTIVENESS OF THE NATION'S WHOLESALE ELECTRICITY MARKETS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

POWERING AMERICA: A REVIEW OF THE OPERATION AND EFFECTIVENESS OF THE
NATION'S WHOLESALE ELECTRICITY MARKETS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 26, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-49

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

27-054                         WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            GENE GREEN, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                       Massachusetts
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             TONY CARDENAS, California
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           RAUL RUIZ, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
Subcommittee on Energy

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               SCOTT H. PETERS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             GENE GREEN, Texas
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                       Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota               officio)
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     4
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6

Witnesses

Gordon Van Welie, President and CEO, ISO New England.............     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Answers to submitted questions...............................   119
Nick Brown, President and CEO, Southwest Power Pool..............    25
Prepared statement...........................................    27
Answers to submitted questions...............................   128
Bradley C. Jones, President and CEO, New York ISO................    36
Prepared statement...........................................    38
Answers to submitted questions...............................   136
Richard Doying, Executive Vice President, Midcontinent ISO.......    43
Prepared statement...........................................    45
Answers to submitted questions...............................   142
Cheryl Mele, Senior Vice President and CEO, Ercot................    53
Prepared statement...........................................    55
Answers to submitted questions...............................   153
Keith Casey, Vice President, Market & Infrastructure Development,
California ISO.................................................    63
Prepared statement...........................................    65
Answers to submitted questions...............................   157
Craig Glazer, Vice President, Federal Government Policy, PJM
Interconnection, LLC...........................................    73
Prepared statement...........................................    75
Answers to submitted questions...............................   165

POWERING AMERICA: A REVIEW OF THE OPERATION AND EFFECTIVENESS OF THE
NATION'S WHOLESALE ELECTRICITY MARKETS

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 26, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2123 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Fred Upton
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Upton, Olson, Barton,
Shimkus, Murphy, Latta, Harper, McKinley, Kinzinger, Griffith,
Johnson, Long, Flores, Mullin, Hudson, Cramer, Walberg, Walden
(ex officio), Rush, McNerney, Peters, Green, Doyle, Castor,
Welch, Tonko, Loebsack, Schrader, Kennedy, Butterfield, and
Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Elena Brennan, Legislative Clerk, Energy/
Environment; Jerry Couri, Chief Environmental Advisor; Wyatt
Ellertson, Research Associate, Energy/Environment; Tom
Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy/Environment; A.T.
Johnston, Senior Policy Advisor, Energy; Alex Miller, Video
Production Aide and Press Assistant; Brandon Mooney, Deputy
Chief Energy Advisor; Mark Ratner, Policy Coordinator; Annelise
Rickert, Counsel, Energy; Dan Schneider, Press Secretary; Sam
Spector, Policy Coordinator, Oversight and Investigations;
Jason Stanek, Senior Counsel, Energy; Madeline Vey, Policy
Coordinator, Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection; Evan
Viau, Staff Assistant; Andy Zach, Senior Professional Staff
Member, Environment; Priscilla Barbour, Minority Energy Fellow;
David Cwiertny, Minority Energy/Environment Fellow; Jean Fruci,
Minority Energy and Environment Policy Advisor; Rick Kessler,
Minority Senior Advisor and Staff Director, Energy and
Environment; and Tuley Wright, Minority Energy and Environment
Policy Advisor.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. The Subcommittee on Energy will now come to
order and the chair would recognize himself for an opening
statement.
So good morning. Last week, the subcommittee embarked on
its first hearing in our Powering America series where a panel
of witnesses shared their diverse perspectives regarding the
state of the wholesale electricity markets. And during that
hearing, we heard directly from market participants who operate
in all seven of the nation's RTO and ISO markets. Today, I
would like to welcome representatives from the nation's grid
operators and invite them to share their thoughts regarding the
current issues and the challenges in their respective regional
markets.
Americans have come to expect that electricity will always
be available when it is needed and it is the role of the grid
operators to make sure that this expectation is always met.
RTOs and ISOs play a vital role in the delivery of power from
the generator to the consumer, but it is a role that is largely
outside the public's view.
By operating and dispatching the transmission systems 24/7,
the grid operators must ensure that supply and demand is
continually kept in balance. In addition, they are responsible
for conducting long-term planning to reduce congestion on
existing transmission lines and to ensure that there is
adequate transmission capacity to reliably serve future
electricity demand.
So as we sit in the committee room today, the grid operator
responsible for coordinating the movement of electricity in
D.C. is known as the PJM. In addition to serving the needs of
13 other states including Michigan, and serving 65 million
folks, PJM also operates over 82,000 miles of transmission
lines. And that should provide a sense of the size and the
importance of these grid operators.
Along with the other six grid operators at the table today,
these RTOs and ISOs combined serve two-thirds of the nation's
population. However, as we heard from our witnesses last week,
there are concerns regarding the state of our nation's
competitive electricity markets. Some of the testimony focused
on a specific RTO function such as the complexities of the
capacity market, but we spent much of the time focused on
broader issues involving grid reliability, market competition,
generator fuel diversity, and whether certain baseload
resources should receive financial assistance to remain viable.
As our witnesses are aware, there are many involving
challenges currently facing the electricity industry. In a very
short period, we have witnessed significant changes in the
market supply and demand fundamentals and specifically weak
growth in electricity consumption combined with the
availability of large supplies of inexpensive natural gas. In
turn, wholesale electricity prices are now at near-record lows
around the country and these low prices have resulted in some
generators being unable to recover their costs. Notably,
several states are advancing proposals to support at-risk
nuclear plants that are unable to survive on revenues from the
energy and capacity markets alone.
The witnesses before the subcommittee today all operate
competitive markets, the dispatch generation across the country
based on lowest cost. They also now find themselves in the
middle of this policy debate involving changing technology,
environmental goals, and the effects of out-of-market actions.
Many are questioning whether the RTO and ISO markets can remain
competitive and perform all of their existing essential
functions while still tackling the new challenges in the faces
of these emerging trends.
So as our Powering America series continues, I look forward
to learning more about what is occurring in each of your
regions, hearing your thoughts regarding what, if any, reforms
could assist your efforts to achieve greater efficiencies,
reliability, and competition in your organized market.
And I yield the balance of my time to the gentleman from
Oklahoma, Mr. Mullin.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Good morning. Last week this subcommittee embarked on its
first hearing in our ``Powering America'' series, where a panel
of witnesses shared their diverse perspectives regarding the
state of the wholesale electricity markets. During that
hearing, we heard from directly from market participants who
operate in all seven of the nation's RTO and ISO markets.
Today, I'd like to welcome representatives from the nation's
grid operators and invite them to share their thoughts
regarding current issues and challenges in their respective
regional markets.
Americans have come to expect that electricity will always
be available when it's needed, and it is the role of the grid
operators to make sure that this expectation is always met.
RTOs and ISOs play a vital role in the delivery of power from
the generator to the consumer, but it's a role that is largely
outside the public's view. By operating and dispatching the
transmission system 24/7, the grid operators must ensure that
supply and demand is continually kept in balance. In addition,
they are responsible for conducting long-term planning to
reduce congestion on existing transmission lines and to ensure
that there's adequate transmission capacity to reliably serve
future electricity demand.
As we sit in this Committee room today, the grid operator
responsible for coordinating the movement of electricity to
Washington D.C. is known as ``PJM''. In addition to serving the
needs of 13 other states (including Michigan) and serving 65
million people, PJM also operates over 82,000 miles of
transmission lines. That should provide a sense of the size and
importance of these grid operators. Along with the other six
grid operators at the table today, these RTOs and ISOs combined
serve two-thirds of the nation's population.
However, as we heard from our witnesses last week, there
are concerns regarding the state of our nation's competitive
electricity markets. Some of the testimony focused on specific
RTO functions, such as the complexities of the ``capacity''
market--but we spent much of the time focused on broader issues
involving grid reliability, market competition, generator fuel
diversity and whether certain baseload resources should receive
financial assistance to remain viable.
As our witnesses are aware, there are many evolving
challenges currently facing the electricity industry. In a very
short period, we've witnessed significant changes in the
market's supply and demand fundamentals; specifically, weak
growth in electricity consumption combined with the
availability of large supplies of inexpensive natural gas. In
turn, wholesale electricity prices are now at near record lows
around the country and these low prices have resulted in some
generators being unable to recover their costs. Notably,
several States are advancing proposals to support ``at-risk''
nuclear plants that are unable to survive on revenues from the
energy and capacity markets alone.
The witnesses before the subcommittee today all operate
competitive markets that dispatch generation across the country
based on lowest-cost. They also now find themselves in in the
middle of this policy debate involving changing technology,
environmental goals, and the effects of ``out-of-market''
actions. Many are questioning whether the RTO and ISO markets
can remain competitive and perform all their existing essential
functions, while also tackling new challenges in the face of
these emerging trends.

Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Chairman Upton, for yielding. I just
want to take a quick moment to recognize those that are here.
One of the witnesses today is Mr. Nick Brown who represents the
Southwest Power Pool. Southwest Power Pool is a regional
transmission organization whose members like Oklahoma Gas and
Electric and GRDA operate in my state and help provide power to
millions of Oklahomans.
I want to thank all the witnesses for being here and look
forward to hearing your testimony as this committee evaluates
the state of our wholesale electricity markets and I yield
back.
Mr. Upton. The time is expired, you yield back. I recognize
the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Rush.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this important hearing today examining the operation and
effectiveness of the nation's wholesale electricity markets. I
must also commend you, Mr. Chairman, for following up last
week's very informative hearing where we heard from industry
insiders, with today's discussion consisting of regional grid
operators as these are the people responsible for administering
the nation's wholesale electricity market and managing the day-
to-day operations of the respective transmission systems.
Mr. Chairman, it has been some time since this subcommittee
has held comprehensive hearings on the Federal Power Act, and I
think these informative discussions greatly benefit all of our
members and will also help us make better, more informed
decisions when determining whether we need to update the
Federal Power Act or leave it as it is.
Mr. Chairman, one of the points that every one of our
industry panelists from last week's hearing agreed upon was the
fact that the nation's electricity grid has changed in recent
years and will continue to undergo dramatic transformations in
the near future. Whether spurred by state and federal policy,
marketing forces, or consumer demands and behavior, we have
seen significant new trends taking place in the electricity
market.
Mr. Chairman, consumers are driving many of these changes
as they demand new tools to more responsibly use energy both as
a way to save money and as a way to save their environment.
Some of these trends include greater demand for cleaner,
renewable sources of energy to compete with traditional fossil
fuels, an increase in distributed generation and demand
response resources, more energy efficiency initiatives and all
the while demanding lower energy costs. With all of these
consumer-driven changes there is also the debate as whether
issues such as fuel diversity and distributive energy make the
grid more or less reliable, and I look forward to hearing from
our witnesses on this important topic.
There is also the important issue of grid modernization and
grid security. As new and different sources of energy are
absorbed into the grid, it is important that we have the
infrastructure in place to get this new, cleaner energy from
the places where it is produced to the places where it is
needed. Congress should not only focus on streamlining
regulations in an environmentally safe and responsible way, but
also, Mr. Chairman, we should be making sure that we provide
adequate investment into modernizing and securing the grid.
Mr. Chairman, the American people want to feel confident
that our energy infrastructure provides secure, reliable,
sustainable energy while also understanding that the grid is
safe from attacks, whether those attacks mean cyber or
physical, natural or man-made.
So Mr. Chairman, I look forward to engaging today's
distinguished panelists on what they identify as the greatest
opportunities as well as the most difficult challenges that we
see in ensuring that we have a greener, cleaner, more
integrated 21st century grid. And with that Mr. Chairman, I
thank you and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Upton. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The chair
would recognize the chair of the full committee, the gentleman
from Oregon, for an opening statement, Mr. Walden.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Well, good morning, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee and our distinguished panelists. As you will
recall, last week we held our first hearing on the Powering
America series where we received testimony from a wide range of
electricity sector stakeholders. That hearing provided this
committee with the perspective, concerns, and ideas from the
individuals who participate in the electricity markets.
So today, we pick up where we left off and continue our
review of America's electricity system by hearing from
individuals who operate, actually operate, the electricity
markets known as regional grid operators, so thank you all for
being here. Regional grid operators, or RTOs and ISOs, are one
of the options Americans have to access reliable and affordable
electricity. They accomplish this by performing a variety of
functions ranging from long-term transmission planning services
to overseeing competitive energy markets where wholesale
electricity is bought and sold.
Now in my home State of Oregon and neighboring state of
Washington, similar grid operator functions are performed for
various consumer-owned utilities by the Bonneville Power
Administration or the BPA. BPA is a nonprofit, federal power
and marketing administration based in the Pacific Northwest and
is part of the Department of Energy. Past attempts have failed
to form an RTO for the states of Oregon and Washington which
encompass my Eastern Oregon district. That opposition, I should
tell you, remains strong today.
But given the size and scope of America's electricity
system, it is safe to say that the job of regional grid
operators has never been easy, and looking at recent
developments within the nation's power sector, it is apparent
that the job is becoming even more challenging. Thousands of
different stakeholders participate in the U.S. electricity
system and many of these stakeholders have differing and
competing desires for how wholesale electricity markets should
be administered.
The RTOs and ISOs regulated by FERC have the difficult task
of deciding how to best manage and oversee energy markets in
order to provide power in the most affordable and reliable way
for the consumers they serve. RTOs and ISOs do not own any
physical grid assets and they do not exist to create a profit.
They act as an independent, nonprofit entity and their goal is
to effectively orchestrate the generation and delivery of
affordable electricity across the bulk power grid by
instantaneously matching power supply with power demand for
customers.
Today, we have a panel of RTO executives who bring a wealth
of experience operating organized electricity markets, and I
look forward to their ideas on how we can we best serve the
needs of the consumers we all need to take care of.
Additionally, I look forward to discussing other important
issues with our witnesses such as how RTOs and ISOs can
accommodate state policies in the areas they serve while
preserving the competitive nature of markets and how RTOs and
ISOs can incorporate new forms of generation onto the grid
without compromising system reliability.
Even though many Americans may not understand the
complexities of wholesale electricity markets, one thing most
Americans do understand is the electricity bill that arrives in
their mailboxes each month. This is especially true for
American businesses who rely on affordable power to succeed and
grow our economy and jobs.
The goal of this committee and I think of the operators is
to make sure that consumers are always coming out as winners.
If we keep the consumer at the front and that is our goal when
making important policy decisions, I am confident that the U.S.
electricity system will continue to thrive and flourish and
meet the needs of all Americans. With that in mind I am eager
to discuss how we can ensure affordable energy for consumers
across the country while also maintaining system reliability
now and in the future.
So Mr. Chairman thanks for the hearing. To our witnesses,
thank you all for participating. I got your testimony here. We
have a couple of subcommittees meeting at the same time as you
might imagine, so I will be in and out. With that if there are
other members on the committee that would like the balance of
my time I am happy to yield to them and, if not, I will yield
back to the chairman and thanks again.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

As you will recall, last week we held our first hearing in
the Powering America series where we received testimony from a
wide range of electricity sector stakeholders. That hearing
provided this committee with perspectives, concerns, and ideas
from the individuals who participate in electricity markets.
Today, we pick up where we left off and continue our review of
America's electricity system by hearing from the individuals
who operate the electricity markets, known as regional grid
operators.
Regional grid operators, or RTOs and ISOs, are one of the
options Americans have to access reliable and affordable
electricity. They accomplish this by performing a variety of
functions, ranging from long-term transmission planning
services to overseeing competitive energy markets where
wholesale electricity is bought and sold.
In my home State of Oregon and the state of Washington
similar grid operator functions are performed for various
consumer owned utilities through the Bonneville Power
Administration. BPA is a non-profit federal power marketing
administration based in the Pacific Northwest that is part of
the Department of Energy. Past attempts have failed to form a
RTO for the states of Oregon and Washington, which encompass my
eastern Oregon district. That opposition remains strong today.
But given the size and scope of America's electricity
system, it is safe to say that the job of regional grid
operators has never been easy, and looking at recent
developments within the nation's power sector it is apparent
that their job is becoming even more challenging. Thousands of
different stakeholders participate in the U.S. electricity
system and many of these stakeholders have differing and
competing desires for how wholesale electricity markets should
be administered.
The RTOs and ISOs, regulated by FERC, have the difficult
task of deciding how to best manage and oversee energy markets
in order to provide power in the most affordable and reliable
way for the customers they serve. RTOs and ISOs do not own any
physical grid assets and they do not exist to create profit.
They act as independent, non-profit entities and their goal is
to effectively orchestrate the generation and delivery of
affordable electricity across the bulk power grid by
instantaneously matching power supply with power demand for
their customers.
Today, we have a panel of RTO executives who bring a wealth
of experience operating organized electricity markets and I
look forward to their ideas on how we can best serve the needs
of the customers they serve.
Additionally, I look forward to discussing other important
issues with our witnesses, such as how RTOs and ISOs can
accommodate state policies in the areas they serve while
preserving the competitive nature of markets and how RTOs and
ISOs can incorporate new forms of generation onto the grid
without compromising system reliability.
Even though many Americans may not understand the
complexities of wholesale electricity markets, one thing most
Americans do understand is the electricity bill that arrives in
their mailbox each month. This is especially true for American
businesses who rely on affordable power to succeed and grow the
economy. The goal of this committee, and I think of the grid
operators, is to make sure that consumers are always coming out
as winners. If we keep this goal in mind when making important
policy decisions, I am confident that the U.S. electricity
system will continue to thrive and flourish and meet the needs
of all Americans. With that in mind, I am eager to discuss how
we can ensure affordable energy for consumers across the
country while also maintaining system reliability now and in
the years to come.

Mr. Upton. The gentleman yields back. The chair will
recognize the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, for an opening statement.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Upton. This is the second
hearing on this subject in the subcommittee this month and just
like last week's hearing, Ranking Member Rush and I worked in
partnership with Chairman Upton and Walden to set up today's
hearing in order to provide us important and unbiased
background for future decisions.
I am pleased we have an opportunity to hear from those who
are entrusted to run the grid, the regional transmission
organizations, or RTOs. While versions of these independent
system operators have existed for decades, it was the Energy
Policy Act of 2005 that enshrined these organizations as
central to the wholesale markets and these markets have yielded
us many benefits including some of the lowest prices we have
ever seen for electricity.
However, that doesn't mean that we should just turn a blind
eye to the question of whether these organizations are properly
positioned to address the many changes that are underway in the
electricity sector. RTOs make decisions every day that greatly
affect the market, its participants, and consumers. In some
ways they are more powerful on a day-to-day basis than the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, which is why we need to
ensure that RTOs are providing unbiased management of their
systems and not veering into the kind of policymaking that is
the responsibility of Congress and the states.
Today, RTOs have their work cut out for them. New
technologies, evolving policies, fuel market changes, and aging
infrastructure all influence the operation, reliability, and
resiliency of the grid, so too do changes in patterns and
distribution of electricity demand. All of these factors have
called into question the most basic tenets of ratemaking and
challenged the longstanding financial model for utilities. They
are also having an impact on wholesale markets with
implications for the competitive position of more traditional
grid assets, and I am sure we are going to hear more about
these issues from our witnesses today.
The growth of distributed generation and these new
technologies are also creating opportunities for consumers and
their advocates to have a more active role in the electricity
sector. Consumers are driving policies at the state level
through the Public Utility Commissions and seeking input on
decisions that impact generation, distribution, and
transmission of electricity. Although consumers have not played
a role in RTO decisionmaking, it may be time to put in place
formal mechanisms to facilitate direct communication between
consumer advocates and the RTOs.
And each of the organizations we will hear from today
operates differently. While they are all administering
wholesale markets, their governance structures, market rules,
state and regional policies, and relationships to market
participants and consumers are different. This hearing gives us
the opportunity to compare and contrast the different
approaches and to evaluate whether some approaches offer
advantages in managing the grid.
And keeping the electric grid operating is essential to our
economy and our safety, so the RTOs' focus on grid reliability
and resiliency is understandable, but these concepts are
evolving along with the new technologies and tools that have
emerged over the past decade. Reliability and resiliency are no
longer defined solely by transmission and baseload generation
assets. In some cases, I have seen transmission projects
needlessly rubberstamped in the name of reliability.
There are certainly other ways to address reliability than
just gold plating the transmission system. Newer and bigger
transmission lines are no longer always the best or most cost
effective answer to the question of how we improve reliability.
It is time for the RTOs to begin to adapt to this new reality.
Distributed energy resources, renewable and otherwise, along
with efficiency and demand response are equally important. And
of course we certainly do need more interstate and
interregional transmission, particularly from the Great Plains
to the rest of the Eastern Interconnection. The lack of
progress in this area leads me to ask whether the approval
process between regions is working as effectively and
efficiently as it should and whether regions have become too
balkanized and unable to work together for the greater good.
So Mr. Chairman, I am pleased that we have been able to
work together on this hearing series evaluating our nation's
electricity markets. Last week, we learned about the
perspectives of market participants and today have an
experienced panel representing our nation's RTOs. But what we
have been missing so far is an analysis of consumer
perspectives. And there are number of important issues
impacting consumers that we must consider including governance
structure, cost recovery models, and appropriate transparency,
and I hope that we will commit to holding such a hearing from
the consumer perspectives in the near future.
That said, I look forward to hearing from the panel and I
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Upton. Thank you. With that, all member statements have
been completed. We are joined by great witnesses today and we
will start with 5 minutes for each one with Gordon van Welie,
president and CEO of ISO New England.
Welcome. You need to hit the mike button there.

STATEMENTS OF GORDON VAN WELIE, PRESIDENT AND CEO, ISO NEW
ENGLAND; NICK BROWN, PRESIDENT AND CEO, SOUTHWEST POWER POOL;
BRADLEY C. JONES, PRESIDENT AND CEO, NEW YORK ISO; RICHARD
DOYING, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, MIDCONTINENT ISO; CHERYL
MELE, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND CEO, ERCOT; KEITH CASEY, VICE
PRESIDENT, MARKET & INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT, CALIFORNIA ISO;
AND, CRAIG GLAZER, VICE PRESIDENT, FEDERAL GOVERNMENT POLICY,
PJM INTERCONNECTION, LLC

STATEMENT OF GORDON VAN WELIE

Mr. Van Welie. Good morning, Chairman Upton, Ranking Member
Rush, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you this morning. As you said, my
name is Gordon van Welie. I am the CEO of ISO New England. And
the ISO was established back in 1997 and led to the creation of
wholesale electricity markets and the subsequent investment in
the region of some $30 billion in electricity supply and
transmission infrastructure.
This has caused a dramatic change in how electricity is
produced and consumed and I believe this transformation is
accelerating. Wholesale markets have produced demonstrable
benefits for New England electricity consumers. For instance,
in 2016, New England's wholesale electricity markets cleared
$5.4 billion in revenues. This was the lowest since 2003 and
down from high water mark of nearly $14 billion in 2008. During
this period, emissions have decreased substantially, and since
I last appeared before this subcommittee the forward capacity
market has driven investment in approximately 5,600 megawatts
of additional generation in demand resources including energy
efficiency.
I last appeared before the subcommittee in March of 2013 to
discuss the transformation of our power system resources. At
the time, I noted a pair of key issues. First, the critical
need for accurate price formation and performance incentives in
our wholesale markets to ensure reliable electricity supply,
and second, I stressed the importance of adequate fuel
infrastructure and supply arrangements. We now have had an
additional 4 years of experience to underscore the importance
of both issues.
I would like to update the subcommittee on these issues and
also speak to cybersecurity challenge. First, I would like to
comment on the issue of state-sponsored resources and their
impact on wholesale markets. The region is preparing to
accommodate an influx of state-sponsored, carbon-free
resources. ISO New England has proposed changes to our forward
capacity market to ensure appropriate price formation and to
accommodate the states' policies. These changes will allow
existing resources that are seeking to retire to swap their
capacity obligations with state-sponsored resources. We believe
that this is innovative way to continue to utilize the
wholesale market to ensure reliability while gradually
transitioning the region towards an energy supply with lowered
carbon emissions.
We are currently discussing this proposal with our
stakeholders and intend to file the market rules with the FERC
in January of 2018. This proposal will likely accelerate the
retirement of uneconomic non-gas generators which are the
resources we currently rely upon when the region's gas
pipelines are constrained and unable to supply gas generators.
This leads me to the issue of fuel security, which
continues to be a top priority for ISO New England. The region
is experiencing a major shift in the generation mix and we
anticipate this ongoing transition could lead to the retirement
of approximately a third of the generation fleet within the
next decade. The shift away from generators with onsite fuel to
gas generators relying on just-in-time fuel delivery has
exposed the limitations of New England's fuel infrastructure.
As I have previously testified, the constraints on the
natural gas transportation during very cold winters can lead to
reliability risks and price volatility in the wholesale market.
The transformation of the resource mix will continue to drive
additional retirements among gas generators and likely
exacerbate the effects of these pipeline constraints. In order
to mitigate the risk, New England market participants or the
states will have to invest in sufficient infrastructure and
fuel arrangements and the ISO may have to make additional
improvements to the wholesale market rules to incent these
investments. The ISO is studying this fuel security risk and
will report preliminary results in October of this year.
Finally, the ISO is working to improve the safeguards for
our control center and business system infrastructure. We
recognize the volume and sophistication of the threats against
the electric grid are rising. I can assure the subcommittee
that we also recognize the importance of critical cybersecurity
assets that we operate and are constantly working to identify
and address these dynamic and evolving challenges.
Since I last appeared before the subcommittee, ISO New
England has made many operational and market-based changes to
meet the needs of our region. Market forces and public policy
decisions are impacting both operations and markets and the
region continues to require innovative solutions to ensure
reliable, environmentally responsible, and competitive
electricity supply. I believe that the collaborative governance
and risk management structures in place in New England will
keep us on course to navigate and meet these challenges. Thank
you and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Van Welie follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Next, we are joined by Nick Brown, president and CEO of
Southwest Power Pool. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF NICK BROWN

Mr. Brown. Thank you and good morning, Chairman Upton and
Ranking Member Rush and all the members of the subcommittee. My
name is Nick Brown. I am president and CEO of Southwest Power
Pool, an organization for which I have worked 32 years. The
title of today's topic, Review of the Operation and
Effectiveness of the Nation's Wholesale Electricity Markets, I
appreciate your interest in that topic and I am here to tell
you the wholesale markets are functioning very well and very
effectively.
In Southwest Power Pool we are focused on end use customers
and we focus a great deal of our attention in ensuring that our
benefit to cost ratio is large and increasing. Today it is
greater than 11:1 versus the cost of operation of our
organization across all reports of 14 states in the central
part of the U.S. We have over 83,000 megawatts of generation
and our footprint serving just shy of 55,000 megawatts of load,
so obviously our reserve margins are multiple of our minimum
criteria and we are very blessed that that portfolio is very
diverse.
We have significant coal, gas, nuclear, a huge amount of
wind and continuing to grow, and hydro. In fact, this morning I
pulled up our web site in real time, a typical summer day, and
our footprint wa 46 percent coal, 28 percent wind, 19 percent
natural gas, 6 percent nuclear, 4 percent hydro, a very diverse
portfolio.
Very important to understand that the wind in our footprint
has grown significantly over the past decade to nearly 17,000
megawatts. Nearly 17,000 megawatts. Also important is that half
of that came on line in the last 2 years. It operates
extraordinarily reliably and does so for a multiple of reasons.
I will tell you as an engineer with training in operations
and planning, if you had asked me 10 years ago if we would have
been able to reliably accommodate even half of that I would
have said no. Period. End of discussion. So how are we able to
do that today? There are specific reasons that we are able to
accommodate that magnitude of wind in a very reliable fashion.
First and foremost, over the last 10 years, we have
invested in nearly $10 billion in transmission across our 14-
state footprint and that has been paid for under policies
developed by our regional state committee who is comprised of a
commissioner from each of our states who, collaboratively,
through our committee and their committee processes, determined
a cost allocation process to pay for that transmission. But for
that transmission we would not be able to accommodate in a
reliable fashion that magnitude of wind.
Second, a day-ahead energy and day-ahead unit commitment
market, we are able to commit generating units across those 14
states in a very, very reliable fashion. And then third, we
consolidated all of the balancing authorities, more than 20, in
our 14-state footprint, but for any one of those being pulled
out of the equation we would not be able to accomplish.
Reliability is job one. We can accommodate managing the system
in a reliable fashion and we can mandatorily from a reliability
unit commitment perspective maintain whatever generation is
needed to protect reliability.
Second, I want to go on to cybersecurity. It is an
interest. It is a very, very high risk for our organization,
but we are subject to the standards of the North American
Electric Reliability Corporation. They require us to
mandatorily comply with those. We are heavily audited against
those. They are backstopped by the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission as are our market rules and we are subject to
penalties of up to a million dollars a day per violation.
I believe we are in good hands, but the reliability
standards are a threshold. We focus on security far above
minimum reliability standards. I appreciate your time today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brown follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Next we are joined by Bradley Jones, President and CEO of
New York ISO. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF BRADLEY JONES

Mr. Jones. Thank you. Chairman Upton, Ranking Member Rush,
members of the subcommittee, thank you for having me here. I am
the chairman and CEO of the New York ISO. Prior to my position
as CEO of the New York ISO, I was the chief operating officer
of the Electrical Reliability Council of Texas.
New York has gone through significant changes much of the
country has. Social, economic, policy changes are driving
significant changes among each of these ISOs, and each of these
ISOs here before you have responded to those changes and have
built systems to ensure that they have the capability to
maintain reliable, safe operations of their systems as well as
do so at the lowest possible economic cost for their consumers.
I would like to highlight three of the critical functions
of the NYISO. First, the NYISO operates the bulk electric
system and does so under reliability rules that are set by the
nation, by the state, and by our regions. Second, we operate
competitive electricity markets throughout our regions to
attain that lowest possible cost for consumers. And third, the
NYISO conducts planning studies to ensure that we can guarantee
reliability out into the future not just for today.
Since 1999, the competitive markets in New York have
delivered consistently for consumers. Over $7.8 billion over
the last several years have been returned back to consumers
through the efficient operation of our systems. Now beyond
efficiency, since 1999, the creation of the NYISO, we have also
seen a significant reduction in air emissions. Carbon is down
by 43 percent from our generation fleet. Nitrogen oxides are
down by 87 percent and sulfur dioxide down by 98 percent in
that same period, significant track record. Yet, New York State
continues to be a national leader on the environment and clean
energy.
And at the NYISO we see a recognition as we move forward to
ensure this clean energy future that we have something we must
address. In our state we are beginning to recognize that we
have a state which is characterized by a tale of two grids, a
grid in Upstate which is primarily clean energy, nuclear
energy, hydro, wind, solar, all components that have low
emissions and yet in the south where much of our load is, over
two-thirds of our load, Downstate we have a grid which is
characterized by over 75 percent fossil fuel generation.
In order to achieve our low emissions and clean energy
objectives we must be able to transport that power. To move
renewable power throughout our grid we have to focus on the
transmission system in New York. Now I need to applaud FERC.
FERC passed, several years ago, an Order 1000 which has given
the great opportunity to move forward on transmission projects
within our region.
We have two major transmission projects that are currently
underway and under consideration. One that moves power a
thousand megawatts from left to right across the state and will
enable us to get more of our power out of the hydro resources
we have in the west as well as the wind resources we have in
the west. We also have another transmission project that is
moving from Central New York down into our load centers of the
Lower Hudson Valley, New York City, and Long Island.
Third, under consideration we are looking forward to
working with the Public Service Commission in New York to drive
one additional policy improvement. That is transmission from
our north country into the central part of the state so that we
can capture again renewable resources in that region. Achieving
our renewable future, which is set by our governor as a goal of
achieving 50 percent renewables by 2030, depends upon building
transmission in the state. We are making great progress thanks
to the work of the FERC so far and we will be making more
progress as we go forward.
In addition, we are working very closely with the state of
New York as an effective partner on analyzing the possibility
of integrating carbon directly into our markets. What I mean by
that is pricing carbon into the market dispatch, something that
at this time that I don't believe any other state is doing, but
certainly something that I believe most economists would
suggest is the best way to accommodate low carbon resources in
our markets.
We are very much at the beginning of this process. We have
been working very closely with our state in a collaborative
way. Our market participants requested that we hire a
consultant. We hired the very renowned Brattle Group in to
study this issue. We hope in the next several days to release a
major report on the possibility of integrating carbon into our
markets.
We think it is an extraordinary way that could, is very
promising for our future not only at keeping costs down for our
consumers, but also in doing so in a way that reduces carbon
even further than the current programs in place. So New York
ISO, much like these ISOs before you, have accommodated change,
they have led change. We will continue to do that in the
future. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jones follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Next, Richard Doying, executive VP for Midcontinent ISO.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD DOYING

Mr. Doying. Good morning, Chairman Upton, Vice Chairman
Olson, and Ranking Member Rush, and the rest of the
subcommittee members. I appreciate the opportunity to talk to
you today about the important topic of energy markets and their
effectiveness and efficiency.
I started at MISO in 2002 as we were developing the energy
markets, and we have seen significant change in the markets and
the resources since that time and I look forward to discussing
those changes with you and how the markets have adapted to deal
with those changes. I know the committee is interested in
hearing about retirement of generation coal and nuclear units
as well as increases in gas, increases in renewable energy, and
I intend to focus my remarks here today on just those issues.
As a brief introduction to MISO we are, as noted earlier, a
501(c)(4), a public interest organization, so we exist for the
benefit of the consumers in our region to reliably operate the
system as well as to ensure the lowest cost delivered prices to
those customers. We operate about 175,000 megawatts of
generation across 15 states, serving about 42 million people.
As part of that we annually generate about $3 million in
benefits for all of our consumers.
The industry is being impacted by a combination of
regulatory, political, and economic factors and we have already
experienced a dramatic shift and changes in the MISO region.
While coal-fired generation supplied about 75 percent of the
energy consumed in the MISO region in 2005, it now accounts for
less than 50 percent, about 46 percent. While gas resources
generated about 7 percent of the energy consumed in the MISO
region in 2005, that number is now at 27 percent. And while
renewables generated and accounted for almost zero percent of
our energy in 2005, it now accounts for about 7 percent and it
continues to grow rapidly.
The changes in that generation profile are due both to
reduction in coal and the retirement of about 13,000 megawatts
of coal within the region, but it is also driven by economic
factors, primarily the reduction in natural gas prices. If you
looked at the natural gas prices in 2005 and considered how far
they would reduce by 2015 and the fact that gas would be a more
economic fuel source than coal, no one would have believed that
that could possibly be the case. But it has led to considerable
change in the generation resource mixes as well as the
operation of the grid.
So how do markets adapt to those changes? We innovate. We
create new market products and new market services in order to
accommodate those changes in the resource mix and we continue
to innovate in order to address particularly renewables and the
increase in gas generation. So I will note three different
areas where that occurs.
One is we partner with our states as they conduct their
resource planning to evaluate the generation portfolio that
they plan to bring forward in the future and to provide our
planning and oversight to make sure that they understand in an
aggregate basis across the broader region the implications of
changes they may be making in their portfolio and how that will
affect the operation of the grid in the market. We also
facilitate infrastructure investment and reliable grid
planning. That process has resulted in over $26 billion of new
transmission infrastructure. An original portfolio of about
$5.6 billion approved in 2011 resulted in 28,000 direct
construction jobs and about 50,000 jobs total.
We also work continuously to improve our markets, to
innovate the market design and products and services. We have a
market roadmap process where we work with all of our
stakeholders including states, including the load-serving
entities, generators as well as all other interested
stakeholders, and that includes changes that are directly
related to the changes that I noted in the generation mix in
the region.
And I will give you just a couple examples of those.
Previously we introduced a new product that would allow wind
generators to participate in the market on the same basis as
thermal generators offering into the market and allowing
dispatch within the region in order to assure the most
operationally reliable as well as market efficient outcomes.
More recent examples of additional changes to address both the
changing fuel mix as well as increasing gas would be new market
capabilities for combined cycle units which are very flexible
and can offer in multiple configurations into the market and
that will allow us to optimize the uses of those resources.
Finally, we work closely with other sectors such as the
natural gas sector and we will continue to do so as we go
forward and gas becomes more important. I hope my written
comments and introductory comments have been helpful to the
committee in terms of introducing these topics and I look
forward to the conversation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Doying follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Cheryl Mele, senior VP and chief operating officer of
ERCOT, welcome.

STATEMENT OF CHERYL MELE

Ms. Mele. Good morning, Chairman Upton, Ranking Member
Rush, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to address you today and offer ERCOT's perspective
on the wholesale competitive markets. My name is Cheryl Mele
and I am the senior vice president and chief operating officer
for the Electric Reliability Council of Texas.
ERCOT manages the flow of electric power to about 24
million Texas customers. This represents about 90 percent of
the load in Texas. We are a membership-based 501(c)(4)
nonprofit corporation governed by a board of directors and
subject to the oversight of the Public Utility Commission of
Texas as well as the Texas legislature. ERCOT is the only non-
FERC jurisdictional power market in the continental United
States. We are subject to the reliability and security
standards set by NERC, and maintaining this regulatory
structure is vital and will continue to bring the benefits of a
reliable grid and vibrant market with the lowest cost to the
consumers of Texas that we serve.
ERCOT has an energy-only market. With limited exceptions,
generators are paid only for the energy they actually put onto
the grid. A number of enhancements have been made to ERCOT's
market since it was launched, but the core energy-only
principles have not changed. We continue to discuss further
refinements with stakeholders and regulators and to consider
the appropriate role for the ERCOT market and operations in
accommodating newer technologies that may offer different
characteristics whether they are storage, additional
renewables, flexible thermal units or distributed generation.
Contrary to the national trend, we project an annual
average of 1.5 percent load growth over the next 5 years, and
in recent years the energy use in ERCOT has grown by an average
of about two percent annually. The generation fleet in ERCOT
features a diverse fuel mix including more wind than any other
state. We currently have over 18,000 megawatts of wind
installed and operating in ERCOT.
In 2016, the energy produced in ERCOT was predominantly
from natural gas plants at about 43 percent, followed by coal
at just under 29 percent, wind at 15 percent, and nuclear at 12
percent. That continued load growth and new generation
investments support continued investment in transmission in the
region. With natural gas playing such a large role in our
generation fuel mix, commodity price of natural gas is the
primary driver of the wholesale prices in ERCOT. With
consistently low gas prices and ample reserve margins, the
average wholesale price of power in ERCOT has been very low in
recent years. We recognize these low prices effect generation
owners' revenues and we are always attuned to the reality and
possibility of generation unit retirements that could affect
our reserve margin outlook.
Like all independent system operators, reliability is our
primary measure of performance. We have successfully updated
our operations and market rules to reflect a changing grid and
we will continue to work with stakeholders as technologies
evolve or issues emerge. Through innovation, our staff and
stakeholders have shown an enormous capability to solve new and
challenging problems today and in the future. While not a
market issue, we are appreciative of and remain committed to
our external collaborations with relevant federal and state
governmental agencies, the industry, and national labs to
enhance everyone's cybersecurity posture.
In conclusion, with healthy reserves and low prices in
ERCOT's energy-only market, continuing with the current,
predictable regulatory structure is important. This allows us
to be responsive to all of our regulators as well as the
consumer and market participants. We will continue to
collaborate to address future challenges and opportunities in
the ERCOT region and we will continually investigate the inputs
and tools needed to support reliability as the grid continues
to change. Thank you for your time today and opportunity to
appear before you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Mele follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Dr. Casey, Keith Casey, vice president of Market &
Infrastructure Development, California ISO, welcome to you as
well.

STATEMENT OF KEITH CASEY

Mr. Casey. Good morning, Chairman Upton, Ranking Member
Rush, and members of the subcommittee. As you noted my name is
Keith Casey. I am vice president of Market & Infrastructure
Development at the California ISO, and I want to thank you for
the opportunity to be here to discuss the operation and
effectiveness of the organized wholesale markets in California.
We appreciate the committee's attention to this important issue
and my comments today will focus on what is working well in our
markets and, frankly, some candid discussion around some of the
challenges we are having.
Since the ISO started operations in 1998, we have almost 20
years of operating experience and have been evolving our
markets considerably since the Western Energy Crisis occurred
17 years ago. Our markets are in far better shape now than they
were then, and over the past 15 years have been yielding
significant benefits to our market participants. They have been
very stable and competitive.
In recent years, as I am sure many of you know, California
has established itself as a global leader in environmental
energy policies that are dramatically transforming the resource
mix on the grid. Today, renewables comprise about 30 percent of
the total energy produced in our markets and are on track to
meet 50 percent by 2030, if not sooner. This transition from
large station power to a more diverse and decentralized system
has created a new value proposition for the California ISO.
Our centralized energy markets are proving to be highly
valuable if not essential for successfully integrating and
managing a diverse fleet of grid resources. Indeed, our success
has encouraged other transmission providers in the West to join
our real-time market and form the Western Energy Imbalance
Market. That market currently serves five entities comprising
approximately eight western states and serves half the electric
load of the Western Interconnection. And we have seven other
entities that are planning to join the Western Energy Imbalance
Market over the next several years.
Since its inception in 2014, the Western Imbalance Market
has created significant benefits not just for California, but
for all the participating entities. In addition to the
wholesale market, California provides significant value to
market participants through facilitating new resource
interconnections to the grid and developing long-term
transmission planning. Both of these functions have evolved
significantly over the years to meet the changing needs of the
industry and ISO has used these processes to connect 20,000
megawatts of renewables to the grid and approve over $7 billion
in transmission investments.
So notwithstanding these successes, there remain
significant challenges to enabling the transformation of the
grid. I will highlight two of them. The first is to maintain
the resources we need for essential reliability services during
the transformation of the electric grid; and secondly, to
ensure the transmission infrastructure needed to support the
diverse set of resources across the West can one day be
developed.
Reliably integrating high levels of renewables into the
power system represents a significant challenge that requires a
complement fleet of resources that are highly dispatchable and
flexible to balance the system and balance the ramping
challenges that we face. We also need to make sure we maintain
essential reliability services like voltage support, frequency
response, and the ability to have a resilient grid that can
respond reliably to contingencies.
In the near future, California will need to rely primarily
on the natural gas fleet to provide these essential grid
services. However, as you have heard in testimony last week,
the gas fleet in California is under financial duress due to
lower energy prices, surplus capacity, and minimal bilateral
contracting, and as a result, conventional power plants are
beginning to seek some sort of backstop procurement from the
California ISO to keep them financially viable or indicating
they will otherwise retire. Currently, the ISO is working with
the California Public Utilities Commission and our stakeholders
to explore regulatory market options for addressing this
problem.
Just quickly on the second issue which is with respect to
tapping the benefits of an expanded Western region. To date,
the majority of California renewable resources are located
within state and are predominantly solar photovoltaic and
relying too heavily on one particular technology like solar PV
exacerbates renewal integration challenges and essentially can
create oversupply conditions at certain parts of the day and
increase ramping challenges for the ISO to manage.
So as California looks to achieve a 50 percent RPS it could
take advantage of the opportunity to tap into other high
quality renewables across the West. Ultimately, having a more
diverse mix of renewables to meet the RPS goal will lessen the
integration challenges, and may ultimately prove more cost-
effective for California.
But of course building transmission across multi-states has
challenges. There has to be agreement on what the benefits are
to each state and ultimately how the costs of that transmission
will be shared. That is a significant challenge. It is one best
left to the states to resolve, but a major challenge
nonetheless.
So in summary, I believe the market and grid services
provided by the ISO are continuing to provide high value by
enabling the transition to a low-carbon, modern grid and we
will continue to look for opportunities to enhance our market
and address the challenges I mentioned to you so we can
continue to yield the benefits. I thank you for your time and
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Casey follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Our last panelist is Craig Glazer, VP of Federal Government
Policy, PJM Interconnection, welcome.

STATEMENT OF CRAIG GLAZER

Mr. Glazer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Rush. I am Craig Glazer on behalf of PJM. We operate in 13
states from Chicago to North Carolina up to the New York
border. I want to start with a personal promise. That is to--we
have operators who have been keeping the lights on in your
district, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Rush's district, Mr.
Griffith's, Mr. Johnson's, Mr. McKinley's, Mr. Doyle's
district, and I will just give you my personal promise. We will
continue to work as hard we can to keep those lights on and
keep prices low.
Now it was the author Stephen Covey who instructed us in
his book, The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, it is sort
of a favorite quote of mine where he says the main thing is to
keep the main thing the main thing. It is sort of a favorite
quote, the main thing to keep the main thing the main thing.
And in the case of PJM, Mr. Chairman, Steve Covey's main thing
can be summarized in a couple of words. Investors are investing
in new, innovative generation in our region. It is funding the
all-of-the-above strategy that many people in Congress have
talked about. And the generation fleet as a result is more
diverse than it has ever been, more reliable than it has ever
been, and prices are lower than they have ever been.
But I am not asking you to take my word for it. If you had
a chance, if we could take a drive around the region we could
start out to show you some of this diversity. We would start
out in Mr. McKinley's district.
[Photo shown.]
Mr. Glazer. This is the new coal facility known as the
Longview Power Station using state-of-the-art coal technology.
OK. Then as we continue that drive around we would find we
could go to Cecil County, Maryland.
[Photo shown.]
Mr. Glazer. This is an example of a natural gas plant that
is self-supplying municipal load. I know we heard a lot about
that. This plant is doing that very thing and depending on the
PJM market to do it.
[Photo shown.]
Mr. Glazer. We then drive over to near Mr. Latta's
district, the Fremont Energy Center, another new, another
state-of-the-art natural gas facility that is self-supplying
another municipal customer.
Just to show you the diversity, we could then take a trip
to Laurel Mountain, West Virginia.
[Photo shown.]
Mr. Glazer. You would find a major wind facility there as
well as a new, innovative battery facility all of which are
depending and selling their output into the PJM market.
And frankly, as part of the sort of ``expect the
unexpected,'' we could end up near Mr. Rush, near your district
at the Shedd Aquarium in Chicago.
[Photo shown.]
Mr. Glazer. That is actually studying using its pumps at
the aquarium to sell into our frequency regulation market as
well as they vary the pumps. So a lot of innovation and a lot
of diversity that is out there.
Now I don't want to mislead you. We at PJM have challenges
like everybody else and I hope we can talk about some of them
in this hearing. They include enhancing grid resilience,
reforming price formation rules, determining and rewarding the
attributes of what has come to be called baseload generation,
accommodating state policies that was mentioned before, and as
was also mentioned before, continually being on the top of our
game when it comes to cybersecurity.
But the bottom line or, as Mr. Covey said, the main thing
is investors are investing, consumers are enjoying the lowest
electricity prices, and our system is more diverse and reliable
than it has ever been. That is a testimonial to a lot of
people. One is those operators that were there this morning
when your constituents woke up and will be there tonight when
they go to sleep to ensure that the lights stay on. It is also
a testimonial to our stakeholders and to our regulator.
I want to give a shout-out to the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission. It is a very professional regulatory agency. I was
a former regulator myself. I wish I had some of the staff that
we had at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. And a
shout-out to the Congress which in this very room devise
policies that have enabled this nation to move to a competitive
market model which I would posit to you with all kinds of
issues around it, but I think overall has served this nation
well.
We can argue about this market rule with that market rule
and legitimately have those discussions and frankly we are our
own harshest critics in PJM many times on these issues. But I
think when I go back and reflect on the hearings, as many
witnesses have stated, the Federal Power Act and the
competitive market model have served the nation well and would
urge everybody to keep that in mind as we debate some of these
other issues.
So thank you and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Glazer follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you all. And at this point we will
go to members with questions and we will try to keep to a
strict 5-minute Q&A to try and get done by early this
afternoon.
I want to focus a little bit about the participation on
cybersecurity efforts. Mr. Van Welie, you talked a little bit
about it. I would like to follow up to see the participation
with the grid exercises as well as cybersecurity training for
ISO New England employees.
And Mr. Brown, your comment that you thought your
operations were far above the standards, which is great, but
what can we do to try and help prevent a cyber attack?
And Mr. Van Welie, we will start with you.
Mr. Van Welie. Well, so I think what--
Mr. Upton. What else can we do constructively to help?
Mr. Van Welie. Constructively, well, I think with the
establishment of the oversight over the NERC by the FERC, the
establishment of cybersecurity standards, I think we set a very
important baseline in the industry with regard to managing
cybersecurity, but those are what I would call a minimum
baseline.
Ultimately, all of the ISOs in front of you here today
employ a defense-in-depth strategy and it is about deploying
automated systems to detect issues. It is about training your
employees which are often the weakest link in the chain. And I
think that if I sort of look back over the past decade, I have
seen the electric industry really lift its game with regard to
cybersecurity.
And that is not to say there is more to be done. I think
there is a lot more to be done. I think the risk is shifting a
lot from whereas we were previously concerned about cyber in
the control centers, I think there is a greater risk out in the
field. And so I see that utilities are going to have to invest
money in this space and I think what Congress can do is to be
supportive of the cost recovery of those investments and I
think it is a necessary investment.
The other thing I worry about, to be honest with you, it is
true and I heard a number of the members today mention the
proliferation of distributed energy resources. The issue with
distributed energy resources is they often are relying on the
internet for communications back to the control centers. And I
think that is a weak link in the chain that we need to pay some
attention to.
If we are going to rely on those resources to be a
substantial part of the capacity to keep the grid going and
reliable, we need to make sure that those resources which are
often in private hands are practicing safe cybersecurity
practices as well.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Brown?
Mr. Brown. So what can you do, certainly support the
standard development process, but as Gordon indicated that is
minimum. Policy can never keep up with technology, so we are
constantly communicating among our regions and with the
government entities on attacks that are occurring in real time.
And that is why I emphasize the standards are important
because we are all in this together, highly interconnected,
highly interdependent, so we must all operate at a minimum
threshold. But in order to keep up with the attacks that are
very real-time we have to go above and beyond the standards
because again policy can never keep up with technology.
Mr. Upton. Anybody else want to comment? Oh, Mr. Jones.
Mr. Jones. Yes, thank you. One additional thing that I
think is important and Nick touched on that as well is threat
identification. So from the federal side that is the most
important element for us, threat identification and
dissemination of that information. That allows us to prepare
for these threats and defend against them. Thank you.
Mr. Upton. Let me go to my next question and that is, it is
a good thing that with all of the things that have been going
on that harmful emissions from the power sector have been
reduced, I think, rather significantly. I know, Mr. Jones, in
New York we have seen the NYISO achieve a 98 percent reduction
in SO
2
emissions since the markets began operation
in 2000. So with all these changes that are going on whether it
be RPS standards by states, reduction in coal, tell us a little
bit about how you expect to see that continue in the next
decade or so.
Mr. Jones. Excellent, thank you. New York State is
currently undergoing a strong push toward reduction of carbon
emissions, so CO
2
emissions in the environment from
our generation fleet. The goal is currently to achieve a 40
percent, 50 percent, rather, reduction in carbon emissions from
1990 levels by 2030 and an 80 percent reduction by 2050.
In order to achieve that, there are a number of steps that
the state has already taken. Number one, to drive more
renewables in the state to achieve these high renewable
penetrations, but they have also stepped forward recently to
preserve the low carbon emissions associated with a portion of
the nuclear fleet in New York. And we have supported that but
we have also supported moving that into the competitive market
environment.
So to the degree that we can do that, the best way to
control emissions of carbon throughout our state would be to
integrate it directly into our dispatch in the energy market
side. We are currently working on that with the state of New
York, as I said. We will have a report coming out very shortly
which will identify the opportunities and the very promising
nature of that approach. We will begin discussing that with our
market participants as well and we hope to have something in
the very near future.
Mr. Upton. When you get that report we will be anxious to
take a look at it.
Mr. Jones. Thank you.
Mr. Upton. My time is expired, so let me go to Mr. Rush for
5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question is
to Mr. Glazer. In your written testimony you state that PJM
works with its stakeholders on proactive rule changes in order
to ensure that the market can continue to accommodate
individual state policies in a manner that still preserves
competitive outcomes without burdening neighboring states that
may not have the same state policy.
As you are aware, to the consternation of some stakeholders
states like Illinois and New York have implemented policies
that take into account the social cost of carbon by giving
credit to their nuclear fleets as safe, reliable, zero-carbon
sources of energy.
Mr. Glazer, how would you address the assertion that adding
value to nuclear fleets unfairly distorts the market? In other
words, how do we incorporate the social cost of carbon in a way
that reflects that cost in energy clearing prices? And on this
question I would also like to hear from Mr. Jones on this
issue.
Mr. Glazer. Thank you, Mr. Rush. I appreciate the question.
This whole question about accommodating state policies, of
course we need to accommodate state policies and we do that. It
is not a question of whether we should do it, there is no
question we should do it. It is a how do you do it question and
that is the difficult part. Let me give you just an example.
Maryland may have one state policy supporting renewable
generation. West Virginia borders Maryland. They have a
completely different policy. It is all an interconnected grid,
the electrons don't respect state borders. So the trick is to
find a way to ensure that Maryland's policy or Illinois policy
is not exported to West Virginia in my example that may not buy
into that same policy.
So how do we do it? There was a discussion, we are working
on sort of almost like, if you will, firewalls, that would
ensure that the market prices are protected, that we don't
export to an unwilling state what that policy is, but at the
same time allow states like Illinois to go forward with what it
wants to do.
So that is the rub here. It is an interconnected grid,
electrons, we don't want to force other states to absorb that
policy, but we want to respect what Illinois did. And that is
what we have got proposals out to accomplish.
Mr. Rush. So do you have a more definitive example of how
you would do that because you have illuminated the problem?
Mr. Glazer. Yes, we are looking at, for example,
potentially running the market two times, if you will. Running
the market once that would allow the Illinois nuclear units in
this case to participate in the market, but also almost running
it a second time to correct any sort of price-oppressive
effects of the fact that there is a subsidy going to certain
nuclear units in Illinois but not the same equivalent nuclear
units, in Ohio or Maryland or anyplace else.
So it is a technique that we are looking at. We have
actually got a proposal to do that and it is a vigorous subject
of discussion.
Mr. Rush. Thank you. Mr. Jones?
Mr. Jones. So the proposal in our region is different than
most of the other ISOs. As Mr. Glazer had mentioned, multi-
state ISOs have a difficult time of getting all of the states
onto the same policy position.
In the three ISOs that are led by a single state--
California, Texas, and New York--it is much easier to implement
state policy directly since we have a single state. In the
State of New York we want to approach this issue through the
energy market. To best say this, in states that are approaching
it through a capacity market the vernacular that is used is to
accommodate state policy into the market. In our state, by
using the energy market we are actually helping to achieve the
goals of the state. It is a rather significant difference but
it is one that we hope to deliver on.
Mr. Rush. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Upton. Thank you. Dr. Murphy?
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Glazer. So I am from southwestern Pennsylvania and
represent an area right in the heart of the PJM area. And as we
are talking about this mix of state and federal regulations,
can you give a little more detail of how they run into,
interfere with each other, and then I will follow up from
there.
Mr. Glazer. OK. And it is, a prime example is Pennsylvania
has a renewable portfolio standard that includes, as I
understand it, clean coal technology as one attribute of a
portfolio standard. Maryland doesn't have that. But the
electrons don't really care. They are moving across the border,
they don't really care.
So the question is: How does Pennsylvania's policy not get
exported to Maryland and vice versa? So what we are looking as
how do we, in a multi-state market how do we accommodate what
every state can do, but in the absence of a national federal
policy on any of these subjects how do we make this all fit
together? We think we can. We think this is very achievable but
it does take some work.
Mr. Murphy. So let's talk about how this is achievable
because states and federal regulators there is this bright line
in some places. But does this take on our part some large
overarching legislation? Do we recognize any of the state
preferences there at all? Because obviously I represent coal
country, every square inch of my district has coal under it,
has Marcellus shale natural gas in multiple layers,
Westinghouse nuclear is, part of it is in my district. We have
got it all. So, but another area may not have that or prefer
that so what is the solution?
Mr. Glazer. Mr. Murphy, I think it is a great question.
There is no question that the more direction on these issues
that can come from this Congress or from the Administration the
better, because then it is federal policy whatever that policy
is.
And I like to say the markets are like a blender. They are
only as good as the ingredients you put into the blender. But
they do, once you put those ingredients in they produce the
most efficient answer, so the more direction we can get from
this Congress I think that helps. It is when states as Mr.
Jones indicated start going in different directions that it
gets complicated. But your district is a perfect example of
having rich in all of these resources, and I think the PJM
market appreciates it and we all benefit from the richness of
those resources.
Mr. Murphy. Which these electrons get mixed up, so we can't
put a filter at the border. So if a state doesn't like coal we
can't keep the coal electrons out?
Mr. Glazer. That is right. That is right, because electrons
follow--
Mr. Murphy. Are you sure we can't do that because if they
don't want coal I am glad to say, all right, you don't get to
have them. You have a brownout then.
Mr. Glazer. Right.
Mr. Murphy. Can't do that?
Mr. Glazer. Can't do that.
Mr. Murphy. All right, too bad.
Mr. Glazer. They follow the laws of physics and they go
where they go. Yes, that is the problem.
Mr. Murphy. Mr. Jones, do you have a comment on that too? I
am just curious. He made reference to you there, what we need
to do on the federal side in ironing out these state-federal
differences.
Mr. Jones. Why are there state and federal differences?
Mr. Murphy. Well, how, what we need to do to help overcome
if there is some problems between them.
Mr. Jones. So in multi-state ISOs the difficulty, of
course, is to figure out how to accommodate each individual
state with their particular policy positions. The PJM has
issued a very short white paper that described one way that it
could be done. For example, I think their white paper describes
that each energy market could carry its own price of carbon.
Those states that do not want to have a price of carbon would
be adjusted as the power flows across those interfaces.
So there are ways to do it, it is just much more difficult
than what we might be able to achieve in New York.
Mr. Murphy. Anybody else have a comment on that because it
is part of what we--Dr. Casey?
Mr. Casey. Yes, I would just note that in California we
have a cap and trade program for carbon allowances within state
and we have the issue of particularly when we run our Western
Energy Imbalance Market we are dispatching resources all over
the West. How do we attribute which resources are supporting
imports into California that would--
Mr. Murphy. What is it you trade?
Mr. Casey. Well, we are trading energy. So we are
optimizing--
Mr. Murphy. But it has to do with carbon too, right?
Mr. Casey. Yes.
Mr. Murphy. So if something like a nuclear power plant or a
solar plant doesn't generate carbon they trade what?
Mr. Casey. Well, they wouldn't have a compliance obligation
for purposes of cap and trade if they are not emitting GHG. But
to the extent we are dispatching resources outside of
California that have a carbon emission and they are supporting
transfers into California, we have developed in our market a
method to attribute that that resource in Arizona is supporting
a transfer into California and is subject to a GHG price and
ultimately a compliance obligation for compliance with
California's cap and trade.
So I just mentioned it as it is a market mechanism where
through the dispatch you can try to tease out which resources
are being dispatched to support transfers to another state and
can enforce a carbon price to it.
Mr. Murphy. I think, Mr. Chairman, that is part of the
complexity that we need to figure out on all of that. It
sounded very convincing, but I have no idea what you just said.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Upton. We will give you 3 days to write a written
statement, OK. Mr. McNerney is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
how business loves stability and predictability especially
utility markets, so I am sort of going to leave that. But I
would like to ask a question and ask each one of you to answer
it in about 15 or 20 seconds starting with Mr. Glazer and
moving this way. What changes, if any, are needed in federal
policies to encourage investment needed for utility companies
to manage the challenges you are facing with the rapidly
changing marketplace?
Mr. Glazer. Very quickly, we are moving beyond reliability
standards to look at a more resilient grid. And there is a lot
of attributes of a resilient grid. It will require support. It
is not going to be inexpensive to do, we have to do it wisely.
I think this committee's focus on these resiliency efforts
would be very, very helpful.
Mr. McNerney. OK.
Mr. Casey. I think in the case of California we have a very
robust investment environment with the integrated resource
planning that goes on at the Public Utilities Commission and
the direction and renewable procurement and the supporting
transmission. So I don't see, really, a need for anything
beyond what we have. I think we have adequate investment
incentives there.
Ms. Mele. From an ERCOT perspective, I think that as I
stated in my comments is that predictability is what we need to
guide the future there and so I don't think there is anything
that we really need. I think that some of the focus on NERC
standards and making sure cybersecurity standards continue to
develop in that sharing of information is probably largely the
most impactful thing to us from here.
Mr. Doying. I guess I would tend to agree with the other
commenters and that is we do have federal support from NERC for
CIP standards and for resiliency standards. Markets as I noted
are able to adapt to the changes in the underlying market, the
composition of the generation fleet, and I think the most
important thing for us is regulatory stability. We largely have
that through FERC, but to the extent that you have policies
that come out that go in different directions over different
periods of time that that is not beneficial to market
participants or the marketplace.
Mr. McNerney. Mr. Jones?
Mr. Jones. Thank you. From New York's perspective we have a
great deal of investment. We are very comfortable. We have
investment in solar, wind resources, investment in natural gas
field facilities. As I had mentioned to you earlier though, we
have a great deal of need for additional transmission
investment. And I don't believe anything additional from this
body needs to move forward, but we do need to have continued
focus by the FERC on moving our transmission projects forward.
Thank you.
Mr. Brown. No additional policy changes are needed in our
region from this body. I would say though it would help if we
had a quorum at FERC.
Mr. McNerney. All right.
Mr. Van Welie. I agree with the previous speakers that
regulatory certainty is very important. I think that I have
watched the industry struggle with what is the long-term
trajectory on carbon pricing, so from an investment point of
view as one is investing in new long-lived assets that are 30
to 40 years in terms of their economic life, having some
certainty around that question would be very beneficial.
And I think as a nation we have struggled with that one and
I doubt we are going to resolve it any time soon, but that
certainly would help us achieve that objective through the
market if we could get it more clearly stated at a federal
level.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Casey, one of my priorities has been to support
technologies and projects that are making the electric grid
smarter and more reliable, more resilient, flexible, and
secure. As California ISO meets the challenges of renewable
energy integration and other state policy objectives, what is
ISO doing to support advanced grid technologies?
Mr. Casey. I would say, in short, a lot. I think in many
ways we are leading the world in advancing new technologies
into the power grid. There is a lot happening on the
distribution network with, as you know with microgrids, energy
storage, demand response, many of those resources are behind
the customer meter. They are not connected to the transmission
system. But we have put forward market models to enable those
resources to actively participate as a grid resource so that we
can be able to dispatch them to help meet the system needs.
Demand response is an area in California that I think there
is a huge untapped potential to really more fully develop. We
have been a big advocate with that working with the Public
Utilities Commission to really get to the technology capability
to what demand response can really do. We have a lot of old
programs out there that really you can only call once in a
while. We need more advanced programs in demand response that
we can call every day and it is seamless to the customer, they
don't even know it is happening.
Those are just some examples of what we are trying to do on
the customer side. There are other things we are doing on the
transmission side as well.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Barton?
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
this hearing. We want to welcome Cheryl Mele who is from ERCOT
in Texas. We are always glad to have you here. I just have one
question, Mr. Chairman. Several years ago, in the Energy Policy
Act of 2005 we had a very small section, section 1222, get
authorized, the Southwestern Power Administration to build
several new transmission lines. One of those projects has been
approved, the Plains & Eastern Clean project line. It starts in
either Texas and/or Oklahoma, crosses through Arkansas and goes
into Tennessee.
The State of Arkansas has filed a lawsuit, and I don't know
if it is the state itself or stakeholders in Arkansas against
that project. I would like to ask the head of the Southwest
Power Pool if he is familiar with this project and, if so, what
your position is on it.
Mr. Brown. So yes, I am very familiar with the project. It
is not a product of a regional planning process that involves
all of our diverse constituents, both regulatory commissions
and all of our very diverse membership, it is a market-driven
solution to delivering wind from the western part of our
footprint to load centers in the East. We are not opposed to
the line, I would just say it is not a product of a regional
planning process.
The question is, do load centers in the East want to use
that particular DC line as a transportation facility that is
constructed solely for the benefit of the wind generators in
the West and the load centers in the East, or do those load
centers in the East prefer an AC solution that becomes a
product of our regional planning process? The costs can be
comparable.
The utilization of a DC line is limited again to benefit
the buyer on one end and the seller on the other end. An AC
solution benefits everyone in the footprint. Both can reliably
accommodate the same mission. Again it is, you know, what
solution do you prefer.
Mr. Barton. All right. What about the representative of the
MISO, it goes through your territory too. What is your position
on it?
Mr. Doying. I would concur with Nick that it is not part of
the regional planning process. I think this is a great example
of somewhere where the RTOs have the ability to accommodate the
policy decisions that are made by states or by bodies such as
this one. If it doesn't go through the planning process it is
not eligible for cost allocation throughout the rest of the
footprint, which means that to the extent it is approved by
states or other entities and they are willing to pay the bill
then it can certainly go forward and we would certainly
accommodate the transmission within our system. So I certainly
don't object to it and we will wait to see how the litigation
plays out.
Mr. Barton. Well, I am told that one of the Arkansas
objections is that they don't receive any of the power, but I
am also told that the line is willing to, and it maybe even has
planned in a connection point in Arkansas that if they wanted,
if Arkansas wanted to it could receive power. Are you familiar
with that?
Mr. Doying. No, sir. I am not.
Mr. Brown. And yes, I am, and certainly it could be
accommodated. The real question is, are there loads in Arkansas
that want that choice of delivery system, a DC line versus an
AC solution that can provide other benefits to the state.
Mr. Barton. I doubt that anybody on the panel understands
the difference between DC and AC. Well, Mr. Shimkus, we will
say Mr.--OK, Mr. Flores says he does. Mr. Morgan, I stand--and
I am sure Mr. McKinley does, so I stand corrected. I will say I
am the only one that doesn't understand the difference. Anyway
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Peters?
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank all
the witnesses. I also want to thank the staff for the excellent
work that they did together to prepare us for this.
Dr. Casey, I wanted to ask you about distributed generation
and maybe you could describe for me what are the challenges in
terms of reliability to the proliferation of distributed
generation and whether the state is looking at weighing in
terms of what is the most efficient way to provide, say, solar
power? Is it large-scale solar farms or is it rooftop? Is the
state taking a position on that and moving it one way or
another or are we just kind of letting that happen?
Mr. Casey. Well, with respect to reliability issues with
distributed energy I think it deals mainly with modernizing the
distribution network to accommodate it. As you know, these
systems were designed with one-way flow of power from large
central stations to consumers that were static consumers. The
grid of the future is going to be much more dynamic. You are
going to have bidirectional flows, you are going to have a lot
of automation on the system.
So I think from a reliability standpoint, the distribution
utilities are really struggling to keep pace with how they need
to upgrade the distribution network to provide the safety and
controls to make sure that that dynamic can be reliably
managed. As a transmission grid operator, that is really not
our issue. That is the issue for the distribution utility. But
as I mentioned, we are trying to leverage those distribution
networks as a resource for the transmission network.
On your question around going forward, is California going
to rely more on large central station renewables versus
distribution, my sense it is going to be both. I think what is
happening on the distribution system is, it is not policy
driven, it is consumer driven. People want more control. I know
you are very involved with the naval bases in San Diego. They
want more resiliency with their system with their microgrids.
Other companies are doing the same. So a lot of that is just
happening and we are enabling it, but to achieve ultimately the
environmental policy objectives California has you are going to
need more large central station solar and wind.
Mr. Peters. I would just ask the panel a question on
cybersecurity and maybe ask it in an overly provocative way is
why should I trust you to take care of cybersecurity? Is there
a federal role for that? What interests you in having federal
participation? What scares you about that? Does anybody want to
offer me some advice about why I should get involved or why I
should sit back?
Mr. Glazer. Mr. Peters, I would be happy to address that.
This is joint effort. We are the people on the front lines. It
is our systems that people are trying to hack into in many
cases. But what the Federal Government has is the authority
through this Congress to require standards. That is very
important. Also, the Federal Government has information as to
threats that we don't have. We are not an intelligence agency.
So I think this is not an either/or proposition, it is really a
partnership.
Mr. Peters. OK. I think that makes sense to me. I think
that information, best practices, setting standards makes a lot
of sense. And I know we have taken some steps to make sure that
an outage in one place doesn't so greatly affect the whole
country, so I think there is protection. But if you have any
thoughts after this on that I would love to hear it.
And then Mr. Jones, I am not as familiar with the
regulatory regime in New York. I assume that that is what is
driving investment in renewables and the reduction in emissions
that you described. Can you just tell me a little bit about
whether that is the case and what it is about the regulatory
framework in New York that is helping?
Mr. Jones. So the regulatory framework coupling with the
efficiencies that are driven out of the markets within our
systems itself is really what has contributed to those
reductions, so more efficient generation has come to our
markets to compete. That more efficient generation has lower
emissions than the less efficient generation. And as the new
generation comes to market, much of the older generation has
left that had higher heat rates and higher emissions, so it has
been a combination of both.
On top of that the State of New York has been a driver for
decades in trying to improve the environment throughout New
York and throughout the country for that matter. There are a
number of initiatives in place, as I had mentioned earlier.
They are achieving a high renewables penetration, achieving
significant reductions in carbon emissions that are driving
changes in our markets as we attempt to achieve that through
the NYISO itself.
Mr. Peters. Thank you very much again to the witnesses. And
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Shimkus?
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize for being
in and out. Members do that all the time especially when you
have competing hearings and other legislation you are working
on.
This is an area that I love to talk about and it is
evolving and you all are managing a system that--I think FERC
was here. I mentioned to some of you who came to visit my
office that FERC was here a year or 2 ago and they basically
said, the Federal Power Act has not been rewritten. It has been
vague enough for us to evolve over time.
So for that I want to thank Mr. Glazer and Mr. Doying for
visiting the office, and Mr. Brown, I am sorry you got Mike
Ross with you. You seemed to be successful even with him there,
so we will keep cheering on--and a pharmacist dealing in
electrons.
So Mr. Glazer, in the last hearing of maybe last week and
we talked about a little bit self-supply debate and issue, can
you talk about that from the aspect of our munis and our co-ops
and especially in the MISO generating area and then the PJM
area? This is an Illinois kind of specific issue. Can you just
talk about if they, if you were asked do you allow self-supply
what would your answer be?
Mr. Glazer. Thank you for the question. And you may have
been out when I said not only do we allow self-supply, in fact
I think I showed some examples. These are some power plants
that in fact are self-supplying.
Mr. Shimkus. My apologies for not being here.
Mr. Glazer. No, no. I understand that. Just so you are
aware, I actually brought pictures of plants that actually
today are exactly doing that. The particular situation with
regard to the IMEA--
Mr. Shimkus. Well, as long as you have addressed it, I am
good.
Mr. Glazer. OK, OK. Yes. The short answer is there are--I
was a little concerned about the panel because there was this
impression on the last panel that there is some rule against
self-supply, and as I tried to show absolutely we have self-
supply today. We have shaken hands with the public power
entities and worked out those arrangements. So it is happening
today as we speak and we have no intention of changing that.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. I want to really dovetail a little
bit on Joe Barton's question because that line also goes
through southern Illinois and it is really more of a siting
fight versus--and I think the AC and the DC argument is really
kind of the critical debate of what can be used locally versus
what is being used, because the local landowners, in essence
eminent domain fights are like we are not seeing it and they
are just forcing their way through. And I always can blame the
Public Utility Commission of Illinois and FERC without taking
direct responsibility for that.
But it is a difficult process that makes you wonder if
public policy needs to be involved somehow in addressing--well,
Mr. Glazer, we were talking about this yesterday. When you look
at the maps, and Mr. Doying, when you look at the maps,
sometimes your RTO, the ISO areas look like political
gerrymandering to some extent. And that is not positive. That
is really a negative comment.
And sometimes because of the engineering aspects they make
more sense than just a visual, but that is why we grapple with
this. That is why I am glad the chairman has these hearings.
Not a question, I guess, just a comment.
I want to also raise to Mr. Jones, you are with the New
York ISO. So it just popped in my mind, and I have a new
legislative staffer who wasn't here, but I raised a couple
years ago a concern of my alma mater which is West Point and
their ability to get a new, some additional transmission into
the Academy. I think I had a meeting or two after that. I don't
know the status of that and I can ask them. I was on the board
of visitors at that time which is the responsibility of that
board is to kind of take a look at the Academy and see if it is
accomplishing its mission. It is training our young men and
women to be the best leaders of our other young men and women.
But also part of that is facilities and the ability of them
to have the opportunity with the electricity and their needs,
so if you would have some people go back and check that on my
behalf I would appreciate it.
Mr. Jones. I would be happy to.
Mr. Shimkus. No other questions. Again I apologize for not
being here. I yield back my time.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Doyle?
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to all the
panelists.
Mr. Glazer, I want to ask you about PJM's report on the
evolving resource mix and system reliability. It sort of
received considerable attention especially for the claim that
PJM's resource portfolio could feature up to 86 percent natural
gas and maintain operational reliability.
I note also in the report though that you acknowledge that
this hypothetical resource portfolio raises questions about
electric system resilience and additional risks were not
captured in the analysis including gas deliverability during
polar vortex type conditions and to go on to include
uncertainties associated with economics and public policy.
And we have seen an incredible increase in the share of
natural gas in the markets and I am a big supporter of natural
gas, I am not speaking against it because it has its benefits.
But I want to know how you view this trend going forward? Do
you think we are going to continue to see greater shares of
natural gas in our markets and are you concerned about that
from a resiliency standpoint and what does it mean for the
long-term perspective in terms of infrastructure investment?
Mr. Glazer. Mr. Doyle, thank you very much for that
question. First off, the good news is particularly in your
district you have the strong natural gas pipeline
infrastructure in that district and in many of the districts
that we serve. That particular report was one of a number of
reports that we have done.
It was looking at the equivalent of if you went to shop for
a car it was asking the question just like you would ask, what
is the size of the gas tank? What is the miles per gallon? What
is the ability to go from zero to 60? We were looking at
different fuels and how they perform as part of a generation
mix and gas served very well in that context as did coal as did
a number of other fuels.
But it is just one part of the puzzle and I think you put
your finger on it. The system is strong. We have tested
individual pipeline dependencies and we look at those. But the
next thing we need to do and we are focused on is resiliency,
which is that sort of high-risk, low-frequency event, what if a
lot of pipelines go out, what happens?
And so that is sort of the next generation. That is where
we are now. We are beyond just the NERC reliability standards
and that is the focus, a big at PJM initiative.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you. I want to talk about price formation
too. You mentioned energy price formation reforms basically
saying that the existing rules fail to appropriately value
large generating plants. And I want to say that I appreciate
PJM's response to a notice of proposed rulemaking from FERC
earlier this year and share the concern that current energy
pricing mechanisms fail to fully transparently and accurately
value an array of resources in our markets.
So I am interested in PJM's proposal of a load following
product that encourages the development of new, innovative, and
flexible resources. Could you describe what type of issue this
product would address and what type of generation resources
would qualify?
Mr. Glazer. Great, thank you. First of all, let me just
very quickly just sort of analogize to what this problem is
because it gets very wonky very quickly. But imagine you go in
the supermarket. You want to get a can of beans. You want to
make sure that that can of beans, the price you are paying for
that is reflected right there on the shelf, you know what you
are buying.
And because of some ways, the way price formation has
happened, actually what happens is you can see an artificially
low price, then you get to the checkout counter and suddenly
there is an add-on price you never knew about. That is not a
great system. So we need to find ways to both price that so you
know what you are buying and frankly the manufacturer can keep
making the beans, if you will. So that is one aspect of our
price formation.
The second aspect is the load following product. Who can
benefit from this? Wind technology, energy storage, batteries,
anybody that can be flexible it is a way to reward them
directly and so we are beginning those discussions with FERC. I
think it can be very promising for new technology.
Mr. Doyle. Great. And I want to ask you this question and
the rest of the panel too. Congress is looking at, I don't know
if we are looking at it as we speak, but there is a lot of talk
about passing a carbon tax. And I am curious. Would PJM have
any issue in implementing this policy? Do you think reliability
or resilience would suffer if given the fact if you were given
adequate time to adopt it? What are your thoughts if we were to
enact a carbon tax?
Mr. Glazer. Again the market is a blender. This would be an
ingredient and we could easily absorb that into the market and
it would be reflected in the prices that people pay. Obviously
we continue to ensure the system is reliable, but it would
work. And the market, it actually is adaptable to that kind of
proposal.
Mr. Doyle. OK, just down the line real quick, yes or no.
Would you be able to, do you think resiliency or reliability
would be affected or could you adapt to it?
Mr. Casey. Well, in the case of California, we are--
Mr. Upton. Want it to be just a yes or no. His time is
expired, so just answer his question yes or no as he asked.
Mr. Casey. OK, yes.
Ms. Mele. It could be accommodated, yes.
Mr. Doying. Yes.
Mr. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Brown. Yes, but not the preferable way.
Mr. Van Welie. Yes.
Mr. Doyle. OK. And Mr. Chairman, thank you.
And I just want to say hello to my friend Mike Ross, a
former member and colleague of ours and a great member of the
Energy and Commerce Committee regardless of what Shimkus says.
Mr. Upton. He was indeed a very good member and still
remains a friend.
Mr. McKinley?
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Glazer, I think I am going to direct most of my
comments to you with PJM. I appreciate you using Longview as
one of your models, but you are well aware that the current
regulations in this country prevent us from building into the
Longview 2?
Mr. Glazer. Well aware of that, yes.
Mr. McKinley. So why I think it is so important that if we
are serious about developing baseload we have to be able to
take that into consideration on how we are going to be able to
replicate the success that occurred at Longview.
Mr. Glazer. And it is a success story, I agree.
Mr. McKinley. Yes, absolutely it is. And I had the pleasure
with Secretary Perry there touring the plant just a few weeks
ago and then he went over to NETL to look at some of the fossil
fuel research facilities and what is underway on that. So just
for the record, we can't do what you want us to do.
The secondly is that you said in your testimony you want to
keep prices low. That is one thing that you said--you are
helping to try to keep prices low. But yet we have perhaps
conflict and maybe you can help clarify that in keeping prices
low. West Virginia now has lost its stature of being number two
in lowest cost energy costs to now the 26th, just in 10 years.
Pennsylvania and Ohio are also in that 25 to 28 range on that
so I don't think the utility rates in the PJM market are
particularly low. Do you want to comment about that?
Mr. Glazer. Mr. McKinley, I think it is not a question of
are they, further, we don't see our mission keeping them low as
much as making sure the prices are right, that they are sending
the correct price signals for new investment just like we just
talked about for a future Longview. That is really the goal is
to make sure the prices are fair and right, attract
investment--
Mr. McKinley. Then at the same time we are--and I support
the chairman's mission for nuclear facilities. For example, in
Illinois we know that the state is going to subsidize or has
already started to subsidize their rates for nuclear. But when
they bid into the PJM market that means that they have a
competitive advantage over coal and gas fired in the East. Do
you want to respond to that?
Mr. Glazer. And that is exactly the concern with sort of
just a state sort of subsidizing a plant, because it has the
effect of crowding out other plants in the state like West
Virginia that didn't adopt that particular policy because you
don't have any nuclear plants in West Virginia.
So you are absolutely right. It is a concern. That is why
we are looking at some mechanisms to--
Mr. McKinley. So you are trying to develop something that
does that?
Mr. Glazer. We are trying to do something that prevents the
harm, if you will, Illinois doing something that hurts West
Virginia coal plants.
Mr. McKinley. Should regulators be rewarding baseload
production and should they be rewarding lowering carbon
emissions as part of their rate base?
Mr. Glazer. Yes, one of the problems, and I am a former
regulator. One of the problems in this whole area, if you start
picking winners and losers inevitably as a regulator we got it
wrong and then we just create stranded costs and we create
problems.
Mr. McKinley. Would trying to protect our baseload be
something that is subjective?
Mr. Glazer. What I am saying, Mr. McKinley, is picking out
particular power plants.
Mr. McKinley. I am not trying to--
Mr. Glazer. Right. But in terms of a mix of resources we
agree, but the way to get at it is not to say I need x amount
of coal, x amount of nuclear, x amount of gas, because who
decides that question? To us, the best way to look at it is
what are the reliability attributes of those? And frankly our
study, as Mr. Doyle pointed out, the study actually identified
many reliability attributes of coal that are very valuable to
it.
Mr. McKinley. And I want to be very supportive of natural
gas because obviously the Marcellus is in Utica, the
possibilities that come forth from that.
Mr. Glazer. Right.
Mr. McKinley. But we look at that and we see during the
polar vortex in 2014 we saw what happened that they went from
about a hundred dollars per megawatt hour up to what, it went
from the average of $30 up to $1,800 for a megawatt hour during
that polar vortex.
What savings could we have had if we had been using base
price back on coal and, you say coal, for example, coal and
nuclear?
Mr. Glazer. Well, to be honest, we saw power plants that
were not producing during the polar vortex and some cases were
coal and some cases were gas. Overall, the extreme weather hit
the entire fleet pretty hard. So we have actually changed our
system to award that good performance of all those units, coal
and natural gas, and that helps to moderate the fluctuations
and the energy prices as well.
Mr. McKinley. I have 20 more questions so I guess we will
have to have a meeting.
Mr. Glazer. I will be happy to follow up with you.
Mr. McKinley. Yes, we will, please. Thank you, Mr. Glazer.
Mr. Glazer. Yes, thank you.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Green.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you and our
ranking member for holding this hearing particularly after last
week's hearing we had on electricity and power.
Coming from Texas, I have to admit when--Ms. Mele, your
testimony said that our natural gas is 43 percent followed by
coal at 28 percent and wind at 15 and nuclear at 12 percent. Do
you expect our baseload to change? Are we seeing more wind
power coming to the market? And by the way, everybody on the
committee is used to us in Texas bragging. I was happy a number
of years ago when the Public Utility Commission to get that
wind power from West Texas to the Dallas-Fort Worth, San
Antonio, Austin, and of course the Houston market where I am
from, made a decision and spent, was it $5 billion?
Ms. Mele. Yes, sir. Actually it was a little bit more than
that. About $6.9 billion was invested under the legislature's
direction to really--
Mr. Green. To make sure that wind could get to the urban
areas where the customers are.
Ms. Mele. Correct. And so today we have about 14,400
megawatts of wind taking advantage of those CREZ lines, and
actually in the queue of potential interest being shown is an
additional 23,000 megawatts of wind. So we assume that will not
all get built, but that interest in developing wind in Texas in
the western region and the Panhandle continues.
Mr. Green. ERCOT is the only RTO in the nation that is not
regulated by FERC. You offer a perspective of what we are
discussing today. In your testimony you mentioned Competitive
Renewable Energy Zones, CREZ, was mandated by the state
legislature. How has this program evolved since its inception
and do you believe it could be replicated across other RTOs
present today?
Ms. Mele. I don't know if I can offer comment to the other
RTOs. They can probably add their own. But I do think that that
certainty of having a resource like the CREZ lines built
certainly has enabled the interest of wind to develop, but also
is serving some our industrial loads in West Texas associated
with our natural gas and oil businesses. And it also is
starting to show a value for the solar development that is
beginning to grow in that western region as well.
Mr. Green. What are ERCOT's projections for the
incorporation of large-scale solar projects and how the
additional solar impact on your current fuel generation mix
under ERCOT jurisdiction?
Ms. Mele. Yeah, today we have just over 700 megawatts of
utility-scale solar installed in ERCOT. As we look down the
road at what is in the cue for development we are seeing
significant interest in solar. It is in the thousands of
megawatts over the next several years. When we did our long-
term system assessment and really looked at what resources are
likely to be developed in Texas based on the resource that we
do have in solar and wind and natural gas and those, that tends
to be where the interest is being expressed in the applications
that we see for interconnection requests, so we believe that
will continue.
But just looking at the solar development, we have an
expectation of about 850 megawatts in 2018, over 7,000
megawatts is expressed interest in 2019, and 8,000 megawatts-
plus the following year, so this is going to be another big
resource that can take advantage of those CREZ lines.
Mr. Green. And so you see these numbers in your testimony
shifting over the years because solar is not part of it now but
there is growth. And I go home every weekend and I love when I
drive to South Texas to see grandchildren, starting about north
of Corpus with those windmills and then they skip a little bit
of the urban area, but then between King Ranch, from King Ranch
to Raymondville almost in the South Texas area there that--is
it potential for any offshore? I have heard of offshore wind
power also being developed, but again on the Texas coast it is
all land-based.
Ms. Mele. Yes, it continues to be land-based, and the
virtues of that southern and coastal wind that we have is that
it tends to be there and available during the peak consumption
hours in the afternoon. And so that resource development has
really been valuable to our state.
Mr. Green. What is the difference in the wind power, say,
in South Texas as compared to West Texas and the megawatts that
they deliver?
Ms. Mele. The actual installations in South and coastal
Texas are quite a bit lower. I don't have those exact numbers,
but I would say it is probably over in maybe 3- to 5,000
megawatts.
Mr. Green. OK.
Ms. Mele. I can certainly confirm those numbers for you.
Mr. Green. So the wind blows more in West Texas than it
does in South Texas.
Ms. Mele. Well, the wind blows predictably in South Texas,
but it blows more in West Texas.
Mr. Green. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Johnson [presiding]. I thank the gentleman for yielding
back. I recognize Mr. Griffith for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate it. As you may realize if you watch this committee
very often, you have entered into the coal sector of this panel
starting with Mr. McKinley, or Mr. Shimkus, then Mr. McKinley,
myself, and Mr. Johnson, and others.
Coal fueled power is still critical to our electrical
supply. It provides about 30 percent of the power we use and is
a workhorse that if we don't kill it is always available. It
helps prop up intermittent wind and solar and uninterruptable
natural gas without a hundred percent firm guaranteed contract
power sources, yet it has been under severe regulatory assault
and victimized by generous subsidies, e.g., wind, PTC and solar
ITC, and mandates, e.g., state renewable portfolio standard
requirements offered to competing power sources.
We have lost about 60,000 megawatts of coal generation over
the last 5 years and the remaining coal plants in competitive
markets are very much at risk. In my understanding of how power
markets work, and I want to clarify some of that if I am wrong.
But my understanding is, is that those generators don't get
compensated for the resiliency they provide the grid. So it is
a perfect storm for fuel secure baseload generators like coal
units and each of the individual clouds in that storm is the
result of a policy decision.
Now earlier, Mr. Glazer, you said something about rewarding
those that are available and I interpreted that as resiliency.
So tell me how that works because that ought to be helping my
coal-fired plants.
Mr. Glazer. Thank you, Mr. Griffith. And we actually see
this initiative as doing just that. It was one of my
supermarket analogies with the price of a can of beans making
sure that the full price is reflected in what you buy. And in
the case of coal to the extent it is providing a service to
customers, ensuring that that is reflected in the price,
absolutely.
Mr. Griffith. Well, I hope, and if you can give me some
more information on that I would appreciate it.
Mr. Glazer. Sure.
Mr. Griffith. And I hope you will continue with that
because when you start talking about resiliency I don't think
there is anything better than coal. I too have natural gas. I
don't have as much as Mr. Shimkus or Mr. McKinley have, but it
is important that we have a mix.
Now one of the other things that you said earlier that
intrigued me when you were talking to Mr. McKinley about cost
is you said, of course we don't want to have stranded costs.
But in my district alone there have been several facilities
that still had life that were shuttered because of regulations.
And when those are shuttered and there is a stranded cost,
isn't it the ratepayer that ends up picking up that cost in the
long run?
Mr. Glazer. Well, and we--
Mr. Griffith. I just need a yes or no because of time.
Mr. Glazer. Yes, yes. And we moved to a market to try to
not put it all on the backs of the customers, to be honest with
you.
Mr. Griffith. And I appreciate that but I think it ends up
pretty much on their backs, notwithstanding your good efforts.
Now I have got to get something straight because I don't
understand.
Mr. Glazer. OK.
Mr. Griffith. So when we had our previous hearing the folks
were talking about, you know, the payment for self-supply and
self-supply. And you are here today and you have pictures of
some self-supply facilities and I think it is great and we have
got some great coal plants out there that are working on some
of this type of stuff.
Clearly there is a disconnect so I need your help in
filling in the gaps. Is it what they get paid if they sell back
to the PJM or others? I mean where is the disconnect? Because I
think both sets of witnesses are honest brokers trying to do
the best they can, but clearly there is something that doesn't
fit.
Mr. Glazer. Yes, and it is a fair point.
Mr. Griffith. I have your position, I have their position,
but where is the disconnect?
Mr. Glazer. Yes, yes. No, and it is a fair point, so two
things very quickly. One is, I think they were referring to a
court of appeals decision that puts some uncertainty around the
various rules that we have. Embedded within that was the self-
supply exemption we worked out with public power. The court
didn't overturn that but it did overturn the rest of it, so
there is a little bit of uncertainty going forward but not for
lack of wanting to honor that deal or even FERC wanting to
honor that deal. So I think that is really part of what we were
talking about.
And the public power says we should just have a totally
different model in terms of how we buy capacity. I don't want
to take a lot of time, but that has got its own set of problems
with it, one of them being there is no price transparency. If
everybody can just do bilateral deals it is like going to the
supermarket. There is no prices. You just wait until the
checkout line and then you have to negotiate what the price is
and you don't know what the person--it just doesn't work very
well. So that is, I think, the essence of the beef.
Mr. Griffith. All right, so, is it something that we ought
to resolve? I personally think it is much better if we let you
all figure it out, but at the same time if we need to resolve
that so that we guarantee that both the urban markets and the
more rural markets are being served and getting a fair rate, I
am happy to wade into that if that is necessary.
Mr. Glazer. And we will keep the dialogue going. I think in
a large part it has been worked out. We have got to work out
what is the impact of this court decision and we will keep you
posted on that.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much and I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. I now
recognize Mr. Kennedy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
witnesses. Thank you to the committee for calling an important
hearing. Thank you, Mr. Van Welie, for coming down. Thank you
for the time to speak with the New England delegation
yesterday, and your team as well.
I am going to echo some of the comments of my colleagues I
think, first and foremost, to say this is really a complex area
of a critically important market and so I think you have seen
from the folks on this side of the dais anyway a real effort to
understand it. Some obviously do better than others.
In that I haven't been around Congress too long, but I do
know that the greater the complexity the harder it is, one, to
oversee, and the more likelihood is that incentives aren't
perhaps structured quite as well as, or there is opportunities
there for incentives to skew to folks that happen to know this
industry really well, particularly if those that are overseeing
it don't have that same degree of expertise.
Mr. Van Welie and his team has been generous with their
time in walking us through some of the challenges that we face
in New England including a conversation yesterday and I wanted
to further engage in that conversation. ISO New England has
been very effective in driving down those wholesale market
rates to very low levels and those prices have come down.
One of the challenges that we face again that we talked
about yesterday is that while those wholesale rates are low,
those retail rates aren't and that once the energy comes out
from that wholesale marketplace because of a whole bunch of
factors that is not under ISO's control, some of which isn't
directly under Federal Government of Congress's control, all of
a sudden the price that the end user gets is not cheap. And
that is something that I hear actually from constituents and
particularly as they are trying to bring back a manufacturing
industry in the Northeast when those energy costs start to be a
driving factor for their own businesses.
We ran into some problems here with FERC, obviously an FCA
8, without having a sufficient quorum. What is the best way and
do you have any suggestions to ensure that there is some sort
of, whether it is a public advocate or some way to make sure
that the public has a way, a seat at the table and some method
to push back on a system, the price increase? Because
understanding that the wholesale rates are low trying to
explain this at a town hall, not all that productive from
somebody that has tried and failed. And with due respect it is
not all that great to say, well, the wholesale rates are low
but da-da-da-da-da. They don't care what the wholesale rates
are. They care what they are having to pay.
So how do we get to a point where we can address some of
these concerns where the public actually feels like they have a
seat at the table?
Mr. Van Welie. So yes, a great question. I would say that
there are some well-established structures for the public to
have a voice both the wholesale and at the retail levels. So
just to describe briefly what happens with the structure around
the ISO, we are compelled to take every rule change through a
stakeholder process. There are six sectors in that stakeholder
process, one of which is end users. There is another sector for
public power.
So public is represented right at the table when we are
discussing all the market rule changes at the wholesale level.
We also, several years ago, established something called the
Consumer Liaison Group and so that is a place where consumer
advocates and the public can have a voice with directly to the
ISO as well. So the states are also represented through their
regulatory commissions.
Mr. Kennedy. Can I push you to get to the retail level
because we have about a minute left.
Mr. Van Welie. OK. And well, at the retail level I think
you have a similar structure in place around the Public Utility
Commissions in each of the six states, so I think there are
many opportunities for the public to engage in this discussion.
I think the issue that you started this with though is the
complexity. And so getting an understanding of how wholesale
affects retail prices and what is in the retail price and what
has been added in there, I think is a very daunting task for
somebody who is uneducated. And I would be happy to talk more
offline about how we can perhaps improve upon that.
Mr. Kennedy. Well, I would certainly appreciate it. As we
look at the focus, in 30 seconds, ISO is focused on
reliability, obviously stems from the reason for your work. The
challenge then comes on that cost side if the issue on
reliability ends up being, well, we can make it reliable at a
certain price point where generators will come in and say we
are willing to enter this marketplace but at a set price, would
those prices then get passed along to consumers?
And again we have seen those wholesale rates come down, but
at a retail level that anger ends up getting channeled in
certain levels, town halls are a great place for that anger to
get channeled. But there is a tension there that is going to
break at some point particularly given the resource-constrained
environment that we might find ourselves in. So let's continue
the conversation. And sorry for going over, thank you.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. The
chair will now recognize himself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Glazer, in your testimony you stated PJM is concerned
about potential retirements of additional coal resources and
that the relevant question is how best to respond to that. You
asked to have your feet held to the fire to devise market-based
solutions to address these challenges. What can and should
Congress do to play a role in this process? Anything else you
would like to expand on in relation to this issue?
Mr. Glazer. Thank you, Mr. Johnson, for that great
question. Really is the subject as we are going to look at what
the future is we have got to focus on this question of
resilience. And part of resilience is who decides? Who decides
what is a credible threat and who decides as many consumers
argue it is gold plating the system. Where is that balance? We
need input from the federal government with that. We need
oversight from this committee on those kinds of questions. It
is a whole new area for all of us.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right, well, I thank you for that.
Perhaps you have already touched on this next issue with some
of your previous answers, but as you know, FERC began a
stakeholder process to reform the process at which market
prices are determined and paid back. Does PJM believe that
these price formation rules have been successful thus far?
Mr. Glazer. We think what they have done has been very
helpful, but we need to and we have been, frankly, pushing on
the Commission to move on this next level which is what I
talked about before how we do a load following product, how we
focus on these inflexible units that ought to be able to set
price.
My supermarket example with the can of beans, that is the
kind of stuff, frankly, we are asking the new Commission when
it gets seated to take this to the next level. What they have
done has been helpful. This is a big issue and might help a lot
of those issues that you have raised.
Mr. Johnson. OK, all right. Well, what remaining areas of
price formation reform are of greatest concern to your RTO?
Mr. Glazer. This one is probably the largest, which is do
we let these large block loaded units, which in some cases are
coal units or large natural gas units, could even be nuclear
units, to set price? That is a very big issue. I think if we
truly got our hands around that it is not a panacea but would
help to take some of the pressure off this whole question about
baseload.
So we are just beginning that dialogue, in fairness to
FERC, but this committee's oversight over that would be
appreciated.
Mr. Johnson. OK. And you mentioned the word resiliency just
a few minutes ago and you also touched on it in your testimony,
a very important topic that has been receiving a lot of
increasing attention. So what steps are PJM taking to promote a
resilient power grid especially in the context of extreme
events?
Mr. Glazer. And great question. We have got, actually we
just outlined for the stakeholders literally a complex map of
things we are doing, some of it is just done in the control
room operating the system more conservatively at times when we
are seeing issues on pipelines, for example. Some of them are
operational. Some of them are these price formation type
issues. Some of these are planning.
We have got some critical transmission substations. How do
we make them less critical so that in fact something happens
they don't have this big impact? Those are the kind of things
we are looking at. We have got a whole map that we have
outlined of those initiatives which I would be happy to share
with the committee.
Mr. Johnson. OK, great. Well, let it be noted that the
interim chairman yielded back over a minute of his time. Yes, I
will recognize Mr. Pallone.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have to get to a
couple of things here, so for the first question if I could
just ask all the panelists to just answer either yes or no,
otherwise I am not going to get to the other question.
So the question for everyone yes or no is does your RTO or
ISO have a designated body responsible for consumer input or
advocacy? Just yes or no.
Mr. Van Welie. Yes.
Mr. Brown. Yes.
Mr. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Doying. Yes.
Ms. Mele. Yes.
Mr. Casey. The answer no to that.
Mr. Pallone. You said no, Dr. Casey, okay.
Mr. Glazer. And I would say yes.
Mr. Pallone. OK, so everyone was a yes except for Dr.
Casey. Thank you. All right, so let me move on. This is more
specific to my congressional district.
In my congressional district, Jersey Central Power and
Light, a subsidiary of First Energy, has proposed the Monmouth
County Reliability Project, a 10-mile, 230 kilowatt
transmission line and substation enhancement project. But a lot
of questions have been raised about the necessity of the
project for meeting its proposed goal of increasing reliability
of the push into the grid serving Monmouth County. I have
raised these myself at public hearings. And this project was
recommended by PJM's Transmission Expansion Advisory Committee
and approved by its board of managers.
So Mr. Glazer, assuming you understand what I asked, if not
I will repeat it, critics say that the process for approval of
transmission projects lacks transparency, consumer advocate
input, and true independent oversight. What can PJM do to
address some of those concerns, if you will?
Mr. Glazer. Mr. Pallone, I appreciate the question. I do
not agree with the premise of it because these meetings are
open, the material is published, and we don't just passively do
that. We reach out to the consumer advocates, they are very
active in our process--to the states as well, the BPU in New
Jersey, so people are there.
The problem comes in then you go to a siting process months
later and people, the public is hearing about it for the first
time. So maybe we need to do more, admittedly, to sort of reach
out to the public on these things than we do and that is a fair
point that we will talk about to address some of those issues.
We are not the deciding authority here, but people do need to
understand what the need is and there probably is more we could
do, to be honest.
Mr. Pallone. So what you are saying to me is that it is
not, you believe that there is opportunity for consumer input
and oversight, but the problem is they just may not be aware of
what those opportunities are.
Mr. Glazer. Right, and in fairness we need to do more in
that area.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Well, again, I appreciate that and
if we can work together on thinking about better ways of doing
that I certainly appreciate it. I just wanted to say, I
understand the need to prepare so there is enough electricity
generation to cover the needs of the market, but I also worry
that drastically overestimating load forecasts on a regular
basis can lead to unnecessary build-out that ultimately has to
be paid for by the ratepayers.
And to that point some are peak load forecasts for PJM's
annual reliability planning have been consistently and
significantly overestimated for the past 8 years even as the
actual use of electricity in my state has declined. So some
projects that have been approved by PJM and have been
constructed based on what I consider overly optimistic
forecasts have resulted in underutilized transmission lines.
So Mr. Glazer, what checks and balances are in place to
encourage PJM not to overexaggerate forecasts?
Mr. Glazer. Thank you for the question. This is a Gordian
knot, because if you overestimate consumers would pay too much;
if you underestimate you could run short and then be in a
serious reliability problem. So it is a Gordian knot to find
the right mix. It has been very tough over the past couple of
years, not an excuse but a reality, because we have seen the
economy, the impacts of the recession, and we have seen energy
efficiency. As the economy picks up we are not seeing the load
picking up, which is showing us that maybe there is some
permanent energy efficiency changes which are then affecting
the load forecast. But it is kind of a difficult area to ping
it exactly right, but we are trying to work very hard on
getting this more sophisticated.
Mr. Pallone. All right, let me just throw in one more
thing. What can PJM do, in your opinion, to minimize
transmission projects that are approved, built, and then
underutilized resulting in unnecessary high cost to ratepayers?
Is there any recommendation you would have?
Mr. Glazer. We generally don't have a problem of
underutilized transmission lines, they are pretty utilized at
this point. As I was talking about with Mr. Shimkus, a
situation where I can't get power into Chicago because the
system is too tight, so generally they are well utilized once
they are built.
This whole question of do you build it just in time or do
you look forward a little bit and predict is a very tough one
because it takes a couple years to get a transmission line
built, so it is difficult. If anything, we have canceled a
whole bunch of transmission lines in response to let's not
overbuild the system. Sometimes I worry maybe we canceled too
many, but in fact we have canceled a bunch of lines. So we have
tried to be responsive to the changing needs of the system,
very much so.
Mr. Pallone. So you don't have any suggestions about trying
to minimize that problem?
Mr. Glazer. The way we do it is to continuously question--
Mr. Johnson. If you can answer that quickly, Mr. Glazer,
the time is expired.
Mr. Glazer. Yes, to continually question what we have done,
to look at it year by year and cancel projects we don't need
any longer.
Mr. Pallone. All right, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the gentleman, his time has expired. I
now recognize Mr. Flores from Texas.
Mr. Flores. I thank the chairman. By the way Mr. Chairman,
I want to share the news with you that a member of this
committee, Steve Scalise, has been released from the hospital,
so we look forward to him joining us soon. Prayers for his
continued recovery.
I have a couple of micro questions just because I am a
little bit of a nerd on some of these things, and then I want
to come back out to the macro. I was just checking my home
solar system, we are producing about 86 percent of my daily
needs right now. We will go up to about 130 percent, maybe
less, because my wife is home with the thermostats under her
sole control.
In any event, Ms. Mele, this raises sort of an issue. Do
you have an idea in ERCOT how much distributed power is behind
the meter like what I am doing? Do we have a way to measure
that?
Ms. Mele. That is something that we are currently
discussing with our stakeholders and we recognize that as an
important thing for us to keep our eyes on. So really, with
something like your rooftop solar we have proposed in a white
paper to the stakeholder community and market participants that
we start to talk about how we get a view of that perhaps
through aggregation.
As the transmission operator and wholesale market operator,
we don't really want to get down into the distribution system,
but we do think it is important where they start to see a
significant amount of that building up at a transmission load
point that there would be some visibility to come back to
ERCOT. That is for our operational readiness as well as for our
planning. Not different than the conversation we just had about
transmission resources, we need to consider how we use that
information in our transmission planning process.
So at this time we don't have a exact picture of how much
is out there. There are some reports that are filed to the
Public Utility Commission that do give us some insight into
that.
Mr. Flores. OK. I was just curious, because I mean implied
in your answer is that it does have an impact on distribution
and reliability or dispatch and reliability.
And so that sort of I want to come out to just another
level up, in Texas, because of the tax credits for certain
types of power, we have had negative pricing enter into the
market and so that seems to be disruptive to being able to
dispatch with transparency and reliability.
Can you tell us what the challenges are because this has to
do with wind primarily and some solar. What has that done to
your job?
Ms. Mele. So I think the important thing to think about for
our job as the people who are responsible to forecast and
procure the resources that we believe are going to be needed to
get through the day as well as the ancillary services to close
the gap between the load forecast and the operational
difference in real time, what we have focused on is really the
accuracy of forecasting. We have done a lot of work, especially
with wind, to look at how accurate we can get that forecast,
considering where we are, and looking at what that net load
ramp potential is. So here is what might change based on where
we currently are with wind and here is load is going and trying
to really focus in on that.
We have actually added a new operating desk in our control
room. It has been in place now for about 8 months, and some of
their primary responsibilities are really looking at that,
looking closely at forecast. We use some pretty sophisticated
software to do both our load forecasting and monitoring our
wind. In addition to that they are looking at what is the
inertia on the grid as we have this changing resource mix.
Mr. Flores. Right, right. Well, that takes us to the next
area I wanted to go and I welcome comments from any of you on
this and I want to start with Ms. Mele. We have got the
challenges in managing baseload and also renewables which by
the way they are structured are intermittent.
Recently in Australia there was an incident that was
weather related that caused their wind energy, wind resources,
to drop off line in southeast Australia and putting 1.7 million
people in the dark. And they really hadn't factored in that
type of an event and so they didn't have enough baseload ready,
enough inertia, if you will, to be able to back the system up
and bring people back on line.
What are each of you doing about that particular issue? And
I only have about 49 seconds. We will start with you, Mr.
Glazer.
Mr. Glazer. This is one of those resilience issues. It
deals with things like black start to be able to--resilience
isn't just preventing things but restoring the system rapidly.
Those are some of the things that we are digging into.
Mr. Flores. OK. Dr. Casey?
Mr. Casey. A couple of things, one, carrying reserves.
Mr. Flores. Quickly.
Mr. Casey. To make sure when that happens we have backup so
at least they can step in. And secondly, making sure the
inverter technologies with these new technologies can ride
through events on the system.
Mr. Flores. Right.
Mr. Casey. It is a relatively new technology. We are
learning as we go, but we are discovering issues and we are
trying to fix them.
Mr. Flores. Let me just quickly, through the rest of you,
are each of you familiar with this incident and are learning
from this incident? OK, thank you. I used up all my time. Thank
you, I yield back and I will submit additional questions for
the record.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the gentleman for yielding back and
recognize now Mr. Tonko for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Because of a conflict I
apologize for missing the beginning of the hearing and for
hitting any topics that may have already been covered. And I
thank all of you for participating this morning, it is a wealth
of talent to have at the table.
And if I might do my hometown, or home state shout-out to
Mr. Jones, thank you for being here and for all of the great
work that you do to guarantee great reliability throughout my
home State of New York and for your work to keep our state on
the cutting edge of our nation's energy transformation.
So we are very happy with the results. New York has
launched a number of ambitious state policies, including
environmental and fuel diversity goals, the Reforming the
Energy Vision, the REV concept, and clean energy standards are
keeping the state at the forefront of our changing energy
system. ISO clearly benefits from dealing with a single state
government so there are not competing state interests or goals
to balance.
Mr. Jones, based on your testimony it sounds like RTOs can
play a role in achieving state policy goals. How has NYISO been
involved in New York's REV initiative?
Mr. Jones. Thank you, Mr. Tonko. REV initiative is
primarily directed at animating our customers in a way that the
customers can participate in both the retail and the wholesale
markets. From NYISO's perspective we have gotten engaged on
that issue and that we launched last fall a DER roadmap. A
roadmap provided some clarity to our approach going forward to
individuals that are proposing to invest in distributed
resources.
Those resources now we are bringing into a pilot program.
The pilot program is intended for us to develop the types of
communications that we will communicate both price and dispatch
these individuals and the settlement process is to make sure
that happens. We hope in a 3-year period to be able to solidify
all of the wholesale market interactions. We are currently also
working with our distribution companies within the State of New
York to assist them in developing their systems.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Obviously that effort with
distributed resources provides great value to the grid.
Mr. Jones. Yes, sir. We see great opportunity to by
animating those customers to reduce overall needs for both
transmission and new generation resources to provide
significant value to our customers.
Mr. Tonko. Super, thank you. And at the market
participants' hearing last week we heard complaints from some
witnesses about out-of-market subsidies. Now New York's ISO
recently commissioned a study from the Brattle Group to explore
the potential to pursue state environmental and other goals
within its market structure. You have suggested that this could
incentivize cleaner generation, provide proper price signals in
the competitive markets, and help achieve state policy goals.
How might that work?
Mr. Jones. Just to put it as simply as I can, the way it
would work is that we would charge generators that produce
carbon emissions. We would charge them for the value of those
carbon emissions. That money then we would return to customers.
But because those individuals are being charged for that cost,
that cost would be reflected into the marketplace, the price,
and low carbon emissions resources then would benefit by that
higher clearing price.
Mr. Tonko. And is there a timeline that you have for
considering the possibility of adopting these types of changes?
Mr. Jones. Yes. We are about to launch the Brattle report
or Brattle, rather, will launch it on our behalf within the
next several days. At that point we will begin to engage our
market participants as we have been working closely with the
PSC, the Public Service Commission of New York, throughout the
last several months. We will engage our market participants. I
would hope that in a period of 3 years we could have that
implemented within our markets.
Mr. Tonko. Thanks a lot. And your 2017 Power Trends Report
identifies transmission constraints as a limitation for New
York to get clean energy resources to some high demand areas.
We are also seeing this on a larger scale throughout the nation
where renewable resource potential is high in the Midwest. Can
you explain how New York's ISO's role in overcoming these
constraints is working?
Mr. Jones. It is working quite well. We need to continue to
drive the process to improve it and speed the process up. We
currently have two projects that are well underway, one from
Western New York to Central New York, one project that will
take power from Central New York down into New York City and
Long Island. We see additional needs going forward and we
proposed those to the Public Service Commission. They are
currently evaluating those. We hope to move those forward very
quickly.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And just for those in the eastern
portion of our nation that are here as witnesses, you have
created capacity markets. Do you think that the capacity
markets are the optimal in least-cost means to determine the
mix of generation resources that we need to serve our
customers? Mr. Glazer?
Mr. Glazer. Nothing is perfect, but I think they have
accomplished the goals of in getting new investments very
efficiently, retiring inefficient investments, so I think they
are overall working well.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Van Welie, please?
Mr. Van Welie. Yes, I do think so.
Mr. Tonko. And Mr. Jones?
Mr. Jones. Yes, very much so.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Again thank you for the work you do.
It is so valuable in this given transformation period, so thank
you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the gentleman for yielding back.
And seeing there are no further members wishing to ask
questions, I would like to thank all of our witnesses once
again for being here today. In pursuant to committee rules, I
will remind members that they have 10 business days to submit
additional questions for the record and I ask that witnesses
submit their response within 10 business days upon receipt of
the questions. Without objection, the subcommittee is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:22 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
