- REINVESTMENT AND REHABILITATION OF OUR NATION'S SAFE DRINKING WATER DELIVERY SYSTEMS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REINVESTMENT AND REHABILITATION OF OUR NATION'S SAFE DRINKING WATER
DELIVERY SYSTEMS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 16, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-13

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-370                  WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            GENE GREEN, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILL FLORES, Texas                       Massachusetts
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             TONY CARDENAS, CaliforniaL RUIZ,
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma               California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia

Subcommittee on Environment

JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
Chairman
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas                    RAUL RUIZ, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             SCOTT H. PETERS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          GENE GREEN, Texas
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       DORIS O. MATSUI, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    officio)
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, prepared statement.....................................   120

Witnesses

Randy Ellingboe, Minnesota Department of Health, on behalf of the
Association of State Drinking Water Administrators.............     8
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Answers to submitted questions...............................   143
John J. Donahue, CEO, North Park Public Water District in
Machesney Park, Il, on behalf of the American Water Works
Association....................................................    17
Prepared statement...........................................    20
Answers to submitted questions...............................   149
Rudolph S. Chow, P.E., Director, Baltimore, MD Department of
Public Works, on behalf of the American Municipal Water
Association....................................................    32
Prepared statement...........................................    34
Answers to submitted questions...............................   165
Gregory E. DiLoreto, Chairman, Committee for America's
Infrastructure, American Society of Civil Engineers............    45
Prepared statement...........................................    47
Answers to submitted questions...............................   171
Martin A. Kropelnicki, President and CEO, California Water
Service Group, on behalf of the National Association of Water
Companies......................................................    53
Prepared statement...........................................    55
Answers to submitted questions...............................   175
Erik Olson, Director, Health & Environment Program, Natural
Resources Defense Council......................................    65
Prepared statement...........................................    68

Submitted Material

Report entitled, ``2017 Infrastructure Report Card,'' from the
American Society of Civil Engineers, submitted by Mr. DiLoreto.   121
Statement of the National Ground Water Association, submitted by
Mr. Shimkus....................................................   127
Statement of Stephanie A. Miner, Mayor of Syracuse, New York,
submitted by Mr. Tonko.........................................   128
Statement of American Rivers, submitted by Mr. Tonko.............   131
Article entitled, ``In American Towns, Private Profits from
Public Works, March 16, 2017, New York Times, submitted by Mr.
Tonko..........................................................   133

REINVESTMENT AND REHABILITATION OF OUR NATION'S SAFE DRINKING WATER
DELIVERY SYSTEMS

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 16, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment,
Committee on Energy and Commerce
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2322 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Shimkus
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Shimkus, McKinley, Barton, Murphy,
Blackburn, Harper, Olson, Flores, Hudson, Walberg, Carter,
Tonko, Ruiz, Peters, Green, DeGette, McNerney, Cardenas,
Dingell, and Matsui.
Staff present: Grace Appelbe, Legislative Clerk; Mike
Bloomquist, Deputy Staff Director; Jerry Couri, Deputy Chief
Environmental Advisor; Wyatt Ellertson, Research Associate,
Energy/Environment; Adam Fromm, Director of Outreach and
Coalitions; Giulia Giannangeli, Legislative Clerk, Digital
Commerce and Consumer Protection/Environment; Tom
Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy/Environment; A.T.
Johnston, Senior Policy Advisor/Professional Staff, Energy/
Environment; Alex Miller, Video Production Aide and Press
Assistant; Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator, Environment; Dan
Schneider, Press Secretary; Jacqueline Cohen, Minority Senior
Counsel; David Cwiertney, Minority Energy/Environment Fellow;
Rick Kessler, Minority Senior Advisor and Staff Director,
Energy and Environment; Alexander Ratner, Minority Policy
Analyst; and Tuley Wright, Minority Energy and Environment
Policy Advisor.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Shimkus. If I could ask all our guests today to please
take their seats, and if we can get that door closed, the
Committee on Environment will now come to order. The chair now
recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
Today's hearing gives our panel a chance to look broadly at
our nation's drinking water infrastructure and examine
questions about what is necessary for the federal government to
do in the way of reinvestment and rehabilitation of these
systems to meet future needs.
Currently, more than 51,000 community water systems treat
42 billion gallons of water for use by 299 million Americans
daily.
This water, which is used for anything from cooking and
bathing in homes, factories, or offices to firefighting is
delivered by publicly and privately-owned water utilities
stretching over 1 million miles of pipe.
It is really a remarkable feat of engineering that
demonstrates our nation's commitment to public health and a
high standard of living.
For more than a decade, there have been concerns raised
about this system and whether our nation is making the choices
it needs to make in order to ensure effective and efficient
delivery of safe drinking water in the future.
Many of the pipes now in use were installed in the early
and mid-20th century and have a projected lifespan of 75 to 100
years.
In 2013, the EPA announced that a bit more than $384
million of investment was needed between 2010 and 2030 to
improve drinking water infrastructure and ensure the provision
of safe tap water.
This report was not a suggestion that the federal
government needed to provide all of that funding but it and
other reports have served as a wake-up call to the threat
facing these systems and begs the question as to whether
Congress should be doing more.
Before the Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1996, to
the extent that it was needed, Congress' role in financing
drinking water infrastructure was confined to line items for
specific projects, a practice that has been substantially
curtailed.
In 1996, Congress, realizing the biggest economic problem
facing drinking water systems was the cost of unfunded
mandates, created a State Revolving Loan Fund program to
provide low-interest loans that helped address compliance and
public health needs.
Last year, the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the
Nation Act authorized $600 million between two new programs
dedicated to tackling lead pipe replacement and aiding
economically disadvantaged and underserved communities.
In addition, this law tried to further invigorate loans not
related to Drinking Water Act compliance through the Water
Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act program.
While I think these are solid steps, we must also
reauthorize funding for the Drinking Water Revolving Loan Fund
program. This has been a very successful and important program
whose purpose is synergistic in view of other infrastructure
programs, having provided more than $20 billion in funding to
over 12,400 projects since 1997.
We must also explore other avenues that not only leverage
investments in these utility infrastructures but also do it in
a way that promotes American workers and protect consumers'
health and pocketbooks.
We need to be smart about our investments. This is not
going to be an easy discussion, but to be successful it is one
we must have.
I believe we must not be afraid to spend more federal money
on this issue, but we must maintain local fees as the primary
generator of funds for daily operation and maintenance of
public water systems as well as their long-term capital
investment needs.
That said, we must acknowledge that not only as a
percentage of household income, U.S. households pay less for
water and wastewater than other developed countries and that
water rates have dropped 3 percent more recently.
We also must remember that some systems have taken the very
unpopular step of raising rates.
But not everyone can do that, whether due to population
contraction or local economic condition, because their rate
bases aren't able to handle capital improvements as well as
others do.
So long as we focus on trying to increase overall
purchasing power for communities, our constituents can enjoy
their drinking water for the next 75 to 100 years.
Before I relinquish my time, I want to thank our witnesses
for being here today, especially in view of the crazy weather
and travel schedules that you and we have had.
I also want to welcome the board members of the Association
of State Drinking Water Administrators. We appreciate all the
work you do and how important you are to the success of the
Safe Drinking Water Act.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. John Shimkus

The Subcommittee will come to order. I recognize myself for
5 minutes for giving an opening statement.
Today's hearing gives our panel a chance to look broadly at
our nation's drinking water infrastructure and examine
questions about what is necessary for the Federal government to
do in the way of reinvestment and rehabilitation of these
systems to meet future needs.
Currently, more than 51,000 community water systems treat
42 billion gallons of water for use by 299 million Americans
daily. This water--which is used for anything from cooking and
bathing in homes, factories, or offices, to firefighting is
delivered by publicly and privately owned water utilities
stretching over one million miles of pipe. It is really a
remarkable feat of engineering that demonstrates our nation's
commitment to public health and a higher standard of living.
For more than a decade, there have been concerns raised
about this system and whether our nation is making the choices
it needs to make in order to ensure effective and efficient
delivery of safe drinking water in the future. Many of the
pipes now in use were installed in the early and mid-20th
century and have a projected lifespan of 75 to 100 years.
In 2013, the EPA announced that a bit more than $384
million of investment was needed between 2010 and 2030 to
improve drinking water infrastructure and ensure the provision
of safe tap water. This report was not a suggestion that the
Federal government needed to provide all of that funding, but
it and other reports have served as wake up calls to the threat
facing these systems and begs the question of whether Congress
should be doing more.
Before the Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1996, to
the extent that it was needed, Congress's role in financing
drinking water infrastructure was confined to line items for
specific projects--a practice that has been substantially
curtailed. In 1996, Congress, realizing the biggest economic
problem facing drinking water systems was the cost of unfunded
mandates, created the State Revolving Loan Fund program to
provide low-interest loans that helped address compliance and
public health needs.
Last year, the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the
Nation Act authorized $600 million between two new programs
dedicated to tackling lead pipe replacement and aiding
economically disadvantaged and underserved communities. In
addition, this law tried to further invigorate loans not
related to drinking water act compliance through the Water
Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act (WIFIA) program.
While I think these are solid steps, we must also
reauthorize funding for the drinking water revolving loan fund
program or DWSRF. The DWSRF has been a very successful and
important program whose purpose is synergistic in view of other
infrastructure programs--having provided more than $20 billion
in funding to over 12,400 projects since 1997.
We must also explore other avenues that not only leverage
investments in these utilities' infrastructure, but also do it
in a way that promotes American workers and protects consumers'
health and pocketbooks. We need to be smart about our
investments.
This is not going to be an easy discussion, but to be
successful; it is one we must have.
I believe we must not be afraid to spend more Federal money
on this issue, but we must maintain local fees as the primary
generator of funds for daily operation and maintenance of
public water systems, as well as their long-term capital
investment needs.
That said, we must acknowledge that not only as a
percentage of household income, U.S. households pay less for
water and wastewater than other developed countries and that
water rates have dropped 3% more recently.
We also must remember that some systems have taken the
unpopular step of raising rates. But not everyone can do that,
whether due to population contraction or local economic
condition, because their rate bases aren't able to handle
capital improvements as well as others do.
So long as we focus on trying to increase overall
purchasing power for communities, our constituents can enjoy
their drinking water for the next 75 to 100 years.
Before I relinquish my time, I want to thank our witnesses
for being here today, especially in view of the crazy weather
and travel schedules you have. I also want to welcome the Board
members of the Association of State Drinking Water
Administrators--we appreciate all the work you do and how
important you are to the success of the Safe Drinking Water
Act.
With that, I yield back the balance of my remaining time
and recognize the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee for 5
minutes to give his opening statement.

Mr. Shimkus. With that, I yield back the balance--well, I
don't want to do that yet. I'd like to yield one minute to my
colleague, Congresswoman Blackburn, for 1 minute.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you. I think that one of the things
we can all agree on is that we are for clean air and we are for
clean water. And as the chairman has said, we know that there
are accountabilities that need to be met.
There is money that is going to have to be expended. We
want it to be done in the right way and we know that
contaminated water is not acceptable.
Of course, sometimes it can hit close to home, as it did
right here on our campus with the Cannon Office Building and
anybody that has worked there knows those stories.
So, I just want to welcome you all. I want to thank you for
being here and I want to thank you for working with us on this
important issue, and I will yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentlelady yields back her time and I yield
back my time.
The chair now recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Tonko, for
5 minutes, who has an interest in this issue.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, and Chair
Walden for holding this hearing.
I know I sound like a broken record requesting a drinking
water hearing for the past 4 years but I am truly grateful to
you for bringing us together today.
I also want to thank our experts here for being in
attendance. We will hear from all of them, from water utilities
to engineers to environmental stakeholders that our national
drinking water infrastructure needs are immense.
I also understand that they will present formally their
report card on infrastructure. I can tell you, if I received a
report card like that my parents would have had a response
immediately.
They would have had an improvement plan in place
immediately. So let's get going, nation.
The facts are startling. We lose over 2 trillion gallons of
treated water each year from leaking pipes. There are more than
240,000 water main breaks each year, which causes service
disruption and property damage.
Nearly 100 mid-size cities across our great country are
facing shrinking populations, meaning a smaller taxpayer base,
to support repairs and to support maintenance.
As Mr. DiLoreto will explain, the American Society of Civil
Engineers recently released their report card and have given
our systems a grade of D.
It is clear we are not making the progress necessary to
tackle this issue. If anything, we are going in the wrong
direction. EPA has estimated some $384 billion is needed over
the next 20 years to keep our systems running.
And as we deal with aging systems, often with century-old
pipes and an alarming number of unregulated and under regulated
contaminants, this estimate can only be expected to grow.
The bottom line is I do not see how the needs can be met
without significantly greater federal investments. I feel the
need to say that the proposed cuts to EPA outlined in President
Trump's budget are not only senseless, they are dangerous.
While funding levels for the SRFs appear to be maintained,
the status quo is simply not good enough. We need additional
funding.
For example, in my home state of New York, we receive a
generous allotment from the Drinking Water SRF--about $40
annually. That money is leveraged with state funds which may
allow for about $700 million in projects this year.
The problem is there were over $4 billion worth of projects
requested, according to this year's intended use plan. Projects
that are not funded will continue to be deferred, putting more
stress on already struggling systems.
So even for a state that is committed to addressing this
issue, there is still a tremendous gap between available funds
and needs.
We cannot fool ourselves into thinking local and state
governments can do this on their own. There is a federal
responsibility. This infrastructure is too important to
continue to be neglected.
And let us make no mistake, there are real consequences--
health and economic--when these systems fail. Flint should have
been a wake-up call to Congress that we must do more.
The investments we can make now are minuscule when compared
to the cost of inaction. And Flint is not alone. These problems
lurk below the surface throughout our country.
Here are just a few headlines from this past week. From
NPR: Kentucky community hopes Trump infrastructure plan will
fix water systems. From the Clarion Ledger: Weekend water
emergency ripples across Jackson. From the Associated Press:
Six Madison schools test positive for lead in drinking water.
This is a national issue, and had this hearing been delayed
until next week I am sure we would have found plenty of new
stories from different states.
Last year's water resources bill, the WIND bill, took a few
steps to address this issue. It created two great programs,
grant programs, one for lead-lined replacement and one for
small and disadvantaged communities.
Congress should fully fund these programs, but that is only
the start. Members of this subcommittee have good ideas on how
to update the Safe Drinking Water Act, which has not been
significantly changed for some 20 years.
Many of these ideas are supported by stakeholders from
labor and the environmental community. The AQUA Act would
reauthorize the drinking water SRF for the first time since its
inception at significantly higher levels.
Ranking Member Pallone's bill, the SDWA amendments,
incorporates a number of ideas from our members including
mandating new standards for lead and other emerging
contaminants while making it easier for EPA to set science and
health-based limits and treatment techniques in the future.
It also would give grants to schools to replace water
fountains that contain lead. Mr. Peters is working on a bill to
provide grants to systems for resiliency, security and source
water protection in the face of hydraulic changes and other
emerging threats.
These are good bills that deserve consideration by this
committee. Also, we must ensure water is included in any
potential infrastructure package that will be considered by
Congress.
We can no longer ignore our hidden infrastructure. I would
encourage all members of our committee to visit a water system
in your district. Go speak to your mayors, your system
managers, your departments of public works.
It is likely you will hear what I heard in my district.
This is a real and vastly overlooked issue and Congress can
help provide relief for financially-burdened local governments
and ratepayers.
Every life in this country depends on access to safe
drinking water. Every job in this country depends on access to
safe drinking water. The needs are great and the cost of
inaction is even greater. It's immensely high.
So I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on the role
that our federal government should play to rebuild, maintain
and protect this infrastructure which is vital to our
constituents' lives.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back and again thank you for
the opportunity of the hearing.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonko follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Paul Tonko

I want to thank Chairman Shimkus and Chairman Walden for
holding this hearing. I know I have sounded like a broken
record requesting a drinking water hearing for the past four
years, but I am truly grateful to you for bringing us together
today.
I also want to thank our witnesses for being here. We will
hear from all of them-water utilities, engineers, and
environmental stakeholders- that our national drinking water
infrastructure needs are immense.
The facts are startling:

We lose more than 2 trillion gallons of treated
water each year from leaking pipes.

There are more than 240,000 water main breaks each
year, which cause servicedisruption and property damage.

Nearly 100 mid-sized cities across the country are
facing shrinking populations, meaning a smaller ratepayer base
to support repairs and maintenance.
As Mr. DiLoreto will explain, the American Society of Civil
Engineer's recently released report card has given our systems
a grade of D. It is clear we are not making the progress
necessary to tackle this issue, if anything we are going the
wrong way.
EPA has estimated $384 billion is needed over the next 20
years to keep our systems running.
And as we deal with aging systems--often with century-old
pipes--and an alarming number of unregulated and under
regulated contaminants, this estimate can only be expected to
grow.
The bottom line is I do not see how the needs can be met
without significantly greater federal investments.
I feel the need to say that the proposed cuts to EPA
outlined in President Trump's budget are not only senseless--
they are dangerous.
While funding levels for the SRFs appear to be maintained,
the status quo is simply not good enough. We need additional
funding.
For example, in my home state of New York, we receive a
generous allotment from the Drinking Water SRF, about $40
million annually. That money is leveraged with State funds,
which may allow for about $700 million in projects this year.
The problem is there were over $4 billion in projects requested
according to this year's Intended Use Plan.
Projects that are not funded will continue to be deferred,
putting more stress on already struggling systems. So even for
a state that is committed to addressing this issue, there is
still a tremendous gap between available funds and needs.
We cannot fool ourselves into thinking local and state
governments can do this on their own. There is a federal
responsibility. This infrastructure is too important to
continue to be neglected.
And let's make no mistake, there are real consequences--
health and economic--when these systems fail.
Flint should have been a wakeup call to Congress that we
must do more. The investments we can make now are miniscule
when compared to the cost of inaction. And Flint is not alone.
These problems lurk below the surface throughout the country.
Here are just a few headlines from this past week:

From NPR, ``Kentucky Community Hopes Trump
Infrastructure Plan Will Fix Water System''

From The Clarion-Ledger, ``Weekend water emergency
ripples across Jackson''

From the Associated Press, ``6 Madison schools
test positive for lead in drinkingwater''
This is a national issue. And had this hearing been delayed
until next week, I am sure we would have found plenty of new
stories from different cities.
Last year's water resources bill, the WIIN Act, took a few
steps to address this issue.
It created two grant programs--one for lead line
replacement and one for small and disadvantaged communities.
Congress should fully fund these programs, but that is only the
start.
Members of this Subcommittee have good ideas on how to
update the Safe Drinking Water Act, which has not been
significantly changed for 20 years. Many of these ideas are
supported by stakeholders from industry, labor, and the
environmental community.
The AQUA Act would reauthorize the Drinking Water SRF for
the first time since its inception at significantly higher
levels.
Mr. Pallone's bill, the SDWA Amendments, incorporates a
number of ideas from our Members, including mandating new
standards for lead and other emerging contaminants while making
it easier for EPA to set science- and health-based limits and
treatment techniques in the future. It also would give grants
to schools to replace water fountains that contain lead.
Mr. Peters is working on a bill to provide grants to
systems for resiliency, security, and source water protection
in the face of hydraulic changes and other emerging threats.
These are good bills that deserve consideration by this
Committee.
Also, we must ensure water is included in any potential
infrastructure package considered by Congress. We can no longer
ignore our hidden infrastructure.
I would encourage all Members of this Committee to visit a
water system in your district.
Go speak to your mayors, system managers, or departments of
public works. It is likely you will hear what I heard in my
district--this is a real and overlooked issue. And Congress can
help provide relief to financially burdened local governments
and ratepayers.
Every life and every job in this country depends on access
to safe drinking water. The needs are great, and the cost of
inaction is high.
So I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on the role
the federal government should play to rebuild, maintain, and
protect this infrastructure, which is vital to our constituents
lives.
With that, I yield back.

Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time.
Chair now looks to the majority side to see if anybody
wished to make an opening statement. Seeing none, anyone on the
minority side? Seeing none, we will turn to our panel.
So we appreciate you all being here. I'll introduce you as
you are prepared to make your statement. Otherwise, I'll go
through it and then I have to go through it again.
So we want to first recognize Randy Ellingboe from the
Minnesota Department of Health on behalf of the Association of
State Drinking Water Administrators. Your full testimony has
been submitted to the committee. You are recognized for 5
minutes.
As you can see, this is an issue that we all find are very
interested about and want to kind of move forward. So we are
not going to be militant on time. But if I do hit the gavel,
you have gone way over, OK.
So you are recognized for 5 minutes. And I think you should
press a button there in the middle and pull it, if you can, as
close as you can. All right.

STATEMENTS OF RANDY ELLINGBOE, MINNESOTA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH,
ON BEHALF OF THE ASSOCIATION OF STATE DRINKING WATER
ADMINISTRATORS; JOHN J. DONAHUE, CEO, NORTH PARK PUBLIC WATER
DISTRICT IN MACHESNEY PARK, IL, ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN WATER
WORKS ASSOCIATION; RUDOLPH S. CHOW P.E., DIRECTOR, BALTIMORE,
MD DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS, ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN
MUNICIPAL WATER ASSOCIATION; GREGORY E. DILORETO, CHAIRMAN,
COMMITTEE FOR AMERICA'S INFRASTRUCTURE, AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
CIVIL ENGINEERS; MARTIN A. KROPELNICKI, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
CALIFORNIA WATER SERVICE GROUP, ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF WATER COMPANIES; ERIK OLSON, DIRECTOR, HEALTH &
ENVIRONMENT PROGRAM, NATURAL RESOURCES DEFENSE COUNCIL

STATEMENT OF RANDY ELLINGBOE

Mr. Ellingboe. Good morning, Chairman Shimkus, Ranking
Member Tonko and members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to talk about our nation's
drinking water systems and how state drinking water systems
support them.
Again, my name is Randy Ellingboe and I am with the
Minnesota Department of Health but I am also president of the
Association of State Drinking Water Administrators whose
members include the 50 state drinking water programs, five
territorial programs, the District of Columbia and the Navajo
Nation.
Our members and their staff help all public water supply
systems provide drinking water that meets all the Safe Drinking
Water Act standards through monitoring of their water quality,
financial and technical assistance to public water supply
systems, and when needed, enforcement to help systems
prioritize taking care of deficiencies and violations.
Today I'd like to talk with you about how states play a
role in public health protection and sustaining the economic
health of communities by implementing three critical components
of the Safe Drinking Water Act: the Public Water Systems
Supervision, or PWSS program, the Drinking Water State
Revolving Loan Fund program and the Revolving Loan Fund set
asides.
Sufficient federal funding for these components is
essential for maintaining the safety of drinking water across
the country. Under the Safe Drinking Water Act, states have
accepted primary enforcement responsibility for federal
drinking water standards and technical assistance efforts for
over 151 public water systems.
These regulations are for contaminants such as nitrate,
bacteria, arsenic, lead, and many carcinogens. A person can go
virtually anywhere in the country and drink water from a public
water system and be confident that the water meets federal
health standards because of the work that public water supply
system operators do with the assistance and oversight of state
and federal drinking water programs.
However, since the Safe Drinking Water Act was passed in
1974, we have come to understand much more about drinking water
contaminants and what it takes to manage and treat drinking
water to prevent illness.
This has led to increased challenges for both public water
supplies and state and federal drinking water programs. But
safe water is crucial for protecting people's health and
communities' and businesses' economic well-being.
When we polled citizens in Minnesota about water resource
issues, drinking water consistently rises to the top. Safe
drinking water for all is one of the community conditions that
supports health.
However, state drinking water programs and many public
water supplies are extremely hard pressed financially as costs
and the funding gap continues to grow.
With the advent of the Drinking Water State Revolving Fund
in 1996, states could provide low-cost loans to utilities to
help them upgrade their treatment plants and water mains,
install more protective technologies and improve their aging
infrastructure.
Many states have also used no-interest loans and principal
forgiveness to assist disadvantaged communities with their
infrastructure needs.
Approximately $18 billion federal capitalization grants
since 1997 have been leveraged by states into over $29 billion
infrastructure loans to communities across the country.
Such investments are now being paid back and loaned out
again and pay tremendous dividends both in supporting and
growing our economy and in protecting our citizens' health.
States have leveraged the federal dollars with state
contributions to provide assistance to more than 10,000
projects to enhance and sustain public health protection for
millions of Americans.
However, the most recent drinking water infrastructure
needs survey identified $384 billion in investment needed
across the country in the next 20 years, as already noted.
With that great need we would recommend expanding the
Revolving Fund to help increase infrastructure investment. It
has a track record for successfully funding a wide range of
drinking water infrastructure projects critical for the
economic well-being of communities as well as protecting public
health.
Set asides are unique to the drinking water program. States
are allowed to set aside a portion of the Revolving Loan Fund
for source water protection, program administration, small
system technical assistance and water operator training and
certification.
Set asides are an essential source of funding for states'
core public health protection programs and these efforts work
in tandem with infrastructure loans. These proactive strategies
and initiatives increase the effectiveness of many state
programs in their ability to support drinking water systems.
In summary, sustaining or increasing the PWSS grants is
critical, to protecting public health and our economy.
Expanding the Revolving Fund will improve the nation's
infrastructure and create jobs, and the set asides are key
resource to ensuring safe drinking water.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this testimony
about these critical drinking water issues.
[The prepared statement of Randy Ellingboe follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. And the gentleman yields back his time and we
appreciate those comments.
Another thing I should have said the Chair would like to
remind members that pursuant to committee rules all members'
opening statements could be placed into the record.
And I also wanted to mention that you all are on the front
lines of these battles. We do really appreciate you being here
and your testimony, and I think as the questions will follow up
to show because you're really trying to deliver the goods.
So I'd now like to recognize Mr. John Donahue, CEO of the
North Park Public Water District in Machesney Park, Illinois,
way far away from Collinsville, on behalf of the American Water
Works Association.
You're recognized for 5 minutes. Thanks for being here.

STATEMENT OF JOHN J. DONAHUE

Mr. Donahue. Good morning, Chairman Shimkus, and members of
the subcommittee. My name is John Donahue, the chief executive
officer at North Park Public Water District in Machesney Park,
Illinois, north of I-80.
I am also the former president of the American Water Works
Association on whose behalf I am speaking today. I appreciate
this opportunity to offer AWWA's input on reinvesting and
rehabilitating our nation's drinking water systems.
As you will hear and see in my written testimony, building
and maintaining sound water infrastructure includes addressing
not only water infrastructure, which includes pipes and
treatment plants, but addressing issues such as cybersecurity
and the protection of source waters.
One innovative tool to help address this is a new credit
program known as a Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation
Act, or WIFIA.
We are optimistic that once WIFIA really gets running and
fully funded it could become a valuable tool for financing
projects beyond the size and scope of those funded by other
tools.
Just as in the transportation program called TIFIA,
Congress only has to appropriate funds for the risk factor to
those loans. Based on calculations from OMB, WIFIA
appropriations could be leveraged at a ratio of about 60 to 1.
For example, if the WIFIA program were to receive the fully
authorized $45 million for Fiscal Year 2018, it could provide
more than $2 billion in loan money.
Since a WIFIA loan will only support up to 49 percent of
eligible project costs, this funding could result in more than
$4 billion in infrastructure investment.
Other key federal programs for infrastructure finance like
the State Revolving Loan Fund programs, or SRFs, are also
designed to provide water and wastewater systems access to
lower cost financing for infrastructure projects, typically
smaller than those that can be funded through WIFIA.
While the SRFs are excellent programs, their efficiency
could be improved by working with stakeholders to streamline
those process.
We realize that this next issue is outside the jurisdiction
of this committee but we need to mention and need to preserve
the tax-exempt status of municipal bonds as Congress considers
comprehensive tax reform. More than 70 percent of U.S. water
utilities use muni bonds to help finance infrastructure
improvements.
The decision to issue bonds is determined and approved by
either the local residents, the referenda or by their elected
officials. These bonds provide substantial savings for the cost
of projects and consequently to the ratepayers.
These are our recommendations to Congress regarding water
infrastructure finance: provide fully authorized funding for
WIFIA and at least $1.8 billion for the drinking water SRF
program; preserve the tax-exempt status of muni bonds,
reauthorize the safe drinking water SRF program and work with
stakeholders to utilize the lessons learned since its creation
to make it more efficient.
Cybersecurity is an increasing component in upgrading and
protecting infrastructure and our written testimony contains
our thoughts on that issue. The protection of source waters are
also critical to the mission of any drinking water utility.
However, many drinking water systems have limited control
over upstream activities that may present risks to water. The
Revised Toxic Substances Control Act does contain provisions
for requiring consideration of impacts on drinking water
sources for certain substances.
However, there are policy gaps in the form of inadequate
information sharing policies and a lack of notification
protocols to alert a utility of incidents that could impact a
water supply.
The chemical spill on the Elk River in West Virginia in
2014 illustrates the need for such notification and alerts. In
addition, improved collaboration between agriculture producers
and water providers can have measurable results in reducing
sediment and nutrient pollution.
Nutrients from agricultural runoff do impact drinking water
quality, as we saw in Toledo, Ohio, in 2014 when the water
system had to be shut down.
The federal farm bill is a key vehicle for agricultural
land conservation efforts. We recommend that Congress support
the designation of drinking water utilities as first responders
in various state and federal emergency response laws in
regulation to facilitate information sharing.
We also recommend that Congress sustain and expand
conservation programs in the farm bill that support
collaboration between agriculture producers and community water
systems to improve source water quality.
EPA's 2012 integrated planning framework and related
documents on affordability provided important new flexibilities
for wastewater utilities to provide regulatory obligations and
infrastructure investments.
Representative Bob Gibbs' Water Quality Improvement Act
would help put the integrated planning framework in statute for
clean water mandates.
However, this legislation only deals with wastewater
projects and does not allow for integrated planning to fully
acknowledge the cost implication of drinking water mandates.
With that, I will conclude my remarks and look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of John J. Donahue follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time.
Chair now recognizes Mr. Rudolph Chow, Professional
Engineer, Director of the Baltimore, Maryland Department of
Public Works on behalf of the American Municipal Water
Association.
Welcome. You're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RUDOLPH S. CHOW, P.E.

Mr. Chow. Good morning, Chairman Shimkus and Ranking Member
Tonko and honorable members of the Energy and Commerce
Committee Environment Subcommittee.
My name is Rudy Chow and I am the director of the
Department of Public Works with Baltimore City. It is my honor
to appear before you this morning.
As director of the Baltimore City Department of Public
Works, I'm responsible for safe delivery of the highest quality
drinking water to 1.8 million people living and working in our
metropolitan region.
I have over 30 years of experience in the public water
industry from the operational, engineering and administrative
perspectives. It is a field I both love and respect.
I'm here today to speak on behalf of the Association of
Metropolitan Water Agencies, AMWA, an organization representing
the nation's largest public drinking water utilities which
collectively serve more than 130 million Americans with quality
drinking water. I serve on the AMWA board of directors with
other dedicated professionals from all over the country.
While our home jurisdiction may be different, I assure you
that our challenges are not. We are all challenged by the
effects of aging infrastructure and the costly capital projects
that protect and improve the quality of water we deliver to our
customers.
It is a delicate balancing act we perform to prioritize and
fund these expensive investments that are borne locally. But
the time of kicking the can down the road is long over.
Through organizations such as AMWA and serious discussion
of these challenges in Congress through committees and
subcommittees such as yours, we hope to seize the moment the
momentum of this national conversation and forge a national
commitment to protect our drinking water.
The scale of this challenge cannot be done solely on our
own. It is too important. We do not want communities forced to
choose between investing in necessary infrastructure and the
safety of their water. But here are the cold hard facts.
The EPA's most recent drinking water and clean water needs
surveys identify more than $655 billion of needed water and
wastewater infrastructure investments over the next 20 years
just to maintain the status quo.
AMWA and the National Association of Clean Water Agencies
project that water and wastewater utilities could spend a
similar amount over 40 years just to adapt to extreme droughts,
more frequent and intense storms and rising sea levels.
In my own city of Baltimore, my annual capital program for
water and wastewater project can comprise 80 percent of the
city's total capital investments. My six-year capital program
for just water infrastructure exceeds $2 billion.
The work of this subcommittee and Congress make a
difference between our success or failure as a nation to
protect our most basic need: clean safe drinking water.
Congress passed the Water Infrastructure Improvements of
the Nation Act last year. It created a new program in funding
to remove and replace outdated lead service lines and help low-
income customers absorb their share of replacement costs.
We need more programs like this to help support affordable
financing and assistance to communities in need. AMWA is asking
to continue this momentum to support the following efforts in
programming.
We need to renew commitment in the Drinking Water State
Revolving Fund, SRF. The Drinking Water SRF is an effective
national funding mechanism providing critical funding
assistance and that is a lifeline to many communities large or
small struggling to fund their capital programs. We ask a
doubling of SRF to $1.8 billion.
The Water Infrastructure Innovation Act, or WIFIA, is a new
federal pilot program that AMWA believes will provide
innovative funding to help communities nationwide pay for
large-scale water and wastewater projects.
WIFIA will complement, not compete, with SRF funds and
WIFIA can help communities with large-scale investment that
some SRFs cannot provide. Support the use of tax exempt
municipal bonds as they are the most prevalent water
infrastructure financing mechanism with at least 70 percent of
U.S. water utilities relying on them to pay for infrastructure
improvements.
By reauthorizing the Drinking Water SRF, Congress will have
an opportunity to update and streamline the program. AMWA would
like to codify water facility security enhancements as well as
allowing a portion of the metropolitan service areas to qualify
as a disadvantaged community use of these funds.
AMWA also supports the framework of the Safe Drinking Water
Act and its careful balance of public health protection and
local cost and feasibility considerations. Congress should
consider options for targeted low-income water rate assistance
programs. They are greatly needed.
Finally, AMWA believes water utilities should be recognized
in providing preference under SRF for taking steps to improve
efficiency and adopting best industry practices via sound water
utility asset management plan or who formulate cooperative
water utility partnerships.
On behalf of AMWA, I appreciate the opportunity to testify
on the importance of investing and rehabilitating our nation's
drinking water infrastructure. Thank you again, and I am happy
to answer any question you might have.
[The prepared statement of Rudolph S. Chow, P.E. follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman's time has expired. We thank you for
your testimony.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Greg DiLoreto, Chairman of the
Committee for America's Infrastructure, American Society of
Civil Engineers and nothing.
So we will recognize you for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GREGORY E. DILORETO

Mr. DiLoreto. Thank you very much, Chairman Shimkus,
Ranking Member Tonko and members of the subcommittee.
Good morning. My name is Greg DiLoreto and I'm a past
president of the American Society of Civil Engineers and the
current chair of the ASCE Committee for America's
Infrastructure, responsible for the 2017 report card for
infrastructure.
Prior to my retirement, I served as the chief executive
officer of the publicly-owned Tualatin Valley Water District in
Portland, Oregon. It's the second largest water utility in
Oregon.
I am honored to be here today to testify on behalf of ASCE
on the state of America's drinking water infrastructure as the
subcommittee examines reinvestment and rehabilitation of our
nation's safe drinking water delivery systems.
You're hearing a recurring theme from the comments by the
chair, by the comments from the ranking members as well as the
four people that have testified before me.
You're hearing this theme that we need to invest in our
infrastructure. Every four years since 1998, ASCE has published
the report card for America's infrastructure which grades the
current state of 16 national infrastructure categories on a
scale of A through F.
Last week, we released our 2017 report card, which we'd
like to have entered into the official record. In this report
card----
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. DiLoreto. Thank you. In this report card, we gave the
nation's drinking water infrastructure systems a grade of D.
Unfortunately, that is the same grade it received in our 2013
report card.
But the good news from this year's report card is that
water conservation efforts through wise use of water seem to
have paid off.
Municipal water consumption in the United States has
declined by 5 percent this decade, marking the first time in
nearly 40 years that water use at home has decreased.
Total freshwater withdrawals this decade continue to
decline in almost every sector including agriculture, industry,
domestic and thermal electric. This is primarily due to
efficiencies and the reduction in withdrawals from retired
coal-fired plants.
The bad news is that every day nearly 6 billion gallons of
treated drinking water are lost due to leaking pipes with an
estimated 240,000 water main breaks per year occurring in this
country.
It's estimated that these leaky pipes are wasting 14 to 18
percent of each day's treated water, the amount of clean
drinking water that could support 15 million households.
To address these programs and bring the grade up to a B--
good condition, which we recommend--EPA has estimated, as
you've heard, we need to invest, at a minimum, $384 billion
over the next 20 years from all levels of government.
Importantly, EPA's numbers do not account for population
growth and an estimate is limited in its scope of projects so
it could be higher. While drinking water infrastructure is
funded primarily through a rate-based user system, the
investment has been inadequate for decades and will continue to
be underfunded without significant changes as the revenue
generated will fall short of the needs grow and as water
utilities strive to meet safe drinking water standards.
Additionally, many U.S. cities are losing population. This
poses a significant challenge to utility managers. Fewer
ratepayers--a declining tax base--make it difficult to raise
funds for capital investment plans.
To respond, utilities must raise rates often in cities
where jobs and pay have not kept pace with the economy, putting
a burden on those who can least afford rate increases.
Conversely, in areas of the country that are growing, such
as the West and Southwest, utility managers must respond to an
increased overall demand.
So we'd like to offer the following recommendations. First,
as you've heard from my colleagues, reinvigorate State
Revolving Loan Fund program under the Safe Drinking Water Act
through permanent reauthorization. And we are going bold,
tripling the amount of the annual appropriation. This is the
amount that the president has called for.
Second, fully fund the Water Infrastructure Finance and
Innovation Act. Three, as with my colleagues, preserve tax-
exempt municipal bond financing. Low-cost access to capital
keeps lending for water upgrades strong and accessible for
communities large and small.
And fourth, eliminate the state cap on private activity
bonds for water infrastructure to bring an estimated $6 billion
to $7 billion annually in new private investment.
Finally, the federal government cannot be the bank of last
resort. We understand and recognize that individual water
utilities must consider the need to increase the price of water
to local users.
Water must be appropriately priced, however, to ensure
investments to rebuild the infrastructure.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That concludes our testimony and
at the appropriate time I'd be happy to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Gregory E. DiLoreto follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much, John.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Martin Kropelnicki, President
and CEO of the California Water Service Group on behalf of the
National Association of Water Companies.
You are recognized for 5 minutes. Thanks for being here.

STATEMENT OF MARTIN A. KROPELNICKI

Mr. Kropelnicki. Good morning, Chairman Shimkus and Ranking
Member Tonko and members of the subcommittee.
As the chairman mentioned, I'm Marty Kropelnicki, President
and CEO of California Water Service Group. We provide water
service to approximately 2 million in the State of California,
Hawaii, New Mexico and the State of Washington.
I'm also the current sitting president for the National
Association of Water Companies, or NAWC, which represents
private water companies across the U.S.
NAWC members have provided water utility services for well
over 100 years and today serve nearly a quarter of the
population.
Before discussing how private water sector can help address
the nation's infrastructure challenges, I want to start with a
story, a true story, of what happened in the state of
California and what the possibilities can be.
There are 400 residents in West Goshen, which is a small
town in Tulare County. The residents of West Goshen had two
small wells that had chronic water quality issues including
nitrates and bacteria contamination.
In 2012, the two wells failed. Then a portion of the their
water system pipes actually collapsed and we had people in this
small town that actually had sand flowing through their pipes
instead of water.
With the residents having to travel to nearby cities and
towns to take showers in portable shower stands, a timely
solution had to be found.
CalWater worked with several nonprofits in the local area,
the county and state to secure funding to connect the water
system to our existing system, which was a mile down the road.
Today, the residents are enjoying something they haven't
had in a long, long time--a supply of safe, reliable and high-
quality water. This example illustrates how private water
companies are already helping overcome water infrastructure
challenges.
NAWC estimates that its six largest members, of which we
are one, will invest nearly $2.7 billion annually in our water
systems. This is significant, given that the federal
appropriations for the State Revolving Fund program is about $2
billion annually. It illustrates the shortfall.
Federal funds alone will not fix the nation's
infrastructure problems, especially given that many are the
result of poor decision making and not necessarily the absence
of funding.
Let me highlight for you several recommendations for
Congress to consider. First, we must ensure that any federal
dollars are effectively and efficiently deployed and used. NAWC
and its members support EPA's 10 attributes of effective
utility management, which include things such as financial
viability, infrastructure stability, and operational
optimization.
Applicants for public dollars should demonstrate that they
are managing their assets so that adequate repair,
rehabilitation, and replacement are fully reflected in
management decisions including water pricing.
Second, failing systems that are seriously compliant with
water quality standards must be held accountable. If a system
is plagued with a history of serious noncompliance it should be
given an option to pursue a partnership that will lead to
compliance or to be consolidated with an operator or owner who
can bring them into compliance.
Finally, as Congress considers future funding of drinking
water programs, NAWC recommends that the private water sector
not only have equal access to federal funding but also that
steps be taken to further enable and incentivize private water
sectors' involvement in solving the nation's infrastructure
problems.
Apart from the obvious tax base measures, these incentives
should include providing a safe harbor provision to shield
would-be partners from legal and financial liabilities
associated with serous noncompliant systems.
Quite simply, private water companies like CalWater have
the financial, managerial and technical expertise to help
ensure that all Americans have safe, reliable and high-quality
utility services.
I sincerely appreciate your invitation to be here today.
Along with my many colleagues in NAWC, I look forward to
working with you to address the nation's water infrastructure
challenges.
Thank you, and I'd be happen to respond to any questions
that the committee may have.
[The prepared statement of Martin A. Kropelnicki follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
Chair now recognizes Mr. Erik Olson, director of the Health
and Environment Program with the Natural Resources Defense
Council, NRDC. You're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ERIK D. OLSON

Mr. E. Olson. Thank you, Chairman Shimkus, and Ranking
Member Tonko and members of the subcommittee.
I think we all take for granted where this water that is
sitting here comes from. It's, in many cases, comes through
water systems that have been there for over a century.
For example, I've seen the DC original plans for the water
supply in Washington, DC signed by guess which president?
Pierce. Started to be built during the Lincoln administration.
Mr. Shimkus. One of my favorites.
[Laughter.]
Mr. E. Olson. We still get our water through lead pipes in
much of the city through lead service lines. We still have a
brick aqueduct that is used for some of the water that is
delivered into the city.
And DC is not unique. We have got I think a situation where
we take for granted where our water is coming from and it is
out of sight and out of mind.
But I'd liken this very much to an old house that is 100-
plus years old. It's got a leaking roof. It's got termites.
It's got a crumbling foundation. It's got broken windows. It
sort of reminds me maybe of the house that Jimmy Stewart had in
``It's a Wonderful Life'' that was falling apart and about to
collapse, and without some tender loving care and real
investment, unfortunately, in a lot of cities and small towns
across the country we are really at risk of collapse.
It's not just the small town in West Goshen, California.
There are a lot of other cities and towns that have this
problem. You know, and these have very real public health
implications.
So CDC estimated a few years back that about 19.5 million
people per year get sick from drinking tap water from municipal
water supplies in the U.S.
Now, some of those people get really sick. There are deaths
and some of them get over the illness. But if you're elderly,
if you have an immune system problem, if you're on
chemotherapy, they are very real, very serious health risks.
And that is just from the microbiological risks. We are not
talking about lead. We are not talking about some of the
carcinogens and the other contaminants.
I will say that the U.S. has made enormous strides in the
last hundred years. Our water is a heck of a lot safer than it
was before World War I.
But, unfortunately, we haven't made the kind of progress we
need and we haven't been investing to keep our water
infrastructure up.
I think we are sort of like ostriches with our head in the
sand. We don't want to think about this problem. It's yet
another problem to worry about.
But this s the one infrastructure issue that touches every
American and their--and their health every single day. We take
a shower in the morning. Do we give it a second thought what's
in that water?
We drink it. We use it for our cooking. We use it for
making our coffee in the morning. What's in that water? We need
to really be thinking about this and the deferred maintenance
that we continue to see across the country, unfortunately,
because of resource constraints is a very real problem that is
affecting communities all over the U.S.
And this has real implications. I was recently in Flint,
Michigan, where we are representing the citizens and I know you
heard from Melissa Mays about a month ago. She's one of the
citizens in Flint, and we visited with Melissa.
We visited with other people in the community and you can
imagine what it is like. What if you didn't feel like you could
bathe your kids in the water?
What if you felt like the water coming out of your tap was
unsafe and that you were being told for a long time that it was
perfectly safe--don't worry about it--and then it comes out
that it wasn't safe and you find out your kids are lead
poisoned? How does that make you feel?
It certainly erodes your confidence in government. It also
erodes your confidence in water systems and I will say that a
lot of people in Flint that we are working with I don't they
are ever going to feel confident about their water and I am
very worried that as this problem escalates across the country
we are going to see more and more of those kinds of situations
where people are not confident in the water that is coming out
of their tap. That's a very real risk.
Another example that I cite in my testimony is East
Chicago, Indiana. We just filed a petition similar to the
petition we filed in Flint months before it became a big issue
in Flint.
We recently filed a petition for East Chicago, Indiana.
They've got serious lead contamination problems in their
drinking water as well as in their soil. I cite a woman named
Crystal that is one of the people that is affected by this.
She's got two kids under the age of 5 who are lead poisoned.
What's going to happen to that community? How are we going
to restore confidence in the water supply in East Chicago and a
lot of other communities across the country?
So where do these problems come from? Well, certainly,
first of all, there is a lack of investment in our
infrastructure. There has been for decades. I don't think this
is a partisan issue. It's something where we haven't been
putting the money we need to put into it and unless we take
some action we have got a really serious problem.
Secondly, we have had weak enforcement. We have
deteriorating lead pipes in a lot of communities, a lack of
source water protection, and I have to mention that the budget
cuts that were announced last night I would call it a bloodbath
budget.
We are seeing huge cuts, although the state revolving fund
is protected huge cuts in Superfund, huge cuts in enforcement,
huge cuts in Great Lakes, Chesapeake Bay program, the water
programs.
We are very concerned that the effect of this is going to
be more problems, more health risks and it is not just EPA. I
noticed also that U.S. Department of Agriculture's entire
program for rural drinking water and sewers is zeroed out--
almost $500 million zeroed out.
The HUD programs, a lot of which pay for drinking water and
sewer----
Mr. Shimkus. I am being very kind.
Mr. E. Olson. That's a serious problem. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Erik D. Olson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much. I think we were getting
your point. I would just add that since you mentioned the
budget it includes $2.3 billion for the State Revolving Funds,
a $4 million increase over the 2017 annualized level, the
budget also provides $20 million for Water Infrastructure
Finance Innovation program equal to the funding provided in
2017.
So we will get to those points and we will have those
debates. But let me now just recognize myself for 5 minutes for
opening questions.
And before I do that, Mr. DiLoreto, I was in Portland with
Congressman Schrader two weekends ago and we were--all the cool
things that this committee gets to do we were observing the
Willamette Superfund site.
So I was just interested, does the water systems there use
the Willamette or they--they've got retaining ponds from the
mountains or how do they----
Mr. DiLoreto. The water system in Portland comes from the
Bull Run. It was originated in 1895 under a grant by President
Harrison and so it is up in the Mount Hood Forest. It has no
human activities, no farmland activities. It's completely
protected.
But it used to be the Willamette River in the 1870s and 80s
and, of course, it wasn't treated and people got sick. The joke
is that the governor at the time, after they did Bull Run,
said, ``I am not drinking any water that I can't see,'' and so
he objected to it. But the Bull Run is their source, not the--
--
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, it is interesting and I would encourage
my colleagues--that is another issue I really look forward to
working with in a bipartisan manner to start trying to bring
some closure and movement on Superfund sites. So it was a great
trip.
Mr. Kropelnicki, you have mentioned the problem of
fragmentation in the nation's water industry. What
recommendations can you give to this committee to address that
problem you've identified?
Mr. Kropelnicki. Sure. There are approximately 52,000 to
54,000 small rural water systems out there and just compare
that to what you have on the electric and gas side.
You have 4,000 electric producers in the U.S. You have
1,600 natural gas producers in the U.S. and so enforcement with
numbers of that size become very, very complicated.
Mr. Shimkus. It's very hard. I represent rural America and
actually USDA rural water grant program has been very helpful.
But you really have to talk to the local communities who are so
small that they really can't sustain their own water
infrastructure and you have to really lovingly encourage them
to get into a regional system and I think that is what you're
addressing, right?
Mr. Kropelnicki. Yes, absolutely, Chairman. One of the
things we just did in the state of California is we have
consolidated a couple districts where we took rural systems
where you have a small number of people, where you have complex
water supply issues and we merged them with larger districts.
So essentially you spread that marginal cost over a larger
base and the end result for the customers in the smaller
district is a significant reduction in the water bill and our
ability to go in and make and continue to make the capital
improvements to keep them into compliance.
Mr. Shimkus. Staying with you, what is one obstacle in the
water industry the federal government could remove that would
draw in more private engagement and investment into industry?
Mr. Kropelnicki. Mr. Chairman, that is a great question. I
mentioned the safe harbor provision. One of the problems being
a private water company or an investor in a water company is
when we fall out of compliance the fines we get are amazingly
substantial, whether it is from the state health department, a
local or regional water board or EPA.
So we are held to a very, very high standard and I am very
proud of the record. NAWC members have nearly a flawless record
at compliance with water quality standards.
However, when we take over a system that is challenged and
out of compliance, we run the risk of getting fined right away.
And so having a safe harbor provision or an amnesty period
that allows us to ramp that system up to compliance would
certainly go a long way in terms of incentivizing private water
to come in and take over smaller systems.
Mr. Shimkus. And I am sure this will be asked by my
colleagues as we start talking about the Water Infrastructure
Finance Innovation Act, which you've all testified about, and
the Safe Drinking Water Act and how they may interact or how
they may help or harm each other.
So if we just go through the whole panel--should the Safe
Drinking Water State Revolving Fund and the Water
Infrastructure Finance Innovation Act--I hate acronyms so that
is why--loan program not just coexist but also complement each
other?
And let's just go Mr. Ellingboe and then we will just go
down real quickly.
Mr. Ellingboe. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and members of the
committee.
Yes, I think having them complement each other would
provide additional resources needed in order to be able to
sustain this infrastructure and I think that is really
important, given the need across the country. And so both
programs are important.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Donahue.
Mr. Donahue. They do complement each other, Mr. Chairman.
The main differences from our perspective----
Mr. Shimkus. Someone might have--I think if you can turn
your mic off once you're done.
Mr. Donahue. The main differences between SRF and WIFIA--
sorry about the acronyms but WIFIA is designed to fund projects
that are typically greater than $20 million where SRF is
substantially less than that.
And historically, when a large project needed low interest
funding or desired low interest funding they might have to
split that project into smaller pieces in order for it to fit
into an SRF program, and that took away resources for the
smaller projects.
So low interest funding for large and small projects in the
manner of SRF programs and WIFIA is a vital portion of our plan
to move forward on infrastructure.
The only other thing I would add is that with the larger
projects through WIFIA the repayment opportunities for
communities are up to 35 years where typically in the SRF
program you're somewhere closer to 20.
Mr. Shimkus. Thanks, and because of my colleagues and out
of respect for them, we will just stop there. I am sure they
will have questions and I'll turn to the ranking member, Mr.
Tonko, for 5 minutes for his questions.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the panelists
again, thank you and thank you for reinforcing and
strengthening the message of investment.
Many of you discussed the needs estimates for the next few
decades. Is it fair to say that there is agreement on this
panel about the scale of need in this country?
We can debate the precise remedy to meet that need--how
much should come through the SRF, how much through tax-exempt
bonds, how much through increased water rates and local
government spending, et cetera.
But does everyone agree that it is going to take more
federal dollars to make any serious effort to bring down the
national need if we that across the board? Need for new
additional federal dollars?
Mr. Ellingboe. Thank you, Ranking Member Tonko and members
of the committee. Yes, we do need additional federal dollars.
Mr. Tonko. OK. If I could just get a yes or no because I am
on limited time here. So Mr. Donahue.
Mr. Donahue. Yes.
Mr. Chow. Yes.
Mr. DiLoreto. Yes.
Mr. Kropelnicki. Yes.
Mr. E. Olson. Limited, yes.
Mr. Tonko. OK. And Mr. Donahue, AWWA represents all types
of water systems. Can you discuss the importance of the
drinking water SRF for small and disadvantaged systems that may
not have the credit rating, the ratepayer base or capacity to
fix their systems or bring them into compliance with the law?
Mr. Donahue. Thank you. That's a great question. Small
systems in particular--and I have experience in that regard
where I've used SRF program money for a number of capital
financing projects--the main advantage to smaller systems using
SRF is the cost of money is much less.
They have to go through higher hoops to get that money so
we are hoping that we can make that process a little bit more
efficient for the--especially for the smaller systems who have
fewer technical staff to help them. I think that would be
advantageous.
I also think that using SRF money for smaller systems who
have a little bit of a tough time with their credit rating,
normally the conventional bond market is very good at
supporting credit ratings and municipalities that are AA or AAA
rated and some of those smaller systems that may not
necessarily have such a high credit limit or credit rating
would benefit from a little bit of an easier process through
SRF.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And there are obvious problems when
dealing with so many pipes at the end of their useful lives.
In my district alone there are pipes that go back to
Rutherford B. Hayes, if we are going to cite administrations.
Water main breaks disrupt service and the local economy. We saw
some of those coming at the worst weather moments of the year,
the coldest weather.
They also make the finances of these systems even more
difficult. Mr. DiLoreto or any of our other witnesses, can you
compare the cost of doing emergency repairs with planned
replacement and how much more expensive is it to react? I know
that a number of engineers have recommended or suggested it is
10 times more expensive at times to do these after they break
than to have some sort of mechanism that pinpoints weakness.
So Mr. DiLoreto.
Mr. DiLoreto. Well, I don't have an exact number. That
sounds approximate. You're absolutely right. If we can do a
maintenance program where we schedule it out, particularly
using asset management, I know a number of colleagues here are
introducing that into their water systems.
We get all the data from all our water pipes we can then do
a modeling that says here's where we ought to be at certain
times so that we can avoid the break. The cost is important.
More importantly is your business shuts down. People have to
get sent home. You lose wages, and that is the real effect you
have on the customers and people.
Mr. Tonko. Anyone else on that issue?
OK. Oh, we do? Oh, Mr. Chow. I am sorry.
Mr. Chow. So I will comment on that. So running a city, a
public works department, we often encounter emergencies rather
than what we call the preventive maintenance work, and I would
say the emergency calls is a heck of a lot more than if we
program that out and go through a normal procurement process
where we bid it and we certainly couldn't get a much better
favorable pricing compared to emergency calls.
Mr. Tonko. Yes. Thank you.
The problem is that many systems don't have the necessary
capital asset management practices to be proactive when
operating on shoestring budgets.
Therefore, a lot of that maintenance is reactive, which
ends up costing local government and ratepayers more.
Mr. Donahue, would you say that is a fair characterization
for some of your AWWA members?
Mr. Donahue. Absolutely, sir.
Mr. Tonko. And the core mission of this statute is to
protect public health. So Mr. Olson, I want to ask what it
means for our country to achieve success with the safe drinking
water law that talked about the lifelong impacts and I'd like
to hear some of your assessments in that regard.
Mr. E. Olson. Well, I would say that both on the
microbiological side I mentioned that there are over 19 million
people that get sick a year. Addressing these problems could
reduce that.
In addition, the lead contamination problem we did a report
recently that found very widespread contamination with lead
across the country, something in the neighborhood of 4 million
served by water systems that exceeded the lead action level,
for example, and there are plenty of other contaminants out
there.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time.
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Olson,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. P. Olson. I thank the chair for calling this very
important hearing.
Welcome to our witnesses, and a special welcome to you, Mr.
Olson. You are one of the few, the proud, the rare Olson with
two Os, not O-L-S-E-N. So get a welcome.
Contaminated water has had national focus because of the
tragedy that happened in Flint, Michigan. That was a failure of
infrastructure. Lead leached out of the pipes and got in
people's drinking water.
It was in the water they drank, they bathed in, they
prepared food with, and only years will tell us the damage that
is been done to bodies with that lead exposure. It will take a
long time.
But infrastructure doesn't just fail over years. It can
happen overnight in a flash. It happened in Corpus Christi,
Texas, the week before Christmas this past year.
They lost all their drinking water for 3 \1/2\ days because
they had a spill. A chemical from an asphalt plant leaked into
their water.
Corpus Christi has a special place in my heart. I got my
first hour flight time at Corpus Christi Naval Air Station. The
first one was 1400 hours. I got my wings of gold there--a naval
aviator. I know that town like the back of my hand.
They have 320,000 residents. Flint had about 100,000. So
three times bigger than Flint. The local grocery stores were
swarmed buying bottles of water. Schools were shut down for the
better part of a week.
The mayor resigned after 37 days in office, just over one
month. He beat a long-term mayor on the issue of water. During
her reign, they had boiled water alerts three times in the last
few years.
Against that background, I'd like to open my questions and
talk about my home, Fort Bend County, Texas 22. It's about two-
thirds suburban and one-third rural.
It is exploding with growth. When a school opens, it is
overcrowded on day one. They have trailers come in. That puts a
huge burden on infrastructure and water.
If you drive away from a house one mile, go on University
Avenue, there is these big blue pipes probably 3 feet in
diameter--water pipes, to try to get ahead of the growth we
have to have.
My first question is for you Mr. Chow. How with our
existing resources can we help growing committees like Fort
Bend County and Brazoria County and Harris County manage that
growth and serve new customers in a cost-effective way with
clean reliable drinking water?
Mr. Chow. Yes. Any cities undergoing growth are going to be
facing the challenges, first of all, with the infrastructure in
the current state it is and you're talking about expansion and
that is the reason why you got these above ground pipes trying
to deliver the water the best they can.
What I'll call the planning in terms of the growth of the
city or the township and so on, all that, the planning exercise
is a lot more important in terms of forecasting, projecting the
population growth and that is where it really comes down to
sound asset management that we mentioned earlier.
Only through sound asset management you can project and
from projection you can be one step ahead in terms of have the
infrastructure in place in advance of the growth coming to your
front door. I mean, that is something that you just have to
anticipate through----
Mr. P. Olson. Mr. Donahue, your comments on that issue,
sir.
Mr. Donahue. Certainly asset management is a key factor and
when you're trying to balance growth with failing
infrastructure that you might already have it is a very
challenging process for water managers to try to deal with.
One of the things that AWWA is supporting is allowing the
SRF program to be used for growth related issues. Right now it
is limited only to reinvesting in the existing infrastructure
and primarily those communities who have experienced some type
of a compliance issue and being able to expand those programs
to allow for growth to accommodate some of those needs.
And I've had experiences with schools as well that are
bursting at the seams in trailers in the playground. So it is a
very challenging process to have.
Mr. P. Olson. Sounds like a job for Congress. I yield back.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman's time is expired.
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. First, I want to thank the chairman and the
ranking member for having this hearing.
Mr. Shimkus. You're welcome.
Mr. McNerney. It's a good time. And I want to thank the
panelists. All your testimony was very good and you came in
here so I really appreciate that.
My first question goes to all of you. A simple yes or no
would be appreciated.
Do you believe that the State Revolving Fund increases are
needed and we need to enhance the ability of cities to get
municipal bonds done for this project?
Mr. Donahue. Yes.
Mr. McNerney. Starting with Mr. Ellingboe.
Mr. Ellingboe. Yes.
Mr. Chow. Yes, sir.
Mr. DiLoreto. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kropelnicki. Absolutely.
Mr. E. Olson. Yes, sir.
Mr. McNerney. Mr. Chairman, I think we have unanimity here.
Mr. Shimkus. Amazing.
Mr. McNerney. Mr. DiLoreto, you indicated improvements in
water conservation. How can we continue to improve in that--in
that way?
Mr. DiLoreto. Well, the fact of the matter is we kind of
reached a point now, if you look at the replacement of fixtures
in your homes, most of them have been turned down now so we
have reached that point where we've got low flow toilets, low
flush showers.
We have reached that point now where we have probably
reached. There may be some little things we can do. Now we have
got to move on to encouraging people in outdoor water
conservation, as your state is well aware of--the kinds of
materials we plant for our residence to make them natural to
the area that we live in.
Mr. McNerney. So there is more room that can be--thank you.
Also, you mentioned leakage. Could you elaborate a little
bit on the technology detecting leaks? Are you the right one to
ask?
Mr. Donahue. Water loss control is a significant part of
the municipal utilities action plan. There are a variety of
options. Acoustical leak detection is available and it is
traditional and it has been around for probably a good 15 years
or so and it is very accurate.
They can come out and pinpoint a leak. But there is also
new technology that I am just becoming aware of where there are
companies that can view via satellite your geographical region
and have some level of accuracy in the determination of where
leaks might be so that it focuses your energy and your money in
going in to find those leaks. So I am encouraged by the
technology.
Mr. McNerney. So we can invest more in developing that
technology?
Mr. Donahue. Absolutely.
Mr. McNerney. I will bite on your cybersecurity remarks.
Could you elaborate on that a little bit?
Mr. Donahue. Certainly. Cybersecurity is a growing concern
for municipal agencies. I can tell you, as an example in my own
town we were attacked and our utility billing system was frozen
out by a cyberthreat from outside the country.
We had to pay a ransom basically to get our computer system
back. So one of the things that AWWA promotes is working not
only with agencies that develop those computer tools for
utilities.
But working with the agencies that developed the software
programs that prevent those threats from coming in I think a
tremendous amount of investment is needed in that regard.
Mr. McNerney. That's horrifying that you would be ransomed.
Mr. Donahue. Well, we were just glad we could buy it back.
Mr. McNerney. Wow. Could you elaborate, Mr. Donahue, on
some of the way the federal money is leveraged?
Mr. Donahue. Oh, sure. So one of the things that has been
spoken about quite a bit here this morning is the SRF programs
and WIFIA as a new financing tool.
And for every one dollar that is invested in the WIFIA
program or is put in the president's budget or in the Congress
budget you could get $60 in loans for those utilities.
So using low-interest money from the treasury and being
able to leverage that is something that will be very valuable
to utilities going forward as we continue with our
infrastructure investment.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Olson, could you talk a little bit about the weak
enforcement problem?
Mr. E. Olson. Sure. We have been concerned about this for
some time and, frankly, the budget cuts are going to make it
worse. The problem is that there are literally tens of
thousands of violations every year of the Drinking Water Act
and a lot of those are not major violations but there are a lot
of health standard violations, literally thousands of health
standard violations ranging from lead to microbiological.
And unfortunately a lot of those are never enforced
against. There is no formal enforcement. We found that 3
percent of the violations actually faced any penalties.
And we are not saying that every single violation requires
a penalty or something like that. But what we do need is a cop
on the beat, a clear signal that if there is a violation that
there will be consequences, especially if it is an ongoing
serious one and EPA's own data shows that even the highest
priority violations they are not getting around to enforcing
nor are the states in many, many cases.
Mr. McNerney. Simple yes or no: do you think it is a matter
of over regulation?
Mr. Donahue. I think it is a matter of under regulation and
under enforcement.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time.
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from West Virginia for 5
minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and DiLoreto.
I was there speaking--I am a fellow of the American Society
of Civil Engineers. Fifty years now I've been a member and----
Mr. Shimkus. How long? Can you say that again? How long?
Mr. McKinley. That's 50 years.
But anyway, having said all that, I am fascinated with a
lot of this presentation and you all have done a great job on
that.
But I get into some other issues that I want to follow back
up with the SRF program has been something that is been, you
know, much dear to me and I know a few years ago, about three
years ago the administration slashed that by half. They had to
transfer that money to educational processes rather than--so I
am glad we were able to get that restored.
But the AGC is still putting out in its literature that
Congress is still cutting back on the money to the SRF. So my
question in part is if we can restore it and, Mr. Chow, I
particularly like you saying double the amount of money goes to
SRF.
You don't get objection from me on that. But my concern I
would have and voiced over the years has been how do we do a
better job allocating the SRF money to rural communities?
Because when I go back to my area, I hear that time and
time again it is the larger cities getting the money and
everything we have been able to do confirms that.
So what would be the steps we should take here in Congress
to put our foot down a little harder on getting this SRF money
to rural communities?
Mr. Chow. Well, certainly. The SRF fund, it's really more
focused on the smaller municipalities and I will answer it this
way--that many of these rural areas or small towns and all that
they are lacking what I call the technical assistance. So that
means, unlike Baltimore City where we have a good number of
engineers that----
Mr. McKinley. Isn't that what we did just a couple years
ago? We provided more technical assistance but we didn't
increase the budget. So all we did was put more people in the
queue to get the same amount of money.
Mr. Chow. Right. But the thing is that I think we as
utilities, as colleagues, and then I think there is a
responsibility of us, meaning utilities--large utilities
providing assistance to those smaller municipalities and
smaller communities from the technical assistance perspective
for experience, lessons learned.
I think that will go a long way. I mean, if you don't have
a project plan designed, what good is SRF? You got to get to
that stage so you can tap into that.
Mr. McKinley. Let me see how it goes. I've got a couple
other quick questions as well.
We know they've had the problem in the West and it's been
the lack of water in the West--the drought they've had for 4 to
5 years out there.
I know it's not quite your testimony that you all were
talking about but is the AWWA or the ASCE--is anyone out there
talking about ways that we could replenish the aquifers in the
West?
Is there anyone talking about that? Because I know there
have been some reports in the past and we are ready to work on
that if by putting some water lines out and just replenishing
the aquifers in the West by using the Missouri or the
Mississippi.
Mr. Kropelnicki. Yes.
Mr. McKinley. Thoughts, please.
Mr. Kropelnicki. Good question, Congressman.
A couple thoughts on that. One, we have had a lot of rain
this last year. It's been actually one of the wettest and
largest amount of snow possibly in the last four decades.
The other thing I would say to when we talk about
conservation, California's done a great job with conservation.
I know for our customers we reduced consumption 27 percent in
about a 3-month period and then we have been able to maintain
that.
The real problem in California is the fact that you have a
population of almost 40 million people and a backbone that the
state owns was put in place in the '50s and '60s when the
population was about 11 million people.
So the drought highlighted the need for more storage. Right
now in California the reservoirs so you have a lot of runoff
happening where that water is running off into the ocean.
So it's really a long-term planning scenario. I think
you've heard that theme about asset management. It's the same
thing I think with the state.
California has taken some big steps in terms of ground
water adjudication. What you----
Mr. McKinley. OK. I'd like you, if you could--again,
running out of time here--if you could get back I'd like to
know more about it because I think the idea of replenishing
aquifers could be very good----
Mr. Kropelnicki. Yes.
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. For other than California. The
less California can get to all of them--is the desalinization.
I know we just had a hearing yesterday about graphene is a
product that could very well be part of the solution in
desalinization of water to give us more of a supply. Any of
your associations dealing with the graphene as part of a
filtration process? I am seeing no, it looks like, on that.
I've got one more question. I'll put it in the record.
Thank you all very much. I appreciate it.
Mr. Shimkus. I thank my colleague. Gentleman's time has
expired.
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California. I was
looking at my list. We have got McNerney, Matsui, Peters,
Ruiz--four Californians right in a row.
So but it is Mr. Peters, and you're recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I'd like to say thanks for having the hearing today.
We have heard from witnesses about aging infrastructure, wasted
water due to leaking pipes and water main breaks, overall risks
to the quality of drinking water.
We have seen that in Flint. I had the opportunity to travel
there last year and see it up close. Near my district in San
Ysidro, California, we saw similar types of lead, copper, metal
contamination in the drinking water and a lot of concern in our
communities.
Actually, to help community water systems be better
prepared to protect drinking water from a variety of threats,
aging infrastructure, industrial activity, the effects climate
change or security threats, I introduced a bill today with some
of my colleagues on the committee, the Secure and Resilient
Water Systems Act, and that bill will direct water systems to
assess these kinds of threats with guidance from the EPA, then
establish grants to provide communities who are at risk and
develop more innovative solutions to use water more efficiently
and to support the need to keep our community safe.
Parenthetically, my own community is involved in a
aggressive recycling effort to keep water from going into the
ocean from our households.
I want to ask Mr. DiLoreto, because in all of this we think
very much about how we measure success, and you did a report
card and gave us a bad mark.
And we would like to know how do you think we should frame
our remediation plan? How do you think we should--is there some
sorts of priorities you have, measurements you have that would
tell us we are doing well and also that would help us with
accountability to our constituents?
Mr. DiLoreto. Right. Well, if you look at our report card
we come out with these eight categories that we graded in. Part
of it is funding and let's be real, the biggest area is that we
are under investing in our water system at all levels.
Mr. Peters. There seems to be a consensus about that here.
Mr. DiLoreto. So the fact is we need to invest greater, at
your level, to things that we are going to do as a nation----
Mr. Peters. Right.
Mr. DiLoreto [continuing]. That cover whether you're in
Alaska or whether you're in Florida. At our level, we need to
do things that take care of the pipe system.
If you talk to one of our colleagues that runs the water
system here, the first dollar he gets goes for water quality
and if he has any money left over he replaces the pipes.
Mr. Peters. So thinking about that from a national
standpoint, do we have sufficient information from water
testing to know where risks are that we would have to address
first?
Mr. DiLoreto. We have information from the contaminants
that we know about through the EPA program. That's how we
provide safe drinking water. Emerging contaminants continue to
occur and then we work through a way to do that.
Right now, we meet--our goal to meet the Safe Drinking
Water Act from EPA.
Mr. Peters. Do you believe that the testing part is
sufficiently funded?
Mr. DiLoreto. Well, we do that at our own agency. So I can
only speak for my own.
Mr. Peters. OK.
Mr. DiLoreto. And we believe that it was sufficiently
funded to do the testing we were required to do and then some
above and beyond that so we can ensure our customers----
Mr. Peters. When we think about under funding, we are
thinking mostly about pipes, it seems like.
Mr. DiLoreto. Well, yes, exactly. Our report card doesn't
look at the source water. It looks strictly at the physical
infrastructure. So the underfunding that we report talks about
underfunding in pipes, underfunding in any physical assets at a
water treatment plant, pumps and so forth.
Mr. Shimkus. Would my colleague, can I----
Mr. Peters. Yes, sir. I'll yield.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. DiLoreto is with the engineers. I think
some of these questions are good questions to ask the
operators--Mr. Donahue, Mr. Chow and Mr. Kropelnicki--because I
think you're onto a point. What other things need to be used,
and so I just want to throw that in there. I am sorry for
interrupting you.
Mr. Peters. Oh, no. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am thinking systemically from our perspective as a
federal government. Suppose we gave these folks and their
affiliates the money that they said they needed. I am not sure
that will be easy. That only took two seconds to say.
What would we expect to see? How would I measure in 5 years
that the systems are doing the right things with the money? I
am asking you, Mr. DiLoreto, because you're the teacher.
Mr. DiLoreto. Well, clearly, what we would say is a grade
of B means condition is good. OK. You don't see the 240,000
water main breaks a year anymore. You're going to see some.
That's inevitable.
Mr. Peters. Yes.
Mr. DiLoreto. But you're not going to see that anymore. We
start seeing our water quality and our pipe systems are both in
that good condition. Condition's good. Funding is good.
Capacity is good.
Mr. Peters. So you'd look at the number of water main
breaks, maybe miles----
Mr. DiLoreto. Or measurement.
Mr. Peters [continuing]. Miles of pipes replaced?
Mr. DiLoreto. That's right. We'd also be looking at the--we
don't make this data up in the report. We get published data.
Mr. Peters. Yes.
Mr. DiLoreto. It's from somebody else. We analyze it. We
would start seeing that number that EPA talks about going down.
We know that we fund it. You'd see reports from these agencies
that would say yes, I've got enough revenue.
Mr. Peters. How about numbers of people exposed to metal
contamination? That would would seem like a priority, too.
Mr. DiLoreto. It would be, although we don't measure that
in our report----
Mr. Peters. Oh, OK.
Mr. DiLoreto [continuing]. Because, again, we are looking
strictly at physical assets.
Mr. Peters. OK. So for me, we did a whole sewage and water
replacement thing in San Diego when I was on the city council.
We used miles of pipes. It seems to me that there has to be
some sort of accounting for contamination and as a way to
calculate where you'd start.
I won't take much more time, Mr. Chairman, but I would just
say that when I went to Flint I think the thing that amazed me
was the level of indifference to it from the Congress--I've
dealt with a lot of contamination issues and some are worse
than others but about the worst is metals and children--heavy
metals in children under six is about the worst contamination
you can have because it's so deleterious and so permanent, and
I would just suggest to my colleagues that starting with that
kind of contamination would be the place where we'd start to
focus on replacing pipes. And I thank you very much for being.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman's time has expired. Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Walberg, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the chairman and thank the panel for
being here. Mr. Ellingboe, let me ask you for your thoughts on
how we incentivize integrated asset management across roads,
drinking water, sewer, storm water management, streamline
investments and ensure proper planning investment and
maintenance over the life of infrastructure.
Mr. Ellingboe. Thank you, Mr. Chair and member, for that
question. I think one of the most critical aspects is
supporting training for water systems and for water operators
and that really is a critical part of the job.
In Minnesota where we see difficulties with asset
management it's often the smallest systems, the medium-sized
systems where water operators may have multiple duties even and
having the time and attention to be able to think about asset
management, think about what sorts of financial investments are
needed, what sorts of technical changes might be needed to
their system.
OK. At any rate, that support for operators and systems to
have the training needed to really identify and recognize what
it takes to manage their systems adequately, financially and
technically is crucial and that is where things like the set
asides have been important for providing support to training
efforts from rural water systems or associations for operators,
et cetera, and where the states can have the opportunity also
to work with operators and provide technical assistance to help
them with that. So----
Mr. Walberg. Would there be any reason to make integrated
asset management a requirement to receive funding?
Mr. Ellingboe. I think the merits--certainly, that would
not only promote it and provide interest for operators in doing
that but it would provide the states with the backing, so to
speak, to require that of the systems as they develop these
plans. And so, certainly, this asset management piece is so
important for the long-term life of the systems that that could
be part of support for seeing that done.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you.
Mr. Chow, how can we ensure transparency in rates and
system needs in order to determine investments?
Mr. Chow. Well, thank you for the question.
First of all, maybe I'll circle back and address some of
your first questions about integrated planning framework
because that sort of threads into your second question.
Mr. Walberg. You've got the mic. I'll take the answer.
Mr. Chow. Well, I think the integrated planning framework,
first of all it's understanding your assets to ensure that you
are looking at things more holistically.
You mentioned about water. You mentioned about the sewer.
You mentioned about the storm water and so on, all that.
And Baltimore is very fortunate. I am probably one of the
first that actually came up with a EPA integrated planning
framework document where we look across not only the sewer
versus storm water under the current EPA, you know, integrated
planning framework definition.
We expanded that to water as well. So you got to look at
things holistically. So when you talk about funding you got to
make sure you provide the funding to the ones that yield the
most benefits.
And, clearly, you don't have enough money to do all of it.
You have to start from somewhere and one of the things we talk
about how do we reduce the water main breaks over time is that
you can't just go out and start replacing water mains. You got
to sort of identify where is the most vulnerable piece and then
go after those.
And through those sound asset management methodology and
looking at things holistically you begin to have a good
planning framework in terms of how do you attack this so-called
infrastructure crisis that we are facing because you can't bite
on this elephant all at one time. You got to take one bit at a
time.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. Yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time.
The chair now recognizes the other gentleman from
California, Dr. Ruiz, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman.
I want to follow Mr. Peters and his concerns for the
public's health. As a physician, I understand the direct link
between our nation's drinking water quality and the health and
well-being of the people that I serve and that we all serve.
Water is a fundamental element that everyone regardless of
political party, regardless of social status needs to survive.
So improving our nation's water delivery infrastructure is
crucial to improving our nation's health.
In California, 85 percent of the community water systems
tap groundwater sources to supplement their drinking water
supply and deliver water to more than 30 million people.
But many ground water basins throughout my state and across
the country are contaminated, as we all know, by both naturally
occurring toxins like arsenic and hexavalent chromium as well
as human causes such as leaky septic systems.
The State Revolving Fund, or SRF, is a critical tool that
enables water agencies to build treatment systems or remove
aging septic systems.
In my district, the Mission Springs Water District has
utilized more than $10 million in SRF funds for its groundwater
protection project to remove more than 2,800 septic tanks and
install more than 33 miles of sewer line.
This project is critical to protecting the groundwater
supplies across the Coachella Valley and may not have been
possible without the SRF.
But not all communities even have access to treated water
systems. Families in many vulnerable and rural communities like
Mecca and Thermal, which I represent, where I grew up, rely on
private wells that can have levels of arsenic more than 10
times the national legal limit.
These families are forced to buy bottled water because they
can't drink the water from the tap and this is simply
unacceptable.
So we owe the American people more than just debate on this
critical issue. Clean drinkable water should be a priority for
every community across America because it affects everyone
regardless of your political party or politics.
So we must act to ensure our water delivery infrastructure
is not only up to date but also reaches every community in
America. In terms of the public health, the septic tanks are
above ground.
With a little rain even in the desert where I live and
represent and grow up, those septic tanks can overfill and
overrun onto the unpaved dirt area where children and the
elderly and everybody else play and walk and going to school.
So you can imagine we have a lot of under developed areas in
our nation all across rural America.
This is for Mr. Olson. You mention in your testimony that
deferred maintenance of our drinking water systems is a ticking
time bomb that threatens the public's health.
So what are the health impacts of drinking water
contaminants such as arsenic and chromium and can you elaborate
on the reduced treatment costs for people if we protect water
sources?
Mr. E. Olson. Yes. Well, there are several contaminants
that are fairly common. You mentioned two of them--arsenic and
chromium, especially chromium. Hexavalent chromium is one that
we are worried about.
Arsenic is fairly widespread. EPA reduced the standard down
to 10 parts per billion a little over a decade ago, I guess it
was.
It's widespread in California and many other communities.
The health impacts of a lot of these are cancer is one of the
risks. We are, obviously, worried about lead being a widespread
contaminant that is affecting a lot of communities. It's not
just Flint or East Chicago, Indiana. There are many other
communities that have a lead problem. And we believe that it's
really important to invest in this.
You mentioned rural communities. We are seeing very
significant proposed cuts to deal with rural community water.
For example, a $500 million cut was proposed in this budget for
the USDA rural water program.
Mr. Ruiz. So those residents in the central part of
America, in rural America, are going to feel the biggest burden
of this budget----
Mr. E. Olson. Exactly, and----
Mr. Ruiz [continuing]. In terms of their drinking water?
Mr. E. Olson. That's right, and then obviously they are
also proposing cuts in the Mexico border program to zero that
out for water. Also, the Alaska native village program, zeroing
that out and many other programs.
Mr. Ruiz. So rural communities are going to get duped once
again?
Mr. E. Olson. We are very concerned.
Mr. Ruiz. Yes.
Mr. E. Olson. Those are where the health risks often are
worse.
Mr. Ruiz. Yes. It's unbelievable but it's true and I see it
in my rural communities as well.
I got 10 seconds so I'll refrain from asking another
question and go ahead and give the mic back.
Mr. Shimkus. I thank my colleague and Chair now recognizes
the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Flores, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
gentlemen for joining us for this important hearing today.
I'd like to start with Mr. Chow. Mr. McNerney started with
a question for the entire panel where each of you said that
municipal financing tax exemptions were very important.
And so, Mr. Chow, I'd like to dig into that a little bit. A
lot of us, at least on this side of the aisle, would like to
see a comprehensive tax reform package passed this year and
what I'd like to ask you is what tax reform components are
important to drinking water infrastructure financing and why.
Mr. Chow. Well, I mean, certainly, maintaining the
municipal bonds being tax exempt is going to go a long way. I
mean, I mentioned in my testimony that our 6-year program is
about $2 billion and most often is going to be funded by bond
markets and we are going to have to go to the bond market and
borrow that money.
Now, we do get some SRF from our state. But in relatively
comparing to the overall needs in the SRF it just doesn't go
far enough.
Now, certainly, with the complement of WIFIA, it's going to
be another tool that we are exploring in terms of availability
to us on larger projects. When we talk about the 1.8 million
customers and so on all that, our projects generally are larger
in nature and the WIFIA is going to go be very helpful from
that perspective.
Mr. Flores. Thinking outside the box for a minute, We
talked about muni finance and WIFIA and SRF. Just think outside
the box for a minute. Is there anything else that would help?
Mr. Chow. Well, certainly, no one has mentioned P3, which
is public-private partnership.
Mr. Flores. I know where I am trying to go, yes.
Mr. Chow. That is an area that is a tool in our toolbox. So
in terms of financing our infrastructure, we go for state
grants.
Then we go for SRF. Now WIFIA is available to us and,
ultimately, leveraging the private dollars in terms of our
infrastructure needs because the fact that we can't continue to
raise water rates at the pace that we have been raising water
rates, particularly in Baltimore with the population 40 percent
is under so-called the national meeting household income level.
So leveraging the private dollars, negotiate terms more
perhaps more favorable in terms of length of the payback
periods, and so on and all that. Those are the out-of-the-box
sort of thinking and has to be an avenue for us.
Mr. Flores. Thank you. That's helpful.
Mr. Kropelnicki--I hope I got close on that--ASCE has
talked much about the true cost of water in past reports and we
know that water rates generally not only pay for operation and
maintenance but long-term upgrades and expansion of the water
system, or at least they are intended to do that. How do you
set your rates to cover all of those costs?
Mr. Kropelnicki. Sure. That's a very good question,
Congressman. Thank you.
We practice full cost for service rate making. So our state
regulator, the public utilities commission and our largest
operations in California does a very good job where we
basically put costs in the bucket.
So you have operating costs--things that are expenses. You
have investment costs--things that go into rate base. There is
an authorized rate of return that we are allowed to earn those
investments.
So you add those things up. Cost of service plus your
investment gives you a revenue requirement. That revenue
requirement divided by your number of units sold gives you a
price per unit.
And the state regulator regulates those things that are in
those buckets. So it allows us to forecast our costs and they
come back and then check our costs.
So all our capital is approved on a project by project
basis. They review our health results. I am very proud to say
our company for the last five years has met the primary
standards, the secondary standards and all the UCMR, which is
unrelated contaminants for the systems that we operate.
And it's all under the purview of our regulator who does a
very, very good job at climbing through our drawers and seeing
how we operate as a company.
Mr. Flores. How do your rates generally compare with others
in your area?
Mr. Kropelnicki. That's also a very good question and that
is where it gets a little more complicated, and it does for the
following reasons.
One, each water source is different and each water source
will have a different type of treatment requirement and the
price of that treatment varies dramatically.
So that'll cause variation in rates. The other thing that
causes variation in rates are things like for a investor-owned
utility we pay taxes. We don't really rely on tax-exempt
financing.
We are required, under generally-accepted accounting
practices, to fund our health and welfare plans, including our
pension. So it's really full absorption costing, wherein
municipal systems they follow a government or a GASB standard
for accounting, which is really different than ours.
So when you normalize all those things out, our rates are
very competitive. But when you don't have them normalized out,
they could sway dramatically. But it all starts with that water
source and looking at what's required for the treatment.
Mr. Flores. Thank you. Sorry I've gone over, Mr. Chairman.
I will say as a CPA, our government accounting standards leave
much to be desired.
Mr. Shimkus. Texas and California. So now we will turn to
the other Texan, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I have a lot of
questions. I won't have 5 minutes to do them all in but be glad
to submit the questions.
My first one is Mr. Olson. In your testimony you mentioned
the need to pay special attention to the needs of lower income
and disproportionately affected communities as part of your
water infrastructure rebuilding program.
I represent a district that has significant amount of
unincorporated area. The city of Houston, we try to partner
with these unincorporated areas. We have in Texas what we call
municipal utility districts and this provides water to tax
based on that.
But we also have private water companies--I know someone on
the panel represents those--who some of their rates are those
in unincorporated are extremely high.
So we try to partner with the state to pay the
infrastructure costs and then they will hook up to the city of
Houston's systems and pay the monthly bills. Could you describe
the characteristics of a disproportionately affected community?
Mr. E. Olson. Yes. It's a big issue because we are seeing
this across the country. Flint is not the only place that has
this problem. There are a lot of small towns and rural areas
that have the problem as you're suggesting in your district,
Mr. Green.
There is a definition that is in the Safe Drinking Water
Act for disadvantaged community. The states will then put a
finer gloss on that as to what it means exactly.
But, basically, if you've got a fairly low income community
that is where you want to target those resources most because
they can least afford it and as we have heard full cost
accounting for water can cause rates to go up and that is
where, I think, you want to make sure you're dealing with the
lower income folks and making sure that you're targeting
resources to them and to the infrastructure there.
Mr. Green. Well, in this case, neighborhoods that are
covered or maybe surrounded by the city of Houston and they
will not annex them because, one, it would be such a drag
because their property tax base is not near enough to pay for
the infrastructure and that is one of our--and low income,
which are throughout the country including Houston, Harris
County, it's not as bad as some of the parts of Texas where we
have colonias. People actually bought houses. There were no
septic systems, no water systems and they ended up drilling
their own wells and they become really a problem. South Texas
and even parts of east Texas does that. Is the Safe Drinking
Water Act something available for those type of communities?
Mr. E. Olson. Well, I actually mention the colonias in my
testimony. It's a serious concern in Texas and a lot of other
areas but especially acute there.
The Safe Drinking Water Act does actually have a colonias
program that needs a lot more attention, a lot more resources.
I think the cut in the rural utilities service budget of
$500 million that was just proposed is really going to hurt
efforts to try to deal with that as well the elimination of the
Mexico border program that has been proposed in the EPA budget.
Mr. Green. In your testimony you mention an idea of
creating a low income water assistance program similar to
LIHEAP, which also took a hit in the president's budget.
Can you go into greater detail on how this program would
work and do we need to do authorizing legislation to do that?
Mr. E. Olson. A quick answer is--there are a couple ways
you could do it. One is much like LIHEAP, which would be
essentially federally funded with some state matching money.
That would be a preferable way to do it. You would
certainly need federal authorization for that.
Local utilities have done this. EPA did a very interesting
review of what some of the states and localities are doing.
Some have been very progressive in dealing with these issues--
the affordability issues--and I can provide that for the record
if that would be of interest.
Mr. Green. But, again, it would be a partnership similar to
federal government, state government, even the local community
pay----
Mr. E. Olson. Exactly.
Mr. Green [continuing]. A share but pay something they can
afford.
Mr. E. Olson. That's right.
Mr. Green. Mr. DiLoreto, I want to start with does your
investment in drinking water infrastructure compare to the D?
Is it safe to say that there are more projects in need of
funding and what kinds of projects are these?
Mr. DiLoreto. Well, it's absolutely true that there are
more projects in need of funding. We look--it appears we have
about one-third of the money that is needed to make--to bring
our water system up to a grade of B.
Now, we don't look at individual projects. We are looking
at the state of the industry. But throughout the industry we
find city--the special district like I used to work for, every
one of them, having water infrastructure projects that are not
getting built with us.
Water mains being replaced and repaired, whether it's pump
stations that aren't getting repaired and replaced. We have
about a third of the money between what we are getting now in
SRF, between money we are generating as utilities to make that
happen.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for holding
these hearings.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, this hearing is making me thirsty so I
have been drinking a lot of water.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia for 5
minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank all of you
for being here. I appreciate this very much.
I have to share a personal story with you. I was a mayor of
a city way back when and I was mayor from 1996 to 2004. I
started when I was 10 years old.
But anyway, fascinating. When I was in pharmacy school I
never realized that I would know so much about water and sewer
because when you're the mayor of a growing city like I was--I
refer to this as the nuts and bolts of municipal government and
it is.
For most people, they turn on the faucet and the water
flows. They flush the toilet and the water goes away and that
is all they know.
But when you're the mayor you got to know everything about
it. In 1996, our population was 4,500. When I left in 2004, our
population was 19,000.
You can imagine the challenges that we had, and we did it--
in hindsight I think it may have been easier for us in a sense
because we had, if you will, a private-public partnership with
the developers.
We said yes, we will extend water and sewer lines and we
will go through the state revolving fund and we will get that
loan on the city but we need letters of credit from you to
cover that.
It was a win-win situation because we were able to get low
rates that they took advantage of. We were able, a
municipality, to be able to be assured we were going to get a
return on it. Otherwise, we'd call in those letters of credit.
And I was just wondering, have you tried any innovative
ways like that? I suspect it's going to be a lot different when
you're talking about repairing water and sewer lines because we
were growing and we had a different set of challenges that we
had to deal with.
But that, in some ways, I think, was advantageous to us. I
mean, that we could do. But when you've got existing
infrastructure that seems to me like it would be more
difficult.
I want to ask you, Mr. Donahue, you represent kind of a
smaller municipality. What challenges do you face there in
getting the funding that you need in order to do these kind of
projects?
Mr. Donahue. That's a very good question and thank you.
It's a rather loaded question too, I might say. As a small
utility manager, trying to keep rates so that they are
affordable to our lower income, lower socioeconomic customers
and still provide the type of resources that we need to provide
to maintain our capital is a difficult balance to try to
maintain.
Back in the day when I had extensive growth we had
developers and we would put the burden on building that capital
on the back of the developer and then they would turn that
capital over to us.
But now, in trying to reinvest and rebuild that
infrastructure, that falls solely on the backs of the
ratepayers and trying to maintain rates so that they are
manageable is a challenge.
Now, water rates are still a bargain in most areas and I
think most of us on the--on the dais here would be hard pressed
to argue against that.
But we can't leave the low income folks behind and we have
to come up with strategies that will help support them while we
are still growing our infrastructure or maintaining our
infrastructure.
Mr. Carter. OK. I've got limited time with so many
questions.
I've talked to some of the water managers, if you will, in
my district and they are telling me a lot of their costs right
there are with the unregulated contaminants, having to test for
those.
Are you all having that same experience?
Mr. Donahue. We have a groundwater system where I am from
and we test for unregulated contaminants every 2 or 3 years as
required by our state agency.
It's not a real burden for us. We manage that pretty
easily. Now, we are fortunate that we have good ground water
but if we had contamination issues then it would be a
significant cost burden for us.
Mr. Carter. I want to ask anyone who wants to jump on this
and this is--I apologize, this may be off a little off of the
beaten path. But one of the problems we have in my area is that
we draw most of our water from the Florida aquifer.
Well, we are right on the edge and we are having saltwater
intrusions so we are having to use treated surface water.
Aquifer storage and recovery--any opinions on that?
Mr. DiLoreto. The agency that I ran for 14 years uses
aquifer storage and recovery and we would take water in the
winter time and we were able to inject it into the ground there
and then we pulled it out in the summer time. So it became
another reservoir, if you will, for water in the summer time.
Mr. Carter. Any problems with it, though? It's tough to get
them to take that step to do it because you feel like they are
going to contaminate our pure system.
Mr. DiLoreto. Right. It started out that way but I am from
Oregon. So, we don't have some of those problems that you have
perhaps in other parts of the country.
Mr. Carter. Right.
Mr. DiLoreto. And so after we worked with our Department of
Environmental Quality and Health Division we were able to
actually do a pilot project that showed that it worked quite
well in----
Mr. Carter. OK. Can I have one last question real quick?
Mr. Shimkus. No.
Mr. Carter. No.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. I mean----
Mr. Carter. One last--seriously.
Mr. Shimkus. Just a statement. We have got two colleagues
that have been waiting for a long time. So why don't we just
no? You can submit it for the record.
Mr. Carter. OK. All right. I will.
Mr. Shimkus. Chair now recognizes the very patient
gentlelady from Michigan, Ms. Dingell, who I know had some
questions for 5 minutes.
Ms. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank you for
holding this hearing because as somebody who comes from
Michigan, the Flint water crisis obviously stays in everybody's
hearts and minds every single day.
And I strongly support increased investment in our drinking
water infrastructure. That should help our communities replace
lead pipes and fixtures quickly and safely.
I am actually even going to ask a question in a minute that
is unscripted, God forbid we ever go unscripted in these
hearings.
But Mr. Olson, first, let me ask you how can federal
infrastructure investments be used to protect communities from
lead?
Mr. E. Olson. Well, there are a couple of urgent needs. One
is there are about 6 to 10 million lead service lines across
the country, according to industry estimates, and we are going
to need to replace those. American Water Works Association and
others have said we need to replace those. So that is a huge
need.
There are also needs for treatment in many communities that
corrosion control treatment is not up to snuff and we need to
address that as well.
Ms. Dingell. One of the issues that we really haven't
talked about but I am really seeing in our communities, and I
want to build on the tax question of my colleague from the
Republican side, is because I had an idea that I am wondering
if it's something we should pursue.
Many homes still have lead pipes in my communities and
nobody's talking about that, and that isn't the system's
responsibility. But until we get rid of those lead pipes that
is going to continue to be a crisis and we are trying to map.
Mr. Chow, I'll ask you this. This is an unscripted question
so staff's probably having a heart attack behind me. But is
there something we should be doing to help homeowners be able
to replace these pipes as well?
Mr. Chow. Absolutely. On the public side we can have the
best water bringing to the property lines and then once it gets
into homes if they have contaminant pipes such as lead pipes
and so on and all that it's not going to be helpful in terms of
water quality.
So we have to think outside of the box. So, for example,
I'll just introduce an example that we have in Baltimore. So we
have aging infrastructure just like everybody else and we
recognize when we have aging infrastructure it's likely the
homes who are tapping into our system are equally aged.
So we are actually looking at our extended warranty
companies out there. They are looking at replacement of pipes
when there is a failure or something like that.
Low cost--in our case, we pay--our residents pay about less
than $10 for water and sewer protection on a monthly basis.
Now, that is an avenue.
But then, now, if you sign up a whole community,
recognizing there is lead pipe in there, again, these private
companies are going to have to take on the risk. So, again,
it's become a business decision they are going to have to make.
But we, on the government side, certainly can bridge that
conversation.
Ms. Dingell. And it's real. Take Flint, for example, where
there are many homes that have lead pipes and there is no money
for those homeowners to replace it.
They are walking away from their homes because they simply
can't afford to replace the pipes. So it's a community issue.
As we are talking about Flint there is also an issue of
confidence by consumers. So we just had an incident down river,
which is part of my community, where the water was brown and
smelled and a thousand other things. So you can imagine in
Michigan what any discolorization and foul smelling does to
people and confidence in their water.
And, quite frankly, the official communication was poor
that left many questions unanswered and I ended up calling the
head of Great Lakes Authority with all the mayors and saying,
this is unacceptable and what happened wasn't good enough.
Mr. Ellingboe, what are states doing to provide more and
better drinking water quality information to customers?
Mr. Ellingboe. Thank you, Congresswoman. The communication
part--I need to remember to sit back--the communication part is
really----
Ms. Dingell. I don't either. I am always in trouble.
Mr. Ellingboe [continuing]. Is really a critical part of
our job as state drinking water programs. And so----
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, why don't we do this? Just turn yours off
and use Mr. Donahue's.
Mr. Ellingboe. OK. Thank you.
Ms. Dingell. It's the mic. It's not you.
Mr. Ellingboe. All right. So thanks again. The question is
what are state drinking water programs doing to help people
understand some of the aspects or risks associated with their
drinking water.
Well, first of all, what's really critical is that we work
with our communities as they need information to provide to
their citizens.
For example, in the issue of lead, I think one of the major
aspects is helping people understand what they might be able to
do in their homes to avoid problems or provide filtration.
We need to have the resources available that are important
through the set asides from the State Revolving Fund in order
to be able to provide that technical assistance to provide
better information from the state level to have as a resource
for utilities to be able to access.
And so it's an ongoing challenge to provide effective
communications.
Ms. Dingell. And I am out of time. I would like to do more
questions for the record because I think having just
experiences there are a lot of issues.
Mr. Shimkus. You are allowed to do that, without objection.
So the chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Colorado, Ms.
DeGette, for 5 minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I am really pleased you are having this hearing and I hope
we have more like this. Several of our colleagues on both sides
of the aisle have pointed out that our constituents all just
assume that when they turn on the faucet that the water will
come out and it will be safe and that it will--and that there
won't be a problem.
And I think we all agree that you really can't have stable
communities without safe drinking water. We saw this in Flint
when the whole system collapsed, when the drinking water
collapsed.
And this committee has a long and cherished tradition of
making sure that safe drinking water is a reality for most
Americans.
And while the Safe Drinking Water Act is not perfect and we
have to update it, it really has been a tremendous success over
the years because it established national drinking water
regulations for toxic contaminants.
It funded urgent drinking water infrastructure projects in
all 50 states through the revolving fund and it set up a
framework of federal-state collaboration to protect drinking
water resources under the underground injection control
program.
So I think it's really been a success. It has been a model
for collaboration with the state and federal government, which
I think has really been helpful.
And I have got this bill called FRAC Act and what my bill
would be to ensure that when we do hydraulic fracturing, which
is a big issue in Colorado and many other states--that we also
comply with the Safe Drinking Water Act to make sure that
fracking is not contaminating our drinking water. That was, for
some reason, in the Energy Act of 2005 exempted and I think
that the Safe Drinking Water Act should cover everything.
Now, having said that, I just want to ask you folks about a
few of the elements of the Safe Drinking Water Act as we start
to think about how we are going to update and modernize it, and
most of these should involve yes or no answers.
Do you support preauthorizing the Drinking Water State
Revolving Fund, Mr. Ellingboe?
Mr. Ellingboe. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Donahue?
Mr. Donahue. Yes.
Mr. Chow. Yes.
Mr. Kropelnicki. Yes.
Mr. E. Olson. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. Thanks. Do you think that, given what we have
heard today at this hearing, do you think Congress should put
greater focus on getting low income or small water systems into
compliance?
Mr. Ellingboe. Yes.
Mr. Donahue. I agree with that as well.
Mr. Chow. I agree.
Mr. DiLoreto. Certainly.
Mr. Kropelnicki. Absolutely.
Mr. E. Olson. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. Now, do you think Congress should provide more
resources for water systems to improve resiliency and security
from threats like climate change and terrorism?
Mr. Ellingboe. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Donahue. Yes, ma'am.
Mr. Chow. Yes.
Mr. DiLoreto. Yes, it's one of our solutions.
Mr. Kropelnicki. Congresswoman, I go back to cost of
service rate making and making sure costs are fully reflected
in the rates and to the extent it's an under privileged
community that you use a rate support fund or other mechanism
to help true that up but it----
Ms. DeGette. So is that yes?
Mr. Kropelnicki. It's a conditional or a qualified yes.
Ms. DeGette. OK.
Mr. E. Olson. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. And do all of you support new financing
options to leverage federal dollars and lower interest rates?
Mr. Ellingboe. Yes.
Mr. Donahue. Yes, I do.
Mr. Chow. Absolutely.
Mr. DiLoreto. Yes.
Mr. Kropelnicki. Yes.
Mr. E. Olson. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I know I could come
up with some more provisions that we could all come to
consensus around but I really think what this shows with this
wonderful and diverse panel here is that we really can come to
consensus around changes to the law so that the EPA can issue
new and common sense standards for contaminants and we also
need to work on ways to improve compliance versus effective
enforcement.
And so with that, I really want to thank all of you. I am
cognizant that I am the last questioner so I'll yield back.
Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady yields back her time and I
appreciate her comments. I would just caution be careful not to
ask for too much.
I do think there is a lot of areas in which we can agree
and I am pretty excited. Great hearing. Appreciate your
testimony. We will be submitting some additional questions to
you. If you'd get those back we'd appreciate it.
I ask unanimous consent to the following items being
inserted into the record: a letter from the National
Groundwater Association, a statement from the mayor of
Syracuse, New York, Stephanie Miner, a letter from American
Rivers and an article from the New York Times dated December
24th, 2016 on drinking water.
Is there objection? Hearing none, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Chair?
Mr. Shimkus. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. The letter submitted by the mayor of Syracuse is
responding to some of the advice that was provided today by the
panel including making use of predictive analytics models so as
to best understand where the leaks may be, where the frequent
reoccurrences have been so as to have a better master plan, and
then sensors also that they are applying for their water
leaks--a vibration system that then identifies.
So I think they are doing innovative things in Syracuse and
it's the kind of message I think I heard here today--to be able
to use those innovative concepts to be able to stretch the
dollars required and to best manage with most efficiency as the
outcome.
So I thank you for entering it into the record.
Mr. Shimkus. Can the gentleman tell me whose congressional
district that is in?
Mr. Tonko. It is not mine.
Mr. Shimkus. It is not?
Mr. Tonko. No, it is in, I think, Mr. Katko's.
Mr. Shimkus. What a good guy.
All right. So we appreciate you all attending and I will
call the hearing adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:59 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

While last year's drinking water crisis in Flint, Michigan
drew the country's attention to one community; we all have
communities in our states that have discovered they, too, have
issues with their water supply and distribution systems. Today,
our committee begins a review of the financial needs of our
entire nation's drinking water infrastructure. Of course, we
need to learn from Flint to make sure the same mistakes are
never repeated, but it is important that we don't simply
confine our view to just a few solutions. We need to think
broadly about all the things that can impact water
affordability, reliability, and safety.
The president strongly supports making newer and larger
investments in our nation's infrastructure and I agree that we
need to protect these assets. But we must ensure wise
investments and diversified efforts make sense and make us
better prepared for our future.
It is not enough to look at the latest water needs
assessment issued by EPA--or any other group for that matter--
and conclude the simple solution is directing more federal
money at the problem. Moreover, the price of pipe or a new
treatment facility is not the only cost driver--regulations are
a significant cost and we know that poorly designed ones can
contribute to cost problems. To the extent that existing and
new regulations, as well as emerging contaminants are an issue,
we should not diminish the importance of tools like the
Drinking Water State Revolving Loan fund, which has helped many
water utilities afford compliance with federal mandates.
Obviously, these are serious issues and we must delve
beneath the surface of these matters and ask hard questions,
like where the line should be drawn between federal investment
and local responsibility, what existing practices or resources
can become used in new partnerships to solve these problems,
and where can technology be applied in ways that make our
systems smarter and not just newer.
I know these are not easy questions, but I know together we
can find the answers. I want to thank our witnesses for joining
us today and I look forward to hearing their testimony.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
