- RESPONSE AND RECOVERY TO ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS FROM THE 2017 HURRICANE SEASON

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

RESPONSE AND RECOVERY TO ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS FROM THE 2017 HURRICANE
SEASON

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 14, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-78

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
28-388 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2018

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

GREG WALDEN, Oregon

Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          GENE GREEN, Texas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     JERRY McNERNEY, California
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            PAUL TONKO, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL FLORES, Texas                   JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana             Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma           TONY CARDENAS, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       RAUL RUIZ, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York              SCOTT H. PETERS, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota           DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina

7_____

Subcommittee on Environment

JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
Chairman
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PAUL TONKO, New York
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas                    RAUL RUIZ, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          SCOTT H. PETERS, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            GENE GREEN, Texas
PETE OLSON, Texas                    DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JERRY McNERNEY, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   TONY CARDENAS, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota           DORIS O. MATSUI, California
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia        officio)
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     4
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    10

Witnesses

Peter D. Lopez, Regional Administrator, Region 2, Environmental
Protection Agency..............................................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Answers to submitted questions \1\...........................   149
Trey Glenn, Regional Administrator, Region 4, Environmental
Protection Agency..............................................    21
Prepared statement...........................................    24
Answers to submitted questions \1\
Samuel J. Coleman, Acting Regional Administrator, Region 6,
Environmental Protection Agency................................    31
Prepared statement...........................................    34
Answers to submitted questions \1\
Bryan W. Shaw, Ph.D., Chairman, Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality........................................................    39
Prepared statement...........................................    42
Mike Howe, Executive Director, Texas Section, American Water
Works Association..............................................    81
Prepared statement...........................................    83
Mark Lichtenstein, Chief Sustainability Officer and Chief of
Staff, College of Environmental Science and Forestry, State
University of New York.........................................    92
Prepared statement...........................................    94
Lyvia N. Rodriguez Del Valle, Executive Director, Corporacion Del
Proyecto ENLACE Del Cano Martin Pena...........................   123
Prepared statement...........................................   126
Trent Epperson, Assistant City Manager, City of Pearland, Texas..   134
Prepared statement...........................................   137

----------
\1\ Mr. Lopez, Mr. Glenn, and Mr. Coleman jointly answered
submitted questions.

RESPONSE AND RECOVERY TO ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS FROM THE 2017 HURRICANE
SEASON

----------

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Shimkus
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Shimkus, McKinley, Barton,
Blackburn, Olson, Johnson, Flores, Hudson, Walberg, Carter,
Walden (ex officio), Tonko, Ruiz, Peters, Green, DeGette,
Dingell, Matsui, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Ray Baum, Staff Director; Mike Bloomquist,
Deputy Staff Director; Allie Bury, Legislative Clerk, Energy
and Environment; Karen Christian, General Counsel; Jerry Couri,
Deputy Chief Counsel, Environment; Wyatt Ellertson,
Professional Staff Member, Energy and Environment; Adam Fromm,
Director of Outreach and Coalitions; Theresa Gambo, Human
Resources and Office Administrator; Jordan Haverly, Policy
Coordinator, Environment; A.T. Johnston, Senior Policy Advisor,
Energy; Mary Martin, Chief Counsel, Energy and Environment;
Alex Miller, Video Production Aide and Press Assistant; Tina
Richards, Counsel, Environment; Dan Schneider, Press Secretary;
Hamlin Wade, Special Advisor for External Affairs; Everett
Winnick, Director of Information Technology; Andy Zach, Senior
Professional Staff Member, Environment; Jeff Carroll, Minority
Staff Director; Jacqueline Cohen, Minority Senior Counsel;
Caitlin Haberman, Minority Professional Staff Member; Rick
Kessler, Minority Senior Advisor and Staff Director, Energy and
Environment; Jon Monger, Minority Counsel; Alexander Ratner,
Minority Policy Analyst; Andrew Souvall, Minority Director of
Communications, Member Services, and Outreach; Tuley Wright,
Minority Energy and Environment Policy Advisor; C.J. Young,
Minority Press Secretary; and Catherine Zander, Minority
Environment Fellow.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Shimkus. We will ask staff to close the back door,
please, and ask the committee to now come to order, and I will
recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
I want to thank all our witnesses for joining us today. We
are especially grateful for those of you who have traveled
significant distances to be with us today to share your stories
about the hurricanes that tore through our country this fall
and about the impact of those hurricanes on the environment.
We know that many of you are still in the trenches of
dealing with the response and recovery efforts, so your
willingness to take the time to be here today does not go
unnoticed.
This fall, the continental United States and some United
States territories in the Caribbean experienced severe weather
from five hurricanes, including extensive damage due to
landfall from four storms.
Hurricane Harvey impacted Texas and Louisiana; Hurricane
Irma hit Florida, Georgia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin
Islands; Hurricane Maria, again, hit Puerto Rico and the U.S.
Virgin Islands; and Tropical Storm Nate impacted Louisiana and
Mississippi.
The Energy and Commerce Committee is conducting a series of
hearings to look at the response and recovery efforts conducted
during this hurricane season so we can figure out what went
well and what we could we have done better, what we need to do
is going--and what we need to do going forward.
We are also focused on what Congress can do to assist the
impacted communities as they work to get back on their feet.
Today we are focused on the environmental impacts of these
hurricanes and the response efforts. No two hurricanes are
alike, and a storm's individual characteristics, like the
speed, intensity, and amount of precipitation, play a large
role in the extent of the storm's impact on natural resources
and the environment.
For example, as we will hear from several of our witnesses,
Hurricane Harvey may have significantly impacted several
Superfund sites in Houston because of the record rainfall and
flooding.
Likewise, in Puerto Rico, Hurricanes Irma and Maria
uncovered the intensified issues associated with aging and
inefficient energy infrastructure, contaminated sites that are
rapidly multiplying, landfills that are already overflowing,
and possibly the most contaminated drinking water supply in the
United States.
Residents across the island are still without power and
reliable source of--and a reliable source of drinking water.
Many are drinking potentially contaminated water because water
purification systems have largely failed in the wake of the
storm, and in the municipality of Dorado citizens resorted to
drinking well water from Superfund sites.
Today, we will look at the response efforts by the
Environmental Protection Agency and the States for the impacted
communities. We will consider environmental issues in the
hurricane-impacted communities such as the availability of
clean drinking water, the potential for air releases, the
impact on Superfund sites and solid and hazardous waste
disposal facilities, and risk management and emergency response
plans.
We hope to hear from the affected EPA regional
administrators about their efforts, what they accomplished,
what remains to be done, and what can be done better in the
future and how Congress can assist.
We will also hear from several private sector witnesses
from academia as well as people who are serving in the boots-
on-the ground roles in Texas and Puerto Rico, and people who
can weigh in on what needs to be done regarding the drinking
water systems in the affected communities.
Again, I thank all our witnesses for being here. I hope the
discussions will start today about the response and recovery
efforts, the National Response Framework, and about whether
statutory or other changes need to be made.
We will adjust the beginning as we continue to oversee and
assist the Federal and State governments as they carry out the
response and recovery efforts for the communities impacted by
the hurricanes.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. John Shimkus

I want to thank all our witnesses for joining us today. We
are especially grateful for those of you who traveled
significant distances to be with us today to share your stories
about the hurricanes that tore through our country this fall
and about the impact of those hurricanes on the environment. We
know that many of you are still in the trenches on dealing with
the response and recovery efforts, so your willingness to take
the time to be here today does not go unnoticed.
This fall, the continental United States and some United
States territories in the Caribbean experienced severe weather
from five hurricanes, including extensive damage due to
landfall from four storms. Hurricane Harvey impacted Texas and
Louisiana; Hurricane Irma hit Florida, Georgia, Puerto Rico,
and the U.S. Virgin Islands; Hurricane Maria again hit Puerto
Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands; and Tropical Storm Nate
impacted Louisiana and Mississippi.
The Energy and Commerce Committee is conducting a series of
hearings to look at the response and recovery efforts conducted
during this hurricane season so we can figure out what went
well, what we could we have done better, what we need to do
going forward. We are also focused on what Congress can do to
assist the impacted communities as they work to get back on
their feet.
Today we are focused on the environmental impacts of these
hurricanes and the response efforts. No two hurricanes are
alike and the storm's individual characteristics--like the
speed, intensity, and amount of precipitation--play a large
role in the extent of the storm's impact on natural resources
and the environment. For example, as we will hear from several
of our witnesses, Hurricane Harvey may have significantly
impacted several superfund sites in Houston because of the
record rainfall and flooding.
Likewise, in Puerto Rico, Hurricanes Irma and Maria
uncovered and intensified issues associated with aging and
inefficient energy infrastructure; contaminated sites that are
rapidly multiplying; landfills that are already overflowing;
and possibly the most contaminated drinking water supply in the
United States. Residents across the island are still without
power and a reliable source of drinking water. Many are
drinking potentially contaminated water because water
purification systems have largely failed in the wake of the
storm and in the municipality of Dorado citizens resorted to
drinking well water from Superfund sites.
Today, we will look at the response efforts by the
Environmental Protection Agency and the States for the impacted
communities. We will consider environmental issues in the
hurricane-impacted communities such as the availability of
clean drinking water, the potential for air releases, the
impact on superfund sites and solid and hazardous waste
disposal facilities, and risk management and emergency response
plans. We hope to hear from the affected EPA regional
administrators about their efforts--what they accomplished,
what remains to be done, and what can be done better in the
future and how Congress can assist.
We will also hear from several private-sector witnesses
from academia, as well as people who are serving in ``boots-on-
the ground'' roles in Texas and Puerto Rico, and people who can
weigh in on what needs to be done regarding the drinking water
systems in the affected communities.
Again, I thank all our witnesses for being here. I hope
that the discussions we start today--about the response and
recovery efforts, the National Response Framework, and about
whether statutory or other changes need to be made--will be
just the beginning as we continue to oversee and assist the
Federal and State governments as they carry on the response and
recovery efforts for the communities impacted by the
hurricanes.

Mr. Shimkus. And before I yield back my time, I am going to
yield 30 seconds to Marsha Blackburn.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to welcome our witnesses. So pleased that everyone
is here. There are so many different aspects to preventing,
planning for, responding to the natural disasters, as the
chairman has said, and these events are taking a toll on our
communities, also on our Nation.
And so much is involved in it--today, the environmental
aspects, but also looking at the health aspects, and we know
that they all have to work hand in hand.
I have got a piece of legislation, H.R. 1876, the Good
Samaritan Health Professionals Act, that deals with that one
component of making certain that people are cared for
appropriately.
But we thank you for being here. We want to do what is
right, we want to be helpful to the process, and we want to
make certain that citizens are cared for in these situations.
And I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentlelady yields back her time to me, and
before I turn to the ranking member I also want to mention that
we will have sitting in with us Jenniffer Gonzalez, who is the
resident commissioner of Puerto Rico. She's going to be sitting
at the dais, but per committee rule she can't ask questions,
she can't make an opening statement. But when she comes, I will
make sure I recognize her.
With that, I yield back my time and yield 5 minutes to the
ranking member, Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It is important that we are holding this hearing and I
thank you for doing that.
I was sad to hear the news that our friend, the former
ranking member of this subcommittee and the current ranking
member of our Health Subcommittee, Gene Green, will be retiring
at the end of the 115th Congress.
I know Gene was here a few moments ago. But I want to thank
him for his friendship and know that he will--and I certainly
know that he will be fighting for disaster assistance for
Houstonians for the next 13 months. So we wish him well.
And I thank all of our witnesses for being here. It is
great to have EPA witnesses join us on this very important
topic. I hope Administrator Pruitt will appear before the
subcommittee at some point in the near future as well.
I want to especially take this opportunity to welcome
Administrator Peter Lopez. Mr. Lopez and I have worked together
for many years. His former Assembly district overlapped a
portion of New York's 20th Congressional District.
Our constituents were hit hard by Hurricane Irene and
Tropical Storm Lee, and we well know that disasters don't
discriminate.
Peter, you are an outstanding public servant, and I wish
you well in your new role and it is great to have you at the
witness table today.
Mother Nature does not discriminate. She doesn't care if
you are a Republican or a Democrat, and our Government must be
ready to respond to help everyone get back on their feet.
So I hope you can take the lessons learned over the years
both in the response and recovery efforts and apply them to
assist our fellow Americans in need now.
We know the recovery effort will be long. But, sadly, in
Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands the response
effort is still underway.
Far too many Americans continue to live without electricity
or safe drinking water and that is simply unacceptable.
On today's panels we will hear about the work done in the
aftermath of Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria, to address
environmental concerns.
EPA plays an important role in disaster response by
assessing and restoring water systems and Superfund sites,
responding to chemical and oil spills, and monitoring air
quality.
I know there will be a wide variety of issues addressed
today including Superfund, chemical safety, air emissions, and
debris management.
I am particularly concerned about water systems, which we
know are often aging and in disrepair, even without the stress
of a disaster.
There are legitimate questions as to whether State
revolving fund loans are the most appropriate vehicle to get
communities back on their feet following such devastation.
In Texas and in Florida, flood waters were contaminated
with bacteria and toxins. Water included high concentrations of
E. coli as well as elevated levels of lead, arsenic, and other
heavy metals.
In Puerto Rico, we have heard stories of people drinking
from and bathing in contaminated rivers. There have been a
number of reported cases of leptospirosis.
The media even reported people using a well located--a well
located on Superfund site, which only after the fact was
determined to meet Federal drinking water standards.
These examples show the direness of the circumstances that
Americans faced following these disasters--no power, no clean
water, and driven to acts of desperation.
These hurricanes should serve as a reminder that EPA is one
of our Nation's most essential public health agencies. EPA has
important work to do as recovery for these disasters begins.
But the drastic proposed reduction to EPA's budget,
personnel, and environmental safeguards will make it harder to
fulfil its mission including supporting disaster response and
disaster recovery.
Preserving a strong EPA is critical to the health of
Americans. These storms have made that clear. A robust EPA will
make communities more resilient.
For example, today we will hear about the risks posed to
Superfund sites by disasters and the work EPA has done to
assess these sites both before and after storms.
But the best and perhaps only way to mitigate the risks to
these sites is through actual remediation. Reducing funding to
the Superfund program will not make cleanups happen any quicker
and will not make sites less vulnerable to storms.
I would also be remiss if I did not mention climate change
and the role EPA should be playing in addressing that threat.
If we continue to ignore climate change, increasingly severe
disasters will become the new normal and we can expect many
more hearings like this one in the future.
I hope we can work together to ensure EPA has the resources
necessary to support disaster response efforts and make our
communities more resilient to disasters before they occur.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses today and
yield back and, again, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back the time.
The Chair now recognizes the chairman of the full
committee, Mr. Walden, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. I thank the gentleman.
Today marks the third hearing our committee has held to
examine the response and recovery efforts for the hurricanes
that ravaged our communities along the Gulf Coast and our
island territories in the Caribbean.
And I would note for the committee in response to our
concern about the situations especially in the island
territories we will be having a congressional delegation--a
pretty high level limited seating capacity trip--to Puerto Rico
and the Virgin Islands coming up most likely early next month
to have--get a firsthand look at the situation. You will get
more information as we go along.
Hurricane response and recovery deals with human tragedy.
These storms didn't just damage property and displace
residents. They delayed dreams and fundamentally altered the
lives and fortunes of millions of Americans in ways big and
small.
While we cannot undo the damage of these storms we can work
to ensure the Federal Government is diligently doing its job to
aid recovery and not making it harder to get that job done.
Public health risks typically associated with natural
disasters including drinking water contamination and the
leeching of hazardous waste are varied and include heightened
risk of infectious disease, as you all know.
These risks can be particularly dangerous for vulnerable
populations such as individuals with immuno suppressed and the
elderly and infants, clearly.
Our job this morning is to better understand who in the
context of environmental concerns that bear on public policy is
engaging in the tough work to help speed recovery, what they
are doing or not doing to make hurricane victims lives better
and the challenges they face, when will something resembling
normalcy return and where are the resources coming from to make
recovery a reality and what private efforts can be leveraged.
So it is all the who, what, when, where, and why and how.
We also need to determine whether the Federal presence is
helping or hurting that recovery and, if so, how do we--how do
we change things that need to be changed.
Some of the areas we hope to cover today will have to go
unaddressed for now. We had hoped to have a Puerto Rico solid
waste official testify via video conference about the situation
on the ground there.
Last week, she confirmed she would testify but then,
unfortunately, power went down on the island and our ability to
communicate with her was lost.
We also hoped to hear from the Federal Emergency Management
Agency about its work leading response efforts and improving
funding for recovery activities. But they were unable to find
someone who could testify. Pretty remarkable.
We will continue working with FEMA to ensure these
questions are answered so we can feel confident in both
statutory authority and administrative practice, support
rational decision making, and promote the needs on the ground.
That said, I want to welcome our witnesses today. Thank you
for being here. Some of you have come great distances but each
of you has important lessons for our committee to learn and we
appreciate your participation.
I am confident that in the midst of all this bad news you
will provide us some stories of dedication, innovation,
gumption, acts of personal sacrifice, kindness, and courage.
These should inspire us to be equally fearless and
committed in our work ahead. And in this committee and its
broad jurisdiction we do roll up our sleeves and search for
solutions to the various challenges that present themselves
after a major disaster and we want to make sure the agencies
under our jurisdiction are well prepared, responding
appropriately, and that lives are improving as a result.
If not, we want to know about it so that we can fix it. I
expect that this will be an excellent hearing for us to
identify vulnerabilities and assess what is needed to better
prepare and respond to this and future storms and disasters.
So thank you for being here. We look forward to working
with you. I know the former chairman of the committee, the vice
chairman, has a special announcement he'd like to make now
about some of our folks in the audience who are with us today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Today marks the third hearing our committee has held to
examine the response and recovery efforts for the hurricanes
that ravaged our communities along the Gulf Coast and our
island territories in the Caribbean.
Hurricane response and recovery deals with human tragedy.
These storms didn't just damage property and displace
residents, they delayed dreams and fundamentally altered the
lives and fortunes of millions of Americans in ways both big
and small. While we cannot undo the damage of these storms, we
can work to ensure that the Federal Government is diligently
working to aid recovery and not making it harder to get the job
done.
Public health risks typically associated with natural
disasters, including drinking water contamination and the
leaching of hazardous waste, are varied and include heightened
risk of infectious disease. These risks can be particularly
dangerous for vulnerable populations such as infants,
individuals who may be immunosuppressed, and the elderly.
Our job this morning is to better understand who, in the
context of environmental concerns that bear on public health,
is engaging in the tough work to help speed recovery, what they
are doing or not doing to make hurricane victims' lives better
and the challenges they face, when will something resembling
``normalcy'' return, and where are the resources coming from to
make recovery a reality and what private efforts can be
leveraged. We also need to determine whether the Federal
presence is helping or hurting recovery and, if so, get input
on how it needs to change.
Some of the areas we hoped to cover today will have to go
unaddressed for now. We had hoped to have a Puerto Rico solid
waste official testify via video conference about the situation
on the ground there. Last week, she confirmed she would
testify, but then power went down on the island and our ability
to communicate with her was lost.
We also hoped to hear from the Federal Emergency Management
Agency about its work leading response efforts and approving
funding for recovery activities, but they were unable to find
someone who could testify. We will continue working with FEMA
to ensure these questions are answered so we can feel confident
both statutory authority and administrative practice support
rational decision making and promote the needs on the ground.
That said, I want to welcome our witnesses here today. Some
of you have come from great distances, but each of you has
important lessons that you will share with us--and we
appreciate it.
I am confident that within the midst of all the bad news,
you will provide us stories of dedication, innovation,
gumption, and acts of personal sacrifice and kindnesses. These
should inspire us to be equally fearless and committed in the
work ahead.
In this committee and its broad jurisdiction, we roll up
our sleeves and search for solutions to the various challenges
that present themselves after a major disaster. We want to make
sure that the agencies under our jurisdiction are well
prepared, responding appropriately, and lives are improving. If
not, we want to know about it so we can fix it. I expect that
this will be an excellent hearing for us to identify
vulnerabilities and assess what is needed to better prepare and
respond to this and future storms and disasters.

Mr. Walden. So with that, Mr. Chairman, I would yield to
the gentleman from Texas the remainder of my time, Mr. Barton.
Mr. Barton. Well, I thank you, Chairman Walden. Thank you,
Chairman Shimkus and Mr. Tonko, for holding this hearing.
I had the privilege way back when--have been a White House
fellow under President Reagan back in 1981 and part of 1982 and
today I have the current class of White House fellows on their
visit to the Hill.
They are in the back lefthand corner. They are 14 of the
best and brightest young Americans. They work for Cabinet
secretaries or agency heads. They are full of vim and vinegar,
and I told them they are in the best committee in the House. So
we want to welcome our White House fellows and wish them the
very best in the years ahead.
[Applause.]
I also want to welcome our two Texas witnesses, Dr. Shaw
and Mr. Sam Coleman. Mr. Coleman is the acting regional
administrator, Region 6, at EPA in Dallas, and Dr. Brian Shaw
is head of the TCEQ down in Austin, Texas. They are both good
men and good friends of mine. We welcome them to the committee.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Pallone.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Environmental impacts from this season's hurricanes have
wreaked havoc and continue to threaten public health in serious
and unacceptable ways.
The Federal Government's response to these hurricanes has
been disorganized and in the instance of both Puerto Rico and
the Virgin Islands it has been too little and too late and we
must step up our efforts.
Two weeks ago, the Subcommittee on Energy held a hearing
focused on energy infrastructure recovery efforts, which is a
central and ongoing concern, and last week we saw a major
setback in the recovery of the electric grid in Puerto Rico
when a repair transmission line failed.
And today, more than two months after Hurricane Maria, more
than half of the island is still without power and that is
adversely affecting everything from health care to access to
safe drinking water.
This lack of electricity puts lives at risk and must be
addressed. Unfortunately, at this point, it does not appear
that any agency within the Federal Government is standing up
and taking full control of this effort.
The Army Corps and FEMA say the other is in charge and that
is unacceptable. Someone needs to take the lead now.
This is also far from the only challenge facing communities
in Texas, Florida, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
First and foremost is the lack of safe drinking water. This
has been a problem in all of the areas affected by these
hurricanes and it continues to threaten lives.
The severity of these issues show the weaknesses in our
drinking water infrastructure and how important it is for our
drinking water systems to be more resilient to extreme weather
and climate change.
Drinking water infrastructure has been a priority for this
subcommittee this year and an issue that we have worked on
together, and several of the provisions included in the
committee's bipartisan drinking water bill could have helped
water systems prepare for these storms.
But I think we are learning that we need to do even more
and that we need to provide more resources to these affected
areas, and I hope that we can continue to work together in a
bipartisan manner to address the concerns we hear about today.
Superfund sites also pose serious risks when natural
disasters strike. Several of these dangerous sites were damaged
during this hurricane season and we are still struggling to
understand the health impacts of that damage.
An extreme--as extreme weather events become more frequent,
it is even more important that we clean up Superfund sites
quickly and thoroughly.
With greater funding for Superfund cleanups we might have
avoided some of the damage we have seen and, again, I hope my
Republican colleagues will join me in working to address this
issue as well.
And these hurricanes have also led to significant air
pollution with real public health impacts. In Texas, we saw an
accidental release of benzene at the Valero refinery and a
dangerous series of chemical fires at the Arkema plant.
In Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, we continue to see
dangerously high air emissions from diesel generators which
could worsen dramatically as debris management efforts being in
earnest.
And if we can't get the power turned back on soon, if we
can't get safe drinking water out to our citizens, more
Americans are going to die. This is a humanitarian crisis and
we must do everything we can to fix it.
As Congress prepares the next emergency spending bill, we
need to consider all these environmental concerns and do what
is necessary to protect human health and the public welfare.
We can and should be doing more to increase access to safe
drinking water, to secure and remediate Superfund sites, and to
limit air pollution.
So I just want to thank the witnesses who traveled here
today from Texas, Puerto Rico, from the Virgin Islands, and
from Georgia, and, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to hearing from
you. I don't know if any of our Democratic members want the
time.
If not, I will yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Environmental impacts from this
season's hurricanes have wreaked havoc and continue to threaten
public health in serious and unacceptable ways. The Federal
Government's response to these hurricanes has been disorganized
and in the instance of both Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands,
it has been, too little, too late. We must step up our efforts.
Two weeks ago, the Subcommittee on Energy held a hearing
focused on energy infrastructure recovery efforts, which is a
central and ongoing concern. Last week we saw a major setback
in the recovery of the electric grid in Puerto Rico, when a
repaired transmission line failed. And today--more than two
months since Hurricane Maria--more than half of the island is
still without power. That is adversely affecting everything
from health care to access to safe drinking water. This lack of
electricity puts lives at risk, and must be addressed.
Unfortunately, at this point it does not appear that any agency
within the Federal Government is standing up and taking full
control of this effort. The Army Corps and FEMA say the other
is in charge. That's unacceptable--someone needs to take the
lead now.
This is also far from the only challenge facing communities
in Texas, Florida, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands. First
and foremost is the lack of safe drinking water. This has been
a problem in all of the areas affected by these hurricanes, and
it continues to threaten lives. The severity of these issues
show the weaknesses in our drinking water infrastructure and
how important it is for our drinking water systems to be more
resilient to extreme weather and climate change.
Drinking water infrastructure has been a priority for this
subcommittee this year, and an issue we have worked on
together. Several of the provisions included in the committee's
bipartisan drinking water bill could have helped water systems
prepare for these storms. But I think we are learning that we
need to do even more, and that we need to provide more
resources to these affected areas. I hope we can continue to
work together in a bipartisan manner to address the concerns we
hear about today.
Superfund sites also pose serious risks when natural
disasters strike. Several of these dangerous sites were damaged
during this hurricane season, and we are still struggling to
understand the health impacts of that damage. As extreme
weather events become more frequent, it is even more important
that we clean up Superfund sites quickly and thoroughly. With
greater funding for Superfund cleanups, we might have avoided
some of the damage we have seen. Again, I hope my Republican
colleagues will join me in working to address this issue.
These hurricanes have also led to significant air pollution
with real public health impacts. In Texas, we saw an accidental
release of benzene at the Valero refinery and a dangerous
series of chemical fires at the Arkema plant. In Puerto Rico
and the Virgin Islands, we continue to see dangerously high air
emissions from diesel generators, which could worsen
dramatically as debris management efforts begin in earnest.
If we can't get the power turned back on soon, if we can't
get safe drinking water out to our citizens, more Americans are
going to die. This is a humanitarian crisis and we must do
everything we can to fix it.
As Congress prepares the next emergency spending bill, we
need to consider all of these environmental concerns and do
what is necessary to protect human health and the public
welfare. We can and should be doing more to increase access to
safe drinking water, to secure and remediate Superfund sites,
and to limit air pollution.
I want to thank the witnesses who have traveled here today
from Texas, from Puerto Rico, from the Virgin Islands, and from
Georgia. I look forward to hearing from you.

Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time.
We want to thank all our witnesses for being here today and
taking the time to testify before the subcommittee.
Today's witnesses will have an opportunity to give an
opening statement followed by a round of questions from the
Members. Of course, your full statements are going to be
submitted for the record.
Our first witness panel for today's hearing will include
Mr. Peter Lopez, regional administrator, Region 2,
Environmental Protection Agency; Mr. Trey Glenn, regional
administrator, Region 4, of the Environmental Protection
Agency; Mr. Sam Coleman, acting regional administrator, Region
6, Environmental Protection Agency; and Dr. Brian Shaw,
chairman of the Texas Department of Environmental Quality.
And with that, we will turn first to Mr. Lopez. You have 5
minutes, sir.
Welcome.

STATEMENTS OF PETER D. LOPEZ, REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR, REGION 2,
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY; TREY GLENN, REGIONAL
ADMINISTRATOR, REGION 4, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY;
SAMUEL J. COLEMAN, ACTING REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR, REGION 6,
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY; AND BRYAN W. SHAW, PH.D.,
CHAIRMAN, TEXAS COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY

STATEMENT OF PETER D. LOPEZ

Mr. Lopez. Thank you, Chairman Shimkus and Chairman Walden,
Ranking Members Tonko and Pallone, and fellow Energy and
Commerce Committee members.
I am Pete Lopez. I am the regional administrator for Region
2, which includes all of New York, New Jersey, the Virgin
Islands, and eight federally recognized Indian Nations.
It is a privilege to join you today for this important
conversation, and my testimony today, please understand, is a
snapshot of what's happening as a result of Hurricanes Irma and
Maria.
Please understand that we are very much in an emergency
response mode and that the testimony we offer today is subject
to change on a daily basis. So we are doing our best here.
Just to preface, in my years as a member of the State
legislature, I was intensely involved in a response very
similar to what's happened in the Caribbean.
So in upstate New York in 2011, we were ravaged by
Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm Lee. Mr. Tonko and I were
partners there working on this issue.
In this instance, my parents were homeless. My family was
homeless. We had eight feet of water in my village. A similar
situation with infrastructure, communications, power grids. The
socioeconomic conditions very much the same.
If you understand New York geography, northern Appalachia,
what we found--and this is a critical issue for the committee
and for the administration--is that the more disadvantaged the
community, the more painful and slow the recovery.
So I can't understate that message, and I just wanted to
bring it to the committee's conscious thought.
Recently, I had a chance to travel to Puerto Rico, and it
was with my colleague, Deputy McCabe, who is with me today, and
I was struck by the incredible destruction, and I have to tell
you that the sights, the sounds, the smells were all too
familiar.
And as with Irene and Lee, I also have family on the
islands in the Arecibo and Camuy area. The Lopez family and
Corderos are there, as well, and we are very concerned about
their safety.
The focus of the trip was not just to be on the ground but
to connect. We met with leaders. We met with leaders of the
territories and the Commonwealth, local officials, and our main
goal was to connect with them, to identify problems and issues
and really help them problem solve.
So we are very committed, and I have to say the experience
was both sobering but also galvanizing. I found that my
colleagues on the ground are very passionate about the work
they are doing and treat individuals as subjects, not objects.
We are concerned about individual families, communities, and
the integrity of the entire population.
As was noted by some of the introductory remarks, a major
challenge remains with the power grid, and here, as you can
imagine, virtually everything relies on electricity.
So whether it is pollution controls at Superfund sites,
drinking water and wastewater system operation, all of those
things are challenged.
Our response has been working with FEMA and Army Corps to
place strategically placed generators at key locations. The
challenge, of course, is that it provides an alternate power
source, but reliability in the long term is at risk here.
So they require fuel, and even the generators themselves
are subject to mechanical failure. So, as we try to run around
the island, we are challenged with the electricity issue.
I just want to say in their defense--for both FEMA and Army
Corps--their job is unprecedented, and I don't want to draw too
much of a parallel to Europe after World War II, where we talk
about the Marshall Plan and off script a little, but the
challenges on the island are unique.
So, in defense of our colleagues with FEMA and Army Corps,
their job is extraordinary.
EPA has about 325 employees and contractors on the ground
in Puerto Rico and in the Virgin Islands. We hope to have that
number increased to about 400 in December.
In your testimony, you'll see greater detail on the status
of drinking water facilities, hazardous waste facilities,
wastewater treatment, Superfund sites, hazardous debris,
comingled debris, and sunken vessels. You'll see all that in
front of you in your testimony.
Just as a quick note, we've made great progress. We still
face a number of challenges. Outside of the power, we have been
dealing with waste--medical waste that has been building up due
to logistical limitations.
Many roads are still impassable and, as you know, weather
conditions have further compromised with mudslides and
flooding. That includes area flooding, chronic flooding, as
well as destruction to other property.
So accessibility on the island is an ongoing challenge.
Humanitarian aid: We have stepped out of our comfort zone, and
where we are the first responders, we are bringing additional
humanitarian aid with our staff as we go into the mountainous
terrain.
So looking to the future, quickly, we know there are unique
challenges. The issue of backup power: We heard reference to
what do we do for the future. Having backup power and supplies
on the island is critical.
Positioning those supplies in key areas, particularly with
storms advancing, would be very helpful. And, again, we know
there are opportunities for improvement always, but we welcome
the committee's engagement and thank you for this opportunity
to be here with you.
Thank you so much, Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lopez follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman's time has expired.
And let me just for the record ask the regional
administrators to state where the headquarters is and remind
our colleagues what States they represent. We did this in the
Energy Sub, and I think that is just helpful to keep that all
in perspective.
So with that--so Mr. Lopez, what are the States and,
obviously, protectorates that you cover?
Mr. Lopez. Yes, Chairman.
So New Jersey, New York, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, and
eight recognized Indian Nations--Tribes--and we are
headquartered in Broadway, New York City--290 Broadway.
Mr. Shimkus. So let me now turn to Mr. Glenn, Region 4
administrator.

STATEMENT OF TREY GLENN

Mr. Glenn. Good morning. Mr. Chairman and esteemed members
of this committee, I am Trey Glenn, regional administrator for
EPA Region 4, which comprises eight southeastern States.
That is Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Mississippi, Tennessee,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Kentucky, and we also have
six federally recognized Tribes.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss the impacts of Hurricane Irma and EPA's response and
recovery efforts and to continue the productive discussion that
we had last month with the subcommittee.
I have been on the job a little over two months now and I
can honestly say that I am in awe of the caliber and expertise
and dedication of the regional staff.
These environmental professionals work each day to meet
EPA's mission of protecting human health and the environment
and this commitment was demonstrated consistently throughout
the EPA's response to the devastating hurricanes we experienced
this past season.
The 2017 hurricane season was indeed unprecedented in the
number and intensity of major storms that impacted the United
States and the U.S. territories. The damage from these
hurricanes is still being assessed. The recovery will continue
for the foreseeable future.
EPA Region 4 is fully engaged in a number of response and
recovery activities and we are working in close coordination
with our Federal, State, local, and Tribal partners as well as
businesses and local communities.
The core of our emergency response program in Region 4
consists of 28 on-the-scene coordinators and 57 additional
staff within a response support corps.
Prior to landfall of these storms, I personally reached out
to the environmental directors of the four States that were in
the potential path of this storm to inform them of Region 4's
ability to assist if needed.
We also reached out to our Tribal partners that might be
impacted by the storm, and Florida was the only State that
requested EPA assistance relative to Hurricane Irma.
We deployed our Region 4 on-scene coordinator to provide
direct coordination and planning support to the State. We also
provided a liaison to the FEMA regional response coordination
center and deployed EPA regional senior leaders to south
Florida and myself to Tallahassee.
We worked closely with EPA headquarters to issue fuel
waivers and no-action assurances to assist in not only the
preparation but also the response activities for these great
storms.
We positioned 12 field hazard assessment teams for
deployment when and where needed. These teams were deployed at
Florida's request to provide oil and hazardous substance
response support. We further provided support to the State for
orphan container assessment and recovery, vessel pollution
response and mitigation, and debris management technical
support.
Region 4 also assisted with water and wastewater system
technical support. We coordinated with the State to monitor the
status of more than 1,600 community drinking water systems and
over 2,000 wastewater systems.
Concurrently, Florida also requested assistance in
contacting small noncommunity drinking water systems such as
schools and restaurants and the water division completed over
1,200 call-down assessments of those facilities.
Our hazardous assessment team performed field assessments
at more than 200 chemical and oil storage facilities identified
as priorities.
We conducted reconnaissance for pollution incidents and
orphan containers and there were no significant storm-related
hazardous substance or oil pollution incidents in Region 4.
We also assisted with orphan container and vessel recovery
in the Florida Keys and deployed personnel to provide support
to the State and assessment of disaster debris management
sites.
Our operation in the Florida Keys continues as we speak. We
have collected more than 700 orphan containers that are stored
in a secure staging area for waste characterization and
recycling or disposal.
Our EPA team has recovered oil and hazardous materials for
more than 65 sunken or grounded vessels and moved these craft
to land-based staging areas where they were transferred to the
custody of the Florida Fish & Wildlife Commission.
Prior to landfall, we assessed vulnerabilities at all
Superfund sites in Florida. We also deployed six teams to
conduct boots-on-the-ground assessments of all national
priority list sites and as a further measure we also deployed
teams to assess these NPL sites in Alabama, Georgia, and South
Carolina, and all we found is that sites experienced very
little impact from Hurricane Irma.
Postlandfall, we worked with our State partners to
ascertain the status of oil storage facilities required to
maintain facility response plans as well as chemical facilities
required to maintain risk management plans.
Overall, there were very minimal reports of oil and
hazardous substance spills that could be attributed to the
storm and only one of the RMP facilities contacted reported a
hazardous substance release, the source of which was very
quickly mitigated.
Moving forward, we continue to meet mission assignments
under the response phase and have initiated recovery with FEMA
and other Federal partners under the national disaster recovery
framework, and under this framework EPA supports Federal
partners primarily on community planning and capacity building,
infrastructure systems and recovery and natural and cultural
resources.
We are excited to have the opportunity to work with our
Federal, State, Tribal, and local partners on this very
innovative initiative.
Again, I thank you for the opportunity to be here and share
with you what I consider to be a great example of cooperative
federalism to assure and restore public safety and recovery
from disaster.
I look forward to answering your questions that you have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Glenn follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Sam Coleman, acting regional
administrator of Region 6.
Sir, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF SAMUEL J. COLEMAN

Mr. Coleman. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and fellow
committee members. I am Sam Coleman, acting regional
administrator for EPA Region 6, which covers Texas, New Mexico,
Oklahoma, Arkansas, Louisiana, and their 66 federally
recognized Tribes. We are headquartered in Dallas, Texas, in
downtown.
Thank you for the privilege of joining you here today for
this very important conversation. I am here to speak directly
about EPA's response to the devastating impacts of Hurricane
Harvey in Region 6 and our associated response activities.
As we have seen in the past three months, every disaster
presents unique challenges. Hurricane Harvey hit Corpus Christi
as a category four hurricane, then lingered over the Texas Gulf
Coast, dropping more than 50 inches of rain in Harris and the
surrounding counties, and this impacted over 7 million people.
EPA worked with Texas and local officials to assess more
than 2,200 drinking water systems and more the 1,700 wastewater
systems.
We retrieved over 950 loose containers and, according to
FEMA, we worked with the State to make sure that over 20
million cubic yards so far of debris has been properly disposed
of.
At one point, the Texas Commissioner of Environmental
Quality had over 500 people working on the response and EPA had
over 250 people assisting the State in those response
activities.
One of the most noteworthy aspects of the response to
Hurricane Harvey was the positive and collaborative
relationship between EPA and the State of Texas.
Because we worked very closely with the State agencies and
the Governor's office, our collective strength of our efforts
were greater than the sum.
By augmenting State resources where needed and providing
some specialized monitoring capabilities, together we were able
to address many challenges prevented by Hurricane Harvey in a
timely manner.
After my 29 years of working at EPA and experiencing events
following Hurricane Katrina and the Deepwater Horizon oil
spill, I have learned a few key lessons regarding the response
activities to assure success.
I am going to go over a few of those. First is exercises--
our Federal agency's plan for such catastrophic events by
conducting exercises to prepare. It is very apparent that these
practices lead us to discover our weaknesses and to have time
to correct those efficiencies before the real emergency occurs.
It is difficult to prepare for such an event as devastating
as Hurricane Harvey. However, the State of Texas was as well
prepared as I've seen and integrations of our organizations was
exceptional.
Second is prior coordination. Because EPA has open
communication and a longstanding cooperative relationship with
our State counterparts and other emergency response agencies,
it clears the path for success that benefits the citizens that
are impacted by a disaster.
When a storm is imminent, EPA begins the coordination
efforts before landfall. As soon as the storm passes, we have
teams that are standing by to begin the assessment of drinking
water and wastewater systems to begin evaluating the
environmental integrity of impacted businesses, to begin
investigating citizen complaints, and to respond to any
reported spills or other damaged areas as well as sharing key
information with the public.
Next is the experienced staff. An effective response
infrastructure includes experienced first responders who are
able to address unforeseen circumstances both swiftly and
effectively.
Staff development during the preplanning time is of grave
importance and should not be underestimated. Experienced
responders are the first boots on the ground and they provide
the most efficient assistance to communities.
And then, finally, is having the right equipment. EPA
employed assets during Hurricane Harvey response to assist the
responders that were not available elsewhere. EPA often
responds to reports of environmental impacts from air emissions
or from other plumes that may be dangerous to a community.
In response to these complaints and odors and fumes during
Hurricane Harvey, EPA deployed a TAGA bus. TAGA stands for the
trace atmospheric gas analyzer.
This is a mobile pollution detection vehicle that is able
to provide air quality results quickly by collecting constant
real-time data of outdoor air quality.
The TAGA bus monitored ambient air in the vicinity of
approximately 25 facilities and adjacent neighborhoods and
during that time they covered over 640 miles going back and
forth in those communities.
The results of this we were able to detect actionable
emissions to work--then to work with those affected facilities
and to work with the State to make sure that they were properly
addressed.
There was also widespread coverage of the fires at the
Arkema facility in Crosby, Texas. That facility housed volatile
chemicals that required refrigeration to prevent them from
self-igniting.
When the facility lost power, the conditions deteriorated
at the facility, which required an evacuation of the facility
and surrounding areas. Ultimately, there was a series of fires
that were spontaneous combustion from those materials stored at
the site.
EPA used the ASPECT aircraft for air sampling above the
facility and in the nearby surrounding areas. ASPECT stands for
the airborne spectral photometric environmental collection
technology.
And I know that is a mouthful but, basically, it is an
airplane that EPA rents that is packed full of EPA-owned
monitoring equipment so that we can look into the plume to
determine if there are harmful levels of chemicals or if there
is any danger either downwind or in the communities surrounding
the plant.
The ASPECT flew 28 flights over 112 hours--28 flights and
over 112 hours, covering miles of pipeline. We looked at 134
risk management facilities and 456 drinking water plants and
also 105 wastewater facilities in support of the Hurricane
Harvey response.
The data was invaluable and assessed the risk quickly in
responding appropriately to the emergency and the technology
was not available through any other parties involved.
The third asset that we used was a mobile laboratory called
PHILIS. PHILIS stands for the portable high through-put
integrated laboratory identification system.
The PHILIS lab is a mobile laboratory that we deployed in
Houston that allowed us to get 48-hour turnaround on volatile
and semi-volatile samples.
This allowed us to quickly assess the conditions at all of
the Superfund sites and also any other samples that we needed a
quick turnaround.
If EPA did not have access to these tools, our response and
the dissemination of information to the public would not have
been as informative and robust. I believe that these EPA assets
are critical to effective preparedness and response.
EPA remains activated as an agency continues to respond to
Hurricanes Maria and Irma. The agency taps resources from our
sister regions during these times of great need.
I have seen the agency continue to grow in our
capabilities, learn from each response and apply lessons
learned as we face new challenges.
We are able to make more data available to the public. For
example, we use story boards as we presented this information
to the public so that they could understand what each sample
meant and how it impacted them personally.
EPA will continue to develop more methods and improve our
responses by working with our State, local, and other Federal
agency partners.
While the response has its own unique challenges, we want
to remain flexible to address the individual needs. I am very
proud of the EPA and the other responders when called to duty
in these times of great need.
I am happy to answer any questions about the great work
we've done and look forward to continuing to serve.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Coleman follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Now, last but not least is Dr. Shaw, chairman of the Texas
Department of Environmental Quality. You have 5 minutes, sir.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF BRYAN W. SHAW

Dr. Shaw. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Shimkus,
Chairman Walden, and Ranking Member Tonko and members of the
committee. It is a pleasure to be here.
For the record, my name is Bryan Shaw. I am the chairman of
the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and I am happy to
discuss our response in recovery efforts related to Hurricane
Harvey.
First, my agency's primary mission is to protect the public
health and natural resources by ensuring that the air and water
and waste are clean and disposed of safely.
This is a critical part of what we work to is fulfilling
that mission in the aftermath of a disaster such as Hurricane
Harvey.
While we recognize the many challenges that we face and the
severity of the--of the storm that we had, the key to making
the response as successful as it was you have heard
demonstrated through the cooperative nature that we have
experienced both with our Federal allies as well as other State
and Federal agencies in responding to the hurricane.
As was mentioned by Mr. Coleman, TCEQ deployed about 500
people dedicated to the Hurricane Harvey response. The 250 or
so folks that worked from EPA to work hand in hand with us were
critical to addressing one of the major issues we face and that
is communication.
At the time that the storm rolls through it is very
challenging to have the adequate communication and get
information in a timely manner because, quite frankly, the
local elected officials aren't always as prepared for a
hurricane as we might want them to be because typically they
are spaced out far enough that this is, in most cases, their
first experience at dealing with a hurricane and when you have
one of this magnitude it becomes even more critical in having a
cooperative relationship between the State and Federal agencies
that respond.
It is critical both to providing that information as well
as reassuring those local officials where help is and help is
on the way.
This cooperation, I think, clearly demonstrates how well
State and Federal agencies can work together. We tend to work
very well with EPA in previous natural disaster response but
never better than we worked in this response and I think
considering the unprecedented nature of the severity of the
storm and, quite frankly, the fact that this storm sort of
parked over Texas and dumped rain continually, it is--if you
look at the tragic losses we had but in hindsight considering
the severity of the storm, the State fared very well, and that
is attributable to the prior planning, it is attributable to
the cooperative relationship we had amongst our different State
agencies and, quite frankly, it is attributable to the
resiliency and the good neighbors that we have in our State of
Texas that we are blessed with that come to the aid of their--
of their neighbor in time of crisis.
I think this fits very well into the Cooperative Federalism
2.0 effort that is underway and I think that is--I applaud this
committee for looking at finding ways to be able to ensure that
the State and Federal agencies are working together.
The Environmental Council of the States has a process
underway called Cooperative Federalism 2.0 which is trying to
incentivize and encourage us moving to that relationship that
was demonstrated, and so I am very much encouraged by that.
I will talk briefly because I know we were running short on
time from the standpoint of my allocated time but I want to
touch on some of the issues that are ongoing.
Obviously, debris management is one of those issues that
continues to be a challenge. This is often what I refer to as
the slow tragedy associated with an event like this.
You see some of that initially when you see the debris from
what is taken out through wind, the tornadoes associated with a
hurricane, as well as the surge--the storm surge.
But oftentimes the flood damage you don't see initially
because those houses seem to be unaffected until you start
seeing the residents return back and removing the debris from
inside of the houses, getting the drywall out, moving it to the
curbs and to the temporary sites.
And so it is critical that we move quickly to be able to
help that happen because having those materials remain indoors
leads to mold and other types of biological contamination that
can be poor for health as well as making it very difficult for
communities to rebuild.
We move it quickly to the curb but you need to move it from
there quickly because you have vector issues--mice, rats, other
things--that can be there--mosquitoes breeding. And so we want
to make sure that we have that process moving along.
And then from the temporary site getting it into a landfill
and making sure that we are providing for ultimately,
environmental and health protections become very critical.
We are working probably most of our time at this point
dealing with the ongoing tragedies and needs related to
disposing of debris, working to quickly identify the temporary
sites, ensure that we are working with those local officials
not just to make sure that all the bureaucratic I's are dotted
and T's are crossed but in making sure that we are both safe,
protective, and ensuring that we don't have issues that will
prevent them from getting reimbursement from those recovery
efforts because those communities have already been hard hit
from the loss of their tax base, their houses, and their
businesses. And so we work very diligently to ensure that moves
quickly.
So we are continuing to have success there but we will
continue to have those calls that come as judges and mayors
realize that the removal process is too slow and we work and
continue to provide resources to help them both from a
technical standpoint as well as, when we can, providing
physical labor and the expertise on the ground.
Air monitoring--we have heard some discussion from Mr.
Coleman so I won't go into a lot of detail other than to point
out that we have a plan in place, our--I call it our common
sense approach where we make sure that prior to a storm's
landfall we take down equipment that is going to likely be
damaged or destroyed in a hurricane and then very quickly bring
it back up.
That takes some time, especially when, in many cases, we
had to wait until we had power restored to an area to be able
to get air monitors in place.
We relied very heavily on our Federal partners to be able
to do sampling as we had case by case needs as well as
deploying monitors that we could bring in to assess plumes and
other issues associated with potential emissions from
facilities.
I will quickly wrap with drinking water, wastewater issues.
As was mentioned, we had a couple thousand drinking water
systems that were in the path of the storm. We still have two
of those that are inoperable. They are small systems and
arrangements have been made to allow for them to have water
brought in so those residents are getting their needs served.
But we still have 24 systems that are under boil water
notice, some of that because of damage to the system and some
of that because, frankly, they're still adjusting to the source
water changes associated with the storm.
Wastewater and sewage, we still have three of those systems
that are inoperable compared to the 40 at the height of the
process. So it does take a good bit of time.
I will close with talking about our hazmat, and we do work
cooperatively but we take the lead with regard to identifying
containers that may be washed away or moved away during the
storm.
And to date, we've had about almost 1,200 of those
containers that have been located and properly disposed of as
well as dealing with the spills associated with the storm.
So you can see that there is a broad range of issues that
have to be addressed and working cooperatively allows us the
best chance of being most responsive to our citizens.
And with that, I will thank you for the opportunity to
visit with you about this issue. We do have many resources
available on our Web site and I am happy to provide those web
links as needed. Those are very helpful both in informing the
public as well as elected officials about resources that are
available to them.
I am happy to answer questions. Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Shaw follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time is expired.
And before I start with the opening question, I want to
recognize Jenniffer Gonzalez, the Resident Commissioner from
Puerto Rico.
She's here at a good time to hear the opening statements,
but also, as I go to my first round of questioning, the first
one is going to go to Mr. Lopez.
So I recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions. Mr.
Lopez, there have been a number of press reports about people
who are without clean drinking water, drinking from a well on a
Superfund site in Dorado, Puerto Rico.
Can you explain the situation there and whether it has been
resolved?
Mr. Lopez. Certainly, Chairman, and thank you for that
question.
So, again, of course, there was a lot of attention to early
concerns of the individuals drinking from the wells. Those
reports were incorrect.
So, in essence, there has been some understandable
confusion with the way the infrastructure is designed and
operable in that area.
So the wells in question are sealed. They are not
accessible. Water has been made accessible through spigots at
those well sites that are part of the super aquifer tied to
process infrastructure.
When we first learned about the concern, our first
response, of course, was humanitarian and we brought bottled
water and had Army Corps bring water buffaloes to the sites
because the main concern was we want to protect human health
and safety, take them away from sites where we had any
question, and make sure people had potable water.
From there we engaged in immediate sampling and from the
results of the sampling we found chlorine residual from those
spigots. Certainly, wells are not prone to have chlorine in
them inherently and so our initial deduction was that that was
treated water.
We have gone forward to do additional sampling and are
doing full spectrum analysis. Thus far, our results reaffirm
and process also reaffirm that along with the Department of
Health from Puerto Rico that that is part of process water
supply. They are not from the contaminated wells.
Mr. Shimkus. Are there any other places on the island where
this issue may be an issue?
Mr. Lopez. Not to our knowledge and, again, the concern--
and just to highlight, Chairman, the concern with the Superfund
site--and this is part of the challenges--Superfund site
doesn't mean that every water source within the designated area
is in question.
What it means in this case with the Dorado site we
identified a target area--we, at EPA--just to monitor. So where
sites were known to have contamination those sites have been
locked down. Other sites we continue to test--I say we, the
Puerto Rico Department of Health--PRASA--on a regular basis to
make sure that those supplies remain potable and within Safe
Drinking Water Act thresholds.
Mr. Shimkus. Was the Puerto Rican water utility the entity
distributing water at the Dorado site?
Mr. Lopez. The Puerto Rico Well Authority--PRASA--was not
literally distributing the water. The areas in question were
fenced and signed. There are spigots there and the sites were
entered into and PRASA was not knowingly willingly
distributing.
But we--again, our main concern there was to make sure that
the water was safe and that is why we brought temporary water
until we could ascertain the status of the true supply.
Mr. Shimkus. So in your written statement, Mr. Lopez, when
you--in your written testimony you note that 20 of the 115
drinking water plants are out of--out of service. What is--what
are you doing to remedy the situation about people not having
access to potable water in Puerto Rico?
Mr. Lopez. Well, our challenge, of course, Chairman, is we
assess. So we determine where there are deficiencies, whether
it be collapse of trunk sewers, whether power be out, and then
we work with Army Corps, which is mission assigned to work with
PRASA to make the repairs.
So funding is provided through the Stafford Act to help
make necessary improvements. We continue to help provide
advisories to the population and, again, we are working with
our partners to make necessary repairs as quickly as possible.
Mr. Shimkus. Let me, in my last minute and a half, turn to
Dr. Shaw. My sister-in-law moved out of Houston right before
the storm.
But she has a lot of friends back there, and she visited
over the weekend and it raises the point about waste management
that you were referring to.
On her return, she showed a picture of her friend's house.
About 2\1/2\ to 3 feet of drywall had been ripped out. I mean,
still, the house will be--take a year probably or I don't know
how long to get it. So when we see storm damage, which we have
in tornado season, you see the initial pile of refuse on the
streets. But then over time you're going to see the refuse from
being torn out. They're probably going to be in dumpsters and
they're going to be hauled someplace.
So the question is, is there sufficient landfill capacity
with this hurricane debris?
Dr. Shaw. The short answer is yes. And you are right, part
of that process is moving from the house to the curb. Usually
there is about three passes of removing from the curb as well.
So it is sort of a cyclical process.
We looked at it very closely and initially estimates were
quite high what the debris might be.
The issue is we have enough capacity in those landfills in
the areas. The real challenges have been twofold. One, does it
reduce the length of life of that landfill, which is obvious.
The second part of that is sometimes those landfills,
because they build them out in cells, they may not have a cell
that is built out ready to receive all that debris, and so in
some cases they may have to exceed their permitted height and
we have a process whereby they can apply to make that happen on
an emergency basis.
What will happen is following the passing of the storm they
will either have to come in and remove that extra cap or they
will have to go through a permit amendment to get approval to
leave that landfill at a height that was higher than was
permitted and then they can build out another cell, if you
will, and move that waste or at least begin taking new waste.
Mr. Shimkus. I am way over my time, and I thank you for the
answer.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Tonko, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Administrator Lopez, as I mentioned earlier, the committee
has heard alarming reports of people without access to safe
drinking water in Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin
Islands, and I heard the exchange with the Chair here just
moments ago.
Let's get a little deeper into the drinking water and
wastewater system issue. Many remain inoperable. Can you help
us understand what are the sources of those problems of
inoperation?
Mr. Lopez. Much of the problem lies with damaged sewer--
excuse me, water mains. We have damaged distribution lines.
Power is a considerable issue.
We, again, are working on generators but those generators
do not always remain operable. So access is an issue. We have
had plants that, because of mudslides or rain, river action, we
have had them--access to them denied.
So at this point, 85 percent of the PRASA system users have
water and PRASA represents about 97 percent of all the water
supply to the island.
There are additional water supply sources--non-PRASA
systems, very small sources. There are very--there are about
237 independent water treatment systems throughout the
mountains.
We are working with mission assignment, with
nongovernmental operations to do work there. In some of those
cases we are, again, trying to get those systems back and
running. But power, in some case physical damage, in some case
access. We also have debris issues. In some case, intakes are
clogged with debris and that has been a challenge for some of
our operators.
Mr. Tonko. And just what percent or whatever expression we
can get from you is concerning electricity failure?
Mr. Lopez. Oh, my gosh, I have some detail. So I can go
through--I have a number. I will just run through--I have a
list. Arecibo alternate power unit, out of service. Esperanza,
alternate power service out of Muniz. We have quite a few. Most
of it is power units.
We do have waterline pipes broken. We do have some cases of
raw water supply clogged. But much of it is power, and, again,
we are using generators and other means to try to activate
those systems. Some systems were flooded, and they had to be
reassessed even before power could be fully restored.
Mr. Tonko. And you had mentioned the infrastructure
failure. What about source water contamination as an issue? Is
that----
Mr. Lopez. Of course, we are very concerned about it, and I
used a phrase Ms. Colon would understand: agua es vida--water
is life.
So whether it be water for drinking, water for bathing,
water for washing your clothes, water for any purpose, we are
all very concerned.
We have been--in terms of the contamination of water our
role has been, first, direct resources to restore water and
systems to be operable. That's the main goal.
With individual homes and families we are working with the
CDC, Puerto Rico Department of Health, and others to provide
advisories. So boiled water advisories are in effect, have been
in effect.
We are also warning people to be--to avoid using these
supplies for potable purposes. We have worked with the CDC to
provide alternate disinfection where possible--chlorine tablets
and other alternate disinfection. So we are taking----
Mr. Tonko. Oh, go ahead.
Mr. Lopez. As broadly as we can we are trying to respond.
But the challenge is we can't control individual human behavior
and people need water. So our main goal is get water to them as
quickly as we can--potable.
Mr. Tonko. Peter, you had mentioned PRASA and with those
independent systems--those beyond PRASA--are they continuing to
struggle to provide safe drinking water?
Mr. Lopez. They are. We are working with them and, again,
it is case by case. Just mind you that a number of the systems
are mountainous and access to them continues to be an issue.
So we are working on assignment to get to them. But at this
point, we had--we have assessed--bear with me a second. Just
going to pull up my notes here on non-PRASA. There are 237
independent community systems and we have assessed them all.
But getting them all operational is a challenge.
Mr. Tonko. And of those 237, which are operating?
Mr. Lopez. Let me--bear with me just a second. About 170 of
the 237 are operational.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Thank you.
And is EPA testing water quality at small water systems?
Mr. Lopez. We do. Well, the Department of Health--let me
say this--the Department of Health for Puerto Rico is the
authority. So our sampling is really not something we do as a
norm.
We did sample in the Dorado case where there were concerns
about drinking from contaminated wells and there we wanted to
do rear guard action for the Puerto Rico Department of Health.
But Puerto Rico Department of Health maintains primacy with
those--with those sites.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time.
Chair now recognizes the gentleman--the chairman of the
full committee, Mr. Walden, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walden. And I thank the chairman and I thank, again,
our witnesses for your testimony on all these issues our
citizens face.
I know, Mr. Lopez, you've talked a lot about the drinking
water and we know when the power goes off the pumps don't run
and purification doesn't work unless you get generators and all
that.
But I would like to move beyond that and ask about the
ability to clean up Superfund sites. How is that being impacted
along the way here?
Mr. Lopez. So, Chairman, the Superfund sites were
assessed--they have been assessed routinely. They were assessed
before the storm events--Irma. They were assessed after Irma.
They have been assessed after Maria.
And much of those sites really are groundwater
contamination. So they were not really moved by the storm. The
issue for the storm and where there was damage were in terms of
fencing and also pump and treat systems, which required power.
So in those cases, we worked to restore those functions.
That's what we've been working to do and the--in terms of
damage----
Mr. Walden. How----
Mr. Lopez. I am sorry, sir.
Mr. Walden. How far along are you on the Superfund site
protection?
Mr. Lopez. To my knowledge, things are locked down.
Mr. Walden. OK.
Mr. Lopez. So if we've seen additional concerns--for
example, we found an orphan container that was removed--but we
are to lock those sites down, Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Mm-hmm. All right. Is that true for the other
sites, too? I mean, are we talking about issues in Houston or
Florida? Are there any Superfund issues we need to be aware of?
Mr. Coleman. With regards to Texas, there were 34 Federal
Superfund sites in the State of Texas. We have done the
assessment of all. There was one site that we listed, the San
Jacinto Waste Pits site, that did require some additional
follow-up.
We have been working with the responsible parties. They
have plans in place to both do repairs to that site and then
there is some additional repairs on the river side of the site
where there was scouring that the PRPs are in the process of
placing some additional rock to stabilize that portion of the
site. That is ongoing.
Mr. Walden. All right.
Dr. Shaw. And I would just add I believe there are 17 State
Superfund sites, and at those we worked very closely with EPA
on both the Federal and the State and secured the sites.
All those sites we're finding there was a release
potentially from one that was a sheen that we saw on water and
that has been dealt with. So but no offsite concerns at this
point. Everything is locked down.
Mr. Walden. So can you all give us assurance then that when
it comes to the issue of Superfund sites we are not
contamination into drinking water, that these sites are secured
best they can be, that you've got this under control?
Dr. Shaw. Yes, sir.
Mr. Coleman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Glenn. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lopez. Yes, sir.
Mr. Walden. Perfect. That's good news. I think that had a
lot of us worried, including, I am sure, all of you. You know,
that is the most dangerous things we face.
Beyond that, you know, as we--as we keep hearing about the
power going on and going off in Puerto Rico and we knew they
had a bad grid to begin with, what should we be worried about
here?
What can we do to help here on that issue of power and how
much of this is really the responsibility of the grid owner and
the power provider in Puerto Rico?
Mr. Lopez. Well, Chairman, again, I think part of the
challenge is, as I mentioned in my testimony, the system itself
is old.
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Lopez. And we heard testimony from Army Corps with the
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee suggesting that
their average age of power plants are much younger than Puerto
Rico's.
So we are dealing with a system that was old and challenged
to begin with, and I think part of our goal is, one, how do we
put power back on but the long-term and----
Mr. Walden. Keep it on.
Mr. Lopez [continuing]. And for Senora Colon: ese es nombre
de mi familia tambien--my family has that name as well--how do
we make sure that it is sustainable and survivable for future
events? So that is an open question.
Mr. Walden. And from what you have seen on the ground,
again, on Puerto Rico or the Virgin Islands especially, are
there--are there enough crews? Are the various agencies
communicating well with each other?
Are there gaps in that communication we should be aware of?
It is always hard in these situations, I know, but----
Mr. Lopez. So, Chairman, we work under a command and
control function. We work with our incident commanders. There's
very close communication with FEMA, Army Corps, our other
partners.
Our regions have been providing support where we signal. We
have been very thankful to my colleagues here for their staff
support as well.
I would say that the communications are strong. The
challenge is making sure that we can get the resources when we
need them.
The other challenge which we have been working at is also
making sure that we are working with the local authorities and
respecting their process--their decision making capability, and
that is--that means in some cases we have to put things in
front of them and give them time, recognizing--and this is the
challenge for those in the situation--if you have been in a
storm event and you are under constant duress, we are rotating
crews in and out routinely----
Mr. Walden. They are there----
Mr. Lopez [continuing]. They are working under constant
duress. So part of our challenge is helping support their
decision making and give them time and support they need so
they can be at peace with mission objectives and corrective
action.
Mr. Walden. OK. Did you have something you wanted to--no?
OK.
My time has expired. Mr. Chairman, thank you all for the
great work you and your teams and the teams from all the
agencies are doing the best they can in these circumstances and
we appreciate that.
But, again, we want to know if there is a problem that you
need help on or they need help on, and I know that our resident
commissioner has been terrific at bringing us all up to speed
and keeping us up to speed.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Five years ago, Superstorm Sandy caused major damage to my
congressional district including Superfund sites and water
treatment facilities and we have seen even more of that with
the latest hurricanes.
So I would like to focus briefly on the importance of
investing and making our environmental infrastructure more
resilient.
In the aftermath of Sandy, I saw the importance of this
firsthand when the storm badly damaged the Bay Shore Regional
Sewage Authority, which treats the wastewater from a number of
the towns in my district, and the authority completed a $28
million project to rebuild the plant and make it more resilient
to future storms.
But I don't think we should have to wait for disasters to
make our infrastructure more resilient. So let me ask Mr.
Lopez, what can EPA do to help communities in Puerto Rico and
the Virgin Islands improve their drinking water and wastewater
infrastructure to make it more resilient?
Mr. Lopez. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman.
So part of the challenge is, again, part of it is the time
we are in. Under the Stafford Act, we are in response. So this
is an emergency. So it is my understanding that Stafford Act
funding means you build in kind--you replace in kind.
So the issue is, and this goes back to you as our partner
and our colleagues here, where do we signal programmatic and
funding flexibility to allow other sorts of investment.
Now, just as an example, with the nongovernmental allies
that we have had with the nonprocess sites, we have been able
to put solar systems in a few isolated incidents.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
Well, let me ask you this. Do you think that we need to
invest more Federal dollars though in environmental
infrastructure in general as part of this recovery or is it
just your concern that we are not focusing on long term?
Mr. Lopez. So I am a little bit above my pay grade,
Congressman, but bear with me. So I am going to speak from the
heart.
So, effectively, it is a function of targeting dollars--
making sure dollars are reachable and also ensuring that the
broad purposes can be served.
So, again, we have many various funding streams. It is not
generally one funding stream, like my colleague, Mr. Cochran
knows.
Mr. Pallone. OK.
Mr. Lopez. So to answer your question, I think part of our
challenge here would be to look at funding streams, look at
resources, ensure that we have maximum flexibility in their
use. Part of this----
Mr. Pallone. OK. And particularly the emphasis on looking
at long-term rather than just short-term to fix things.
All right. I am just rushing through because I wanted to
ask a question about the Superfund, too. As you know, Hurricane
Harvey damaged a lot of Superfund sites in Texas including one
site where hazardous dioxins were exposed and I think we should
be doing more to limit the impact of severe weather on
Superfund sites.
So let me ask Mr. Coleman. You only briefly mentioned
Superfund. But is it--it is a priority, I think, for a lot of
communities. Do you agree that more resources for Superfund
cleanups would mean few contaminated sites vulnerable to
extreme weather?
Mr. Coleman. So the site in Texas that you mentioned--the
San Jacinto Waste Pits site, is a site that is under EPA
oversight but there are accountable responsible parties who are
both responsible for the day to day security of the site as
well as----
Mr. Pallone. But my question is do you agree that more
resources for Superfund cleanup would mean fewer contaminated
sites vulnerable to extreme weather? You can just say yes or
no. I mean, I just want to know if you think money or resources
would make a difference.
Mr. Coleman. Well, we are working with the funds that are
appropriated to make sure that those sites that require Federal
funding are cleaned up as expeditiously as possible.
Mr. Pallone. All right. All right.
Let me go back to Mr. Lopez. We heard troubling reports out
of Puerto Rico, citizens drawing drinking water from a well on
an unsecured Superfund site. What more could EPA do to protect
public health from exposures to toxic sites after severe
weather strikes?
Mr. Lopez. So, Chairman, as I was mentioning to your
colleagues, the contamination in the groundwater was really not
affected by the storms, to our knowledge.
The issue was making sure that the mitigation methods that
were in place were functioning as intended--fencing, pump and
treat seat systems.
The--in Dorado, the wells in question were not accessible.
Power supplies had been disabled. There was no ability to pull
water from the wells. So the source of water, again, was from
the--from PRASA, from the public----
Mr. Pallone. Do you think that we could do more to
protect--could EPA do more to protect public health from
exposure to toxic sites after severe weather strikes or, again,
this is just simply fixing damage?
I mean, the concern I have is, again, what you said--that
maybe we are just simply fixing damaged fences, blocking access
to these sites. I mean, this goes back maybe to what you were
saying before. But just----
Mr. Lopez. So at those sites the wells were not accessible
of for public access, again, the groundwater contamination was
there before the storm and remains, and that is something we
continue to work on.
So our challenge is to mitigate--again, track any plumes,
for example, in the Dorado site. We are tracking a plume so we
test water supplies. We test--vigilance is really the issue
here.
We remain vigilant, and we certainly understand the
importance of making sure that we are staying within Safe
Drinking Water Act standards, keeping people under those
thresholds with their water supply.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
Mr. Lopez. So monitoring, continue testing--those are--and
then mitigation remain the tools available to us.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thanks a lot.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman's time expired.
The Chair now recognizes the vice chairman of the
subcommittee, Mr. McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you again
for having this hearing on this.
Let me skip from Region 2, 4, and 6 and move to Region 3
out of Philadelphia. There's an area that--the flooding that
had taken place the hurricanes had an impact not only in Texas
and Florida and Louisiana, along the coast, but it had a
demonstrative effect in north central West Virginia, in eastern
Ohio, northern West Virginia, western Maryland, western
Pennsylvania in the streams.
The water that--the amount of water that came down during
that period of time we washed out--our streams were full of
debris, full of items that should have been dredged, and as a
result we had water lines lost, exposed.
We had septic systems that were destroyed. We had water
pumping stations that went down because of this. So I am just
curious--and we had loss of life in north central West Virginia
as a result of this.
So it is not just happening with hurricanes in the coastal
areas that we are talking about--the ravaging that took place.
It has had an effect on the central part of this country as
well.
So my question, when they try to get the dredging of these
streams so that they can mitigate the potential loss, often we
are hearing from the region--the EPA is they won't give
permits.
They go through an extended permitting period. Either that,
or FEMA steps in the way or an environmental group steps in the
way.
So if we are going to mitigate the potential loss and the
environmental impact, what would you suggest that we do in
other areas to clean up our streams if the EPA continues to
stand in the way of dredging? Any one of you?
Mr. Lopez. Yes. Yes, sir, I can help with that and, again,
it is funny how life brings you--moves you forward.
So with Irene and Lee in northern Appalachia--again, we are
just north of you. I had Southern Tier. I had the Susquehanna
River Valley. We had the Catskill region.
To answer your question, part of our challenge is, is as we
get into these streams we have to be very careful because any
impact upstream can have an impact downstream.
In my home community, the urgent response was to just dig
into streams and we wound up channelizing our streams. Water
began flowing faster and destabilizing the stream banks and
emergency evacuation routes were compromised.
Short story is as we get in, we are working with NRCS,
others--DEC and New York State--to try to look at it from a
watershed basis.
Some of it means restoring flood plains. Some of it means
restoring the natural flow of the streams. Getting in to clear
debris can be an ongoing mission but we also have to recognize
that we have to give room for streams almost like a living
organism to get rid of energy and to have a place----
Mr. McKinley. I understand.
Mr. Lopez. So----
Mr. McKinley. But the EPA and FEMA are standing in the way
of permitting to do that. We have got to--we had--at
Follansbee, West Virginia, they have had a--their stream is 8
feet of gravel and sand have built up in that so as a result of
this they had no capability of absorbing the amount of water
that came down, and homes were washed out as a results of this.
Mr. Lopez. So--so----
Mr. McKinley. So I am saying----
Mr. Lopez. You know, Chairman, respectfully, I have Region
2, so I am your neighbor in New York, in particular, similar
topography.
I can only tell you that the partnership there has been
with the State agent. DEC has been the agent in charge. EPA has
worked----
Mr. McKinley. The State keeps blaming the Federal
Government. Where are we supposed to get through this, so that
we can mitigate the potential loss?
We can eliminate a lot of these damages and the
environmental impact if we could clean our streams out. But
other people keep blaming Region 3.
Is there something you can suggest? Is it happening in
other areas that you're seeing a more successful relationship
to dredge these----
Mr. Lopez. Congressman, if I may, what I'd like to do with
your permission is take your information back to our
headquarters----
Mr. McKinley. Please.
Mr. Lopez [continuing]. See if we could research this issue
for you.
Mr. McKinley. Please. The other has to do also when Rick
Perry said that hitting a Category 4 which had such devastating
effect on the petrochemical industry and has been suggesting
that we build a secondary facility in Appalachia with an ethane
storage facility in the north central eastern Ohio and western
Pennsylvania. As a result, maybe we wouldn't have such loss of
product if we had something other.
So I really appreciate the fact that the commissioner and
Pruitt all are working together to try to find a secondary
source on this--a supply.
I think it would eliminate some problem because we know
that when that hit--Hurricane Harvey hit, out of the 23 cracker
facilities in the Houston area, 17 went down.
So as a result, it had that ripple effect all across the
country that people couldn't get resident supplies and
companies had to reduce their workforce as a result of it.
So I am hoping that we can continue to learn from this
problem that has occurred and how we can have a secondary
source, and we are not going to have both environmental impact
and economic impact.
I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Peters, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
witnesses for being here.
You know, I think--I spend a lot of time when I see these
awful disasters come they--they, obviously, cause a lot of
dislocation and tragedy.
They also cost us a ton of money at the Federal Government
for cleanup, and I think a lot about what you might have
learned as part of the cleanup that you might advise us to
invest in ahead of time.
So what are the things that maybe you've observed that you
think, boy, if the Federal Government had invested in this
beforehand we would have saved a lot of money in the long run.
Anything in general that you gentleman saw? Maybe Dr. Shaw?
Dr. Shaw. Yes. Thank you.
Certainly, that is part of what we--we have an ongoing
process of trying to do the lessons learned and to that end we
are in our second week of our after action review to learn the
right lessons from this.
Part of what I think addresses your question is the fact
that the Governor has put together a commission to rebuild
Texas and part of what we are looking at there is identifying
what are those resilience issues, opportunities, and needs both
to build back infrastructure but also what do you do--what is
that next step you would do if you had additional funds or
funds----
Mr. Peters. Anything in particular in mind right now?
Dr. Shaw. There are things like several--sometimes it is a
reservoir--excuse me, a retention system. We have dykes and
levy systems that have been proposed and often are waiting on
funding.
Mr. Peters. OK.
Dr. Shaw. And so there are projects that had been approved
and are just waiting on funding that would help to mitigate
some of those flood issues.
So those sorts of things are obvious and so we are trying
to put together a better holistic package of what it looks like
statewide but especially in the Hurricane Harvey impacted area.
Mr. Peters. That seems wise to me.
Before I leave you, Dr. Shaw, have you had--we have had a
lot of--we have had issues with massive sewer spills that have
flowed and come from Tijuana up into San Diego, which I
represent.
I wanted to see if you've had any experience in dealing
with clean water and health issues with the CDC or FDA in
connection with the issues you face in Texas.
Dr. Shaw. Not specifically.
Mr. Peters. How has that been?
Dr. Shaw. Not specifically CDC and FDA. We partner,
obviously, with EPA very closely on our--on our water quality
issues but I've not had experiences with CDC and FDA on those
issues.
Mr. Peters. OK.
Maybe, Mr. Lopez, if you had any general responses to that
question about Puerto Rico. I had a specific one, but any
general thoughts about what resiliency the Federal Government
might be involved in building in so that we don't face the
quantity of destruction that we saw this time next the
wastewater----
Mr. Lopez. Thank you, Congressman.
And, again, we mentioned a little bit about flexibility
with funding to ensure that as rebuild occurs or as we move
forward, because recognize that once we leave the response mode
we head into recovery and that is going to be a very long
conversation.
And for any of my colleagues here we know that that is not
just months. That may be years, and that may include additional
rebuilding, reinvestment, flexibility of funding.
The other thing that I was discussing with my colleague--my
deputy, Ms. McCabe--is the issue of, in that case, having
resources available or prepositioned, having----
Mr. Peters. Right.
Mr. Lopez [continuing]. Because of their isolation having
resources prepositioned would be very helpful.
Mr. Peters. Let me go back a step, because you are still--I
think you are still--you are still framing the response issue.
Let me just----
Mr. Lopez. We are very raw there. Yes, sir.
Mr. Peters [continuing]. Give you an example of something
that I just read about, which is Tesla restoring power to the
Children's Hospital in Puerto Rico with a solar and storage
project.
Now, it seems to me, I know--I think that Puerto Rico burns
bunker fuel, which is a logistical issue. You've got to get
that--you got to get there and, obviously, it speaks to the age
of the power plant.
You have got--I mean, I am sure you had a grid issues that
are affected by the wind. But it does seem to me--what I
noticed in Puerto Rico was after the storms stopped, the sun
was shining, and had there been distributed energy through
solar--smart solar investments, things like hospitals would be
up online ahead of time.
I would certainly suggest that that is something we ought
to be thinking about in these island places which are so
isolated you can't just send a truck of bunker fuel out there.
Had we invested in solar in some of these facilities,
particular the--around the critical infrastructure like
hospitals--the Children's Hospital--ahead of time, I think, you
know, a lot of these people wouldn't--wouldn't have been
affected in the same tragic ways.
I guess--maybe I will turn to Mr. Glenn and Mr. Coleman. Do
you have any sort of lessons learned in terms of pre-disaster
investments we might be considering right now so that next time
this happens we won't be so on our heels?
Mr. Glenn. Well, I am fairly new to the Federal Government.
I have been here two months----
Mr. Peters. Welcome.
Mr. Glenn [continuing]. And prior to that in the private
sector. Thank you. I am enjoying it. Here is what----
Mr. Peters. I enjoy it sometimes.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Glenn. Here is what I walked in and observed, literally
day one on this was the communications interaction and
relationships that we had with our peers at the State level and
at the local level as well.
So the one lesson I learned was we cannot do enough
coordination with our State and local and Tribal partners to
make sure that we know what their systems are, we know who the
people are and we train together and work together so that we
can respond to this and that is the huge takeaway I had from
this for the--relative to the impacts in our region.
Mr. Peters. Thank you.
Mr. Coleman, my time is expired but maybe someone else will
as you the question.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Houston, Texas,
Mr. Olson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair.
I would like to start out with a point of personal
privilege. Yesterday we found out that----
Mr. Shimkus. Not again.
Mr. Olson [continuing]. Found out that a fellow Texan--this
is good. Not good, but sad. A fellow Texan, Gene Green,
announced this will be his last term in Congress.
He is a dear friend, a great Texan. We will miss you, but
thank you for your service, my friend.
Welcome to our four witnesses. A special Texas Aggie howdy
to Chairman Shaw, and my question will be for you, Chairman
Shaw and you, Mr. Coleman.
First of all, could both of you talk about the sorts of
hazards you saw in the Houston area and all of the area
impacted by Harvey after Harvey left?
I know, for example, we had some pretty foul water that
threatened with bacterial infections and we had debris piles
that were magnets--as mentioned, snakes, rates, other animals.
In fact, a young girl who lives in Texas 22 in Sienna
Plantation was out working in Wharton, was bit by a copperhead
snake in a pile of wet soaked clothes. So my question is do we
know anything about how to respond to these threats with Harvey
or was it just a larger scale of what you know you have to deal
with when a storm hits like Harvey did?
Dr. Shaw. Thank you, Congressman.
Certainly, with regard to this event, it is--a lot of the
issues you see are common to a flood event but uncommon from
this nature of the magnitude and the breadth of the impacted
area.
So with regard to flood waters, anytime we have floodwaters
that are going to inundate wastewater treatment plants you are
going to have bacterial contamination and that is why our
response cooperatively with the EPA was to provide information
about how to deal with contamination from flood water.
With regard to the debris, certainly the magnitude of the
debris is a challenge and it is exacerbated because of the fact
that you have waste haulers, for example, that may have
contracts up and down the coast and when you have--the impacted
area is up and down the coast you don't have enough resources
there potentially to respond in a timely manner and it is just,
you know, 30-plus million cubic yards of debris is an awful lot
of debris to deal with.
Mr. Coleman. And I would just say that during a natural
disaster or any type of disaster there are many, many hazards.
Our goal really is to inform the public very quickly of how
they can best protect themselves while they are also trying to
restore and recover their own property.
With regards to flood waters, we really advise people to
minimize their exposure because the waters are contaminated and
there are many hazards associated with that.
You mentioned some of the other things. People have to
really wear protective equipment and be completely vigilant as
they work on their individual property to restore that. I
meant, that is very, very important and we work closely with
our State and local partners to make sure that that information
is put into the hands of every individual so that they
understand what they have to deal with.
Mr. Olson. You mentioned the constant threats out there.
For example, a first responder in Missouri City had a flesh-
eating virus. Somehow, it got into his--he had a little small
cut probably from working through a debris field and got
exposed to that virus. So thank you, thank you for getting
ahead of the curve.
And you guys mentioned, I think--if I quote you correctly,
Mr. Coleman, you said the coordination between you and Dr. Shaw
was, quote, ``exceptional,'' and I think it was on the ground
and that is what--that is my opinion as well.
But I have concern. You said you prepared for that with
exercise after exercise with TCEQ. How do you do that with a
storm like Harvey, a big storm like that, and also how about
with three storms?
You have Irma and Marie hit at that same time. Can you
coordinate with different regions as opposed to TCEQ? I mean,
boy, that is a big challenge, isn't it?
Mr. Coleman. Yes, sir. It is a big challenge. We work very
closely. There is an annual hurricane exercise that the State
organizes that involves EPA, the Corps of Engineers, other
State agencies as well where we really go through the game
planning as to who does what making sure we have all of the
proper contact information, everybody knows what their lane is,
and what capabilities that they bring to the table.
So we participate in that. We also work on a daily basis to
deal with much smaller incidents with the State so that our
staff and their staff know each other well and they work
seamlessly together to respond to these incidents.
Mr. Olson. Dr. Shaw, you want to add something to that?
Dr. Shaw. Yes. I would--I would say that we actually--in
one of those exercises we had the foresight to mock up a
response to a Category 3 hurricane making landfall in Corpus
Christi.
Harvey was a 4, making landfall just north of Corpus
Christi, but it points out the fact and the way I usually
characterize the importance of these exercises is we need to
make sure that whenever we show up for the real thing we are
not making introductions to our colleagues and counterparts in
other agencies.
We already know who they are. We know them by face and by
name, and so those exercises are priceless so that we can hit
the ground running, not having to make introductions to try to
figure out a game plan.
We already have the game plan. We've already practiced it.
We begin implementation.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I noticed my time has
expired and I will close by saying, at 9:54 this morning, all
four witnesses confirm they are happy my Houston Astros won the
World Series title.
I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. I hadn't heard that before, so thanks for
letting us know that.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Green for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Well, I am proud of the Astros, too. But I want
to thank our panel for being here and thank the Chair and the
ranking member for holding the hearing today on Hurricanes
Harvey, Irma, and Maria.
I also want to thank our panelists--for the panel,
particularly Administrator Coleman and Dr. Shaw, and I know the
partnership that you've had between our regional office of EPA
and the State has been--even when I was in the legislature
years ago.
And I want to thank the EPA for the decision last month
after our new administrator viewed the site to remove the
cancer-causing dioxins out of the San Jacinto Waste Pits, and
that is both on the north side of Interstate 10 and the south
side of Interstate 10. And it is an important issue in east
Harris County.
I have represented it off and on over the years, first as a
State senator and then in Congress, and I shared it with Ted
Poe. Now I share it with Congressman Brian Babin.
So we need to fully remove the contaminated soil and
accelerate it with the recovery--discovery of the damage and
the temporary cap during Hurricane Harvey.
Administrator Coleman, what is the time line for EPA to
begin the removal of the contaminated material from the San
Jacinto Waste Pits?
Mr. Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Green, for that question.
So, as you know, we've issued the recommended decision in
October. We are working with both the Justice Department and
the responsible parties on this special notice and negotiating
a consent decree that will facilitate the specific design and
then removal.
Specifically, we expect the negotiations to take six to 12
months in working with the responsible parties. The design
activities can take as long as another six to 12 months and
then the work will start.
So I can't give you a specific time frame because those
negotiations are complex and do involve a number of issues that
we have to work through with them.
So but that is generally what we expect to see.
Mr. Green. OK. Well, I would hope you would provide
information and EPA has been doing it to the constituents out
there for, like I said, mostly Congressman Babin now. But I
sure have a lot of people who go out and crab and fish right
near those sites and I would--we'd like to make sure they're
not, well, consuming that but also to make it much more safer.
And so the process will take almost a year, and I
understand the difference because the temporary cap is about a
$20 billion and then the permanent cap or the permanent removal
is anywhere--the latest estimate, I think, from EPA was almost
$120 billion.
Mr. Coleman. That is correct--$115 million to $120 million.
Mr. Green. And so I expect the responsible parties have the
option of going to the courthouse and making that decision. But
I understood the original report from the regional office to
the national office was really strong opinion on what needed to
be done.
Our district also includes--and this is in our district
and has been forever, it seems like--the U.S. oil recovery in
Pasadena, Texas, it is actually on a--near a bayou in Texas.
Pete's gone but it is Vince Bayou coming through Pasadena and
into the Houston ship channel or Buffalo Bayou. And many
members of the public and local media voiced concern about that
toxic material mitigating into the Vince Bayou.
Was there any information from that site that it--did any
of that site bleed into the--into Vince Bayou and ultimately
Buffalo Bayou and the Houston ship channel?
Mr. Coleman. Again, thank you for that question.
As you know, the U.S. oil site consists of two nearly
adjacent locations but they are separated by a road and they
are different in elevation.
So the former City of Pasadena wastewater treatment plant
was flooded and because of the nature of what they did there,
which was treat wastewater, we do recognize that there were
probably some releases of things that were at that site. But we
also know that they never stored hazardous waste or recycled
oil on that portion of the site.
The second portion of the site, which is located at a
higher elevation, where they did process oils to recover, that
site actually did not flood.
It did, of course, sustain over 50 inches of rainfall. So
some of the buildings which are in somewhat disrepair there was
rainfall that entered the buildings.
There was some--we would call it storm water runoff that
occurred and we did assess Vince's Bayou. We looked very
closely at the receding waters and collected samples. We did
not see that anything significant left that upper portion where
the waste oil was processed.
So we feel confident that Vince Bayou only received some
runoff from that lower area that was the former Pasadena
wastewater treatment plant.
Mr. Green. OK. Is there a viable----
Mr. Shimkus. Quickly, please.
Mr. Green [continuing]. Or responsible party for the U.S.
oil site?
Mr. Coleman. Yes, sir. We are working with the responsible
parties. They say a group of investors who are actually working
to both maintain stabilization of the site as well as working
with us on a more thorough investigation and, ultimately, a
cleanup of that site.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and gentlemen, thank
you for joining us today.
Mr. Lopez, prior to the hurricanes hitting Puerto Rico this
season, most people would have characterized the municipal
solid waste landfills as a mess even on a good day, with 19 of
the 29 landfills operating out of compliance with Federal law.
So what's the status of the landfills in the--in the wake
of the hurricanes today?
Mr. Lopez. So the landfill status, of course, as you
mentioned, we had challenges and continue to be challenges on
the island.
Debris management, which is really the response, is a
complicated undertaking. So there is pressure, of course, to
put more material into the landfills.
But what we are attempting to do, working with Army Corps
and our partners, is to separate the waste streams and dispose
of them in a fashion that relieves pressure on the landfills.
So whether it be vegetative debris or hazardous medical
waste--any number of elements that could wind up in a
landfill--we are working aggressively to separate out and
dispose of, working with the authorities in a proper fashion.
Mr. Johnson. So are they still a mess?
Mr. Lopez. So a landfill situation that existed prior to
the hurricane remains----
Mr. Johnson. No. No. What are--what's the status today?
Mr. Lopez. So the landfills continue to operate as they did
before. There has been no change in that.
Our challenge--incident challenge is handling the debris,
keeping the landfills functioning but also handling the debris
which could accumulate in the landfills if not properly
intercepted.
Mr. Johnson. Do you--do you think that Puerto Rico should
keep its delegation authority under Subtitle D?
Mr. Lopez. Ultimately, the--and, again, we--this will be a
longer-term conversation, Congressman. So our challenge will be
to help support the local authorities. I feel that that is the
appropriate thing to do.
We want to support them, give them capability, help provide
resources where we can and also address other ways other than
landfilling to address their solid waste.
But recognize that that is not EPA's function as a--as a
role. We don't usually do solid waste management. We defer to
the local government authorities for the actual management of
solid waste.
Mr. Johnson. Is it--is it fair to say that current debris
removal since the hurricanes--current debris removal is going
to further overload the already filled capacity in those
landfills?
Mr. Lopez. We are working to intercept it. There is a
danger--there is always a possibility. But we are working very
aggressively and thoughtfully with the leadership to identify
waste streams and properly provide siting to separate them out
and mitigate them appropriately. So there is always a potential
but we are working to minimize the impact.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Coleman, in your testimony you write that while each
response has its own unique challenges, we remain flexible to
address individual needs.
So as you indicated, things like geographical constraints,
economic conditions, damage extent, and infrastructure
vulnerabilities are all factors that shape Federal agency
response when a natural disaster strikes.
In other words, how we respond to Houston's challenges is
clearly different than those of Puerto Rico's challenges. So
how does the EPA currently ensure response efforts take these
challenges and regional characteristics into consideration?
Mr. Coleman. So we work--we have a national cadre of
responders that work very closely together on training and that
forms the baseline of how we respond.
As I mentioned, we have a set of technical assets--the
ASPECT, TAGA, PHILIS--that also provide that specialized
equipment. But then we work very closely with our State
partners in each location as well as those other State agencies
that we work with,with our FEMA regional offices, with things
called regional response teams that then do additional
specialized training and facilitation as it relates to the
specific incidents that may occur in different geographic
areas.
So those multiple layers of training exercises, having the
right equipment, allows us to then be adaptable and flexible in
responding to all types of different disasters and events.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Is there room for improvement?
Mr. Coleman. I believe that there's always room for
improvement and, as Chairman Shaw indicated, the State does an
after-action report. We are doing a similar exercise. We
participate with the State side.
But we also have them participate and critique our work so
that we can make improvements and we do that after each event
and we memorialize those lessons learned so that, as we
incorporate that into our training going forward, we are able
to make those improvements.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes Dr. Ruiz from California for 5
minutes.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to throw out a compliment to my colleague from Ohio
who just asked those questions. Those are very good questions,
very insightful. Thank you for asking those questions.
I want to continue on that line in terms of coordination
and some local flexibility problems that I saw when I went to
Puerto Rico myself that was an unscripted visit.
I went on my own accord and I visited a lot of locations
impromptu so I can get the real story and not the script that
folks would like to give you, and I had great assistance when I
was on the ground as well.
And by way of background, I am an emergency medicine
physician trained in public health and also trained in
humanitarian disaster response from the Harvard Humanitarian
Initiative and other locations.
We talked about coordination. Let me just ask an open-ended
question. Mr. Lopez, who is running the show in Puerto Rico?
Who is--who is really in charge?
Mr. Lopez. So, understandably, we are under a command and
control structure, as we mentioned. Again, FEMA makes the
mission assignments.
Mr. Ruiz. OK.
Mr. Lopez. So mission assignments are handed out by FEMA.
Mr. Ruiz. So you would say FEMA is in charge?
Mr. Lopez. Through our command and control structure.
Mr. Ruiz. Yes.
Mr. Lopez. That is--again, as we interact we take mission
assignments from FEMA----
Mr. Ruiz. OK.
Mr. Lopez [continuing]. And we work with our headquarters
in our regional offices for support.
Mr. Ruiz. OK. And how are you coordinated? Where--like, how
does that information get down to the EPA folks that are in the
field?
Mr. Lopez. So we have a command and control structure and
in our region we have an incident coordinator.
Mr. Ruiz. Yes, and where is that incident coordinator
located?
Mr. Lopez. He is in Edison, New Jersey. We also have
staff----
Mr. Ruiz. In New Jersey.
Mr. Lopez [continuing]. We also have staff--and this is--
this is critical for Puerto Rico--we also have staff embedded
on the island. So----
Mr. Ruiz. Where exactly are they embedded?
Mr. Lopez. Guaynabo.
Mr. Ruiz. Guaynabo.
Mr. Lopez. And also out of San Juan.
Mr. Ruiz. And where else are they embedded? In San Juan?
Mr. Lopez. San Juan.
Mr. Ruiz. OK.
Mr. Lopez. So we have staff embedded there. We also have
some staff----
Mr. Ruiz. OK. So, you know, the point I am making is that
when I was there the number-one thing you need is clarity in
leadership, in roles and responsibilities, and having to bring
in all the--all the local players, as Mr. Coleman was talking
about, and everybody in a very flexible rapid response group
and I didn't see that in Puerto Rico.
We are using a spoke and hub model that is basically run
out of San Juan. Very top-down heavy information is being sent
out.
All the different agencies are working in silos. They
weren't even communicating with each other. So there is things
like you mentioned, obstacles in being able to reach certain
geographic locations.
I worked with the 82nd Airborne closely in Port-au-Prince
right after Haiti. Those--those men and women can move
mountains to get supplies anywhere in the world and I didn't
see that kind of coordination on the ground to get those
supplies, to get the people where they needed to go.
So here is what I am proposing, and I am speaking to every
else, is, you know, the challenges of Puerto Rico are very
different than the challenges in Houston and Florida.
You don't have a large concentration of population with an
infrastructure that is intact--electricity and communication.
You still have the majority of people without power. You still
have the majority of people who have difficulty finding that
clean water. And you say some of the--some of the water systems
are operational.
What does that mean, operational? Because I have been into
some hospitals they say are operational but that is only one
floor of the five floors of the hospital, but yet people want
to tout them as operational.
So what we need to talk about is capacity and what is the
capacity of the infrastructure to reach how many people.
Oftentimes, gentlemen, we get--we get the reports of how many
people on the ground, how many water bottles, how many systems.
But that is not the way that you manage or that you count
accountability in a disaster response. We have to talk about
capacity. So what is the capacity of the different agencies and
the different infrastructure systems to provide the much-needed
services?
And you are right, Mr. Lopez. Agua es vida--water is life
and so tell me, is there a water task force in Puerto Rico with
different stakeholders and where is that water task force--how
is that water task force managed and who are the stakeholders
in that task force?
Mr. Lopez. So it is a small group. So we have, again, FEMA.
We have mission assignments. Our offices--we work with the
EQB--environmental quality board--and with the territory health
department.
So those are the principal actors.
Mr. Ruiz. OK.
Mr. Lopez. And just, Congressman, if I may, we are on track
on a regular basis. We do regular meetings with the island--
conference calls and interdiction of----
Mr. Ruiz. Great. My proposal is to have field command posts
with all the different stakeholders to address local issues
with local mayors and NGOs and the Puerto Rican government, the
Federal Government, and other agencies working together--pretty
much what Mr. Coleman talked about that is occurring in other
locations but have that in Puerto Rico more in the field so
that you can have better decision making, coordination, and
responding.
Your role is to test and monitor and to track changes. But
then that needs to get translated to actual implementation in a
much more rapid way so that goods and repairs can be made in a
transparent and prioritized way on the ground.
And so that is--my time is up--so that is my--that is my
recommendation, given my experience and I think that we need to
move forward in trying to implement some of those.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Dr. Ruiz. I agree.
We had a very similar hearing like this on the Energy
Subcommittee, and the question I asked, well, ``Who's in
charge?''
Mr. Ruiz. Yes, and----
Mr. Shimkus. I would have loved for----
Mr. Ruiz [continuing]. And right now we heard FEMA, but
then when I was on the ground FEMA said Puerto Rico----
Mr. Shimkus. I--I----
Mr. Ruiz [continuing]. And Puerto Rico says FEMA.
Mr. Shimkus. I don't disagree, and I wish that the
administration would have just parachuted 82nd there----
Mr. Ruiz. I would have loved to have seen that. Absolutely.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. To some of the very small
villages, and I think we all would have been best served. Then
we could have worried about who is responsible later. But you
need to get service there immediately.
Mr. Lopez. Chairman, if I--just briefly, too. And not last
but not least, there is a joint field operations center there
and we do have EPA incident commanders and we have branch
leaders in Puerto Rico.
So there is an incident command center there. Those other
agencies are embedded but----
Mr. Ruiz. See, when you say that, though, Puerto Rico is
big, you know, and you leave us with the impression that it is
somewhere.
But where exactly, and are they in the different
municipalities and do we have the right people working in a
group out in the field in those different municipalities,
because when I was there they didn't exist.
FEMA told me they didn't have field command posts. DMAT did
not have field command posts. I spoke to different agencies
that did not--they said that this would be a good idea and
something that they would be very willing to work with and
actually I am meeting with HHS later today to address this
concept.
Mr. Shimkus. Great. Thank you. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Flores, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flores. Speaking of HHS, that is going to be my
question.
I want to thank the chairman and ranking member for holding
this hearing. I want to thank the panel for joining us today.
Under Emergency Support Function Number 8, the Department
of Health and Human Services, or HHS as it is commonly called
around here, is the primary agency for ESF Number 8 and
includes support for potable drinking water, solid waste
disposal, and other environmental issues related to public
health.
I have got a question--this question for Mr. Lopez and Mr.
Coleman, starting with Mr. Coleman. Number one, have you worked
with HHS to carry out this function regarding providing potable
water and also solid waste and debris removal in communities
affected by hurricane damage this season?
Mr. Coleman. Yes, sir. We do work with HHS. Specific to
Hurricane Harvey, as the State and FEMA determined the specific
Federal assistance that is necessary, in this particular
response, that role of HHS was somewhat limited because of, A,
the State capacity was quite extensive and we had done a lot of
coordination work with them, but embedded with my staff I have
3 members from the Centers for Disease Control, and they
coordinate and have reachback capability to both the CDC
headquarters and HHS in general as any issue comes up, and we
are able to quickly address those and provide the support as
requested by the State.
Mr. Flores. OK. Thank you, Mr. Coleman.
Mr. Lopez, do you have anything to add regarding ----
Mr. Lopez. The only thing I would say, again, is that HHS
is part of the unified command structure so that they are
immersed in that conversation.
Our local engagement has been with the Puerto Rico
Department of Health. So, ultimately, we do have the
representation of health interests.
Mr. Flores. OK.
Mr. Glenn, do you have anything to add?
Mr. Glenn. No, sir. It's part of that structure and we have
been working with them.
Mr. Flores. OK.
Mr. Shaw, you gave us a breakdown of TCEQ's costs for
dealing with the hurricane response and you indicated that the
funds to reimburse you would be coming from FEMA. Has FEMA been
a good partner in working with the State of Texas and dealing
with the response and recovery efforts?
Dr. Shaw. Yes, and there is sort of various aspects of how
that operates. We have, in the initial public assistance
reimbursement from FEMA, about $700,000 anticipated for that
cost and that is the initial travel and what have you, working
with the initial response.
We also have a $15 million authorization from FEMA for us
to work with EPA in dealing with the field operations, which
includes a lot of our command and control--our assessment and
location of containers displaced and what have you in the field
operations.
So $700,000 for the initial component and $15 million to
work with EPA on those field operations.
Mr. Flores. OK. What can be improved upon in terms of that
process? It sounds to me like it has worked pretty smoothly. Do
you have any suggestions for improvement?
Dr. Shaw. It is working well. Communications is the primary
issue and we have a lot of lessons learned. So yes, I think we
will learn more but I think the key thing is to point out one
of the issues, for example, are lessons learned. We work very
closely with EPA. In this event, we were able to very quickly
deal with things such as fuel waivers that took weeks in past
events and took hours in this event, and that allowed us to
focus on those critical issues, making sure we got water,
wastewater, and immediate harm issues addressed quickly.
Mr. Flores. OK. In this process, have you come across
anything where Congress can help in terms of making statutory
improvements to the Stafford Act or any other related Federal
statutes to deal with catastrophes like this?
Dr. Shaw. There are--there is room for improvement and the
challenges, quite frankly, Congressman, are going to be those
tradeoffs because, you know, as you look at--and this is sort
of outside of my lane--but one example is dealing with the
repairs on the recovery side of that to homes, for example, and
I think there's opportunities to be able to get that done much
more quickly and to do permanent repairs as opposed to
something that is temporary.
The reason that I am interested in that is because getting
those folks back into their homes has such a huge health and
environmental impact because the longer it takes to get those
homes repaired the longer you have those health issues
associated with debris with people that are outside or
displaced from their housing and then the economics associated
with all those.
So there is room for improvement. A lot of those have to do
with making sure that Congress is making the types of decisions
about how to improve the efficiency of getting those repairs
done as well as making sure that they're ensuring that those
funds are expended properly and you avoid--there is going to be
foul play involved and that becomes a huge issue as how much
you balance, making sure you get the funds out there but you
minimize the money that is fraudulently spent.
Mr. Flores. OK.
Thank you for your responses. Again, I thank the panel for
joining us. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Colorado, Ms.
DeGette, for 5 minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to
the witnesses for coming.
Mr. Glenn, before Hurricane Irma, you and the other leaders
in Region 4 increased staffing of the Regional Emergency
Operations Center, the deployed on-scene coordinators to the
State emergency operations center, and you provided a Region 4
liaison to the FEMA Regional Coordination Center. Is that
right?
Mr. Glenn. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. DeGette. And do you--can you estimate how many senior
leaders were deployed prior to the hurricane's landfall?
Mr. Glenn. Prior to the landfall, as far as our executive
leadership I, myself, went down and we had two other senior
leaders that worked directly for me went to south Florida, and
then some individuals from headquarters were also down in
Florida.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Were you the most senior person down there
before landfall or was there someone more senior to you?
Mr. Glenn. Prior to landfall, I was the most senior person
in the Region 4 down there.
Ms. DeGette. OK. And, you know, it is like Mr. Coleman was
saying, there was a lot of coordination with the State and
local officials down there. Is that right?
Mr. Glenn. Absolutely. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. DeGette. So, Mr. Lopez, I want to--I know you didn't
arrive on the scene until September 28th but I want to ask you
the same question, if you know.
Before Hurricane Irma hit Puerto Rico, did the leaders in
Region 2 increase staffing in the Regional Emergency Operations
Center?
Mr. Lopez. So, again, I started actually on October 11th.
Ms. DeGette. Oh, OK.
Mr. Lopez. But----
Ms. DeGette. So do you--do you know what kind of staffing
was increased?
Mr. Lopez. I would have to--I would have to get back with
you for detail.
Ms. DeGette. OK.
Mr. Lopez. I have some assessments but I don't want to be
inappropriate with a response. So I'd be happy to respond.
Ms. DeGette. OK. And so the questions--you'll probably need
to get back to me on the staffing, the onsite coordinators, and
who the senior leaders were who were there prior to landfall.
The anecdotal evidence that we have is that whereas in
Region 4 they were all there before it hit, in Region 2 what
happened was they were all rushed--aside from the people who
were already embedded there that you testified about before
that we were already behind the curve because we had to send a
lot of people in. So if you can get me that information that
would be really helpful.
And I want to ask you again--to continue, Mr. Glenn, now,
on September 12th there were 12 field hazard assessment teams
conducting facility assessment support at chemical and oil
storage facilities. Is that right?
Mr. Glenn. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. DeGette. Now, Mr. Lopez, do you know how many field
assessment--field hazard assessment teams were operating in
Puerto and the U.S. Virgin Islands two days after Irma made
landfall?
Mr. Glenn. I can't tell you the number of teams but I can
tell you that teams were on the ground so----
Ms. DeGette. You don't--can you get me that answer, please,
of the number?
Mr. Lopez. I can get you the number, of course.
Ms. DeGette. And how about Maria? Same thing?
Mr. Lopez. I will have to get you the same thing. Again,
the sites----
Ms. DeGette. OK.
Mr. Lopez [continuing]. As I mentioned in my testimony,
were assessed prior and afterwards. So there have been
assessments ongoing. But I can't tell you the number.
Ms. DeGette. Right.
But, again, you know, in Region 4 they had 12 teams on the
ground two days after. So what I want to know, and as several
of my colleagues on both sides of the aisle have said, is
Puerto Rico is a lot larger physically and more complex because
of transportation needs and other issues.
So I am just wondering two days after landfall in Puerto
Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands how many teams did we have and
what were they doing.
Now, Mr. Lopez, I bet you can't answer this either.
Mr. Lopez. I will do my best, ma'am.
Ms. DeGette. Do you know how many teams did Region 2 have
in making boots on the ground assessments of Superfund sites
two days afterwards--after Irma?
Mr. Lopez. As I mentioned, the----
Ms. DeGette. If you can get me that information, too.
Mr. Lopez. We will get you the specific numbers.
Ms. DeGette. Sure.
Mr. Lopez. But just to be clear, Congresswoman, there was a
presence----
Ms. DeGette. Uh-huh.
Mr. Lopez [continuing]. And folks were on the ground
assessing before and after.
Ms. DeGette. I am certainly not trying to imply there was
no presence.
Mr. Lopez. I understand. I just don't have the correct
number.
Ms. DeGette. But like Mr. Glenn--correct me if I am wrong--
Region 4 had six teams on the ground on September 12th that
were making boots on the ground assessment of Superfund sites.
Is that right, Mr. Glenn?
Mr. Glenn. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. DeGette. So that is what I am wondering, Mr. Lopez,
and, frankly, I am a little concerned that you don't know. I
realize you didn't come in until October. But we need to know
how robust and how quick the response was and the very fact
that we are having this hearing, Mr. Chairman, and they can't
answer any of these questions for Region 2--Region 4 has it
Johnny-on-the-spot--just goes to the concern that we are all--
that we are all expressing today and if I can get your answers
maybe----
Mr. Lopez. Sure.
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. Maybe my concerns will be
alleviated. But I fear that they will not.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady yields back her time and I
thank her for those questions. It just goes to my point of a
standard operating procedure and why are regions different when
there is a disaster heading in a certain area.
Ms. DeGette. Why is it one thing in one region and another
thing in another region?
Mr. Shimkus. Right. So thank you very much.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Hudson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all
the witnesses for being here today.
Mr. Glenn, I particularly want to say welcome to you.
Obviously, Region 4 includes my home State of North Carolina. I
look forward to getting to know you better and working with you
in the future.
While the damage in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands
is significant, Region 4, including Florida, sustained
substantial damage from Hurricane Irma on the heels of
rebuilding after the 2016 hurricane season.
There were several reports after Hurricane Irma of issues
with drinking water systems and several communities under
boiled water advisories.
What is the status, Mr. Glenn, of drinking water systems in
Region 4? Are there still people without access to safe
drinking water?
Mr. Glenn. The information I have is that all drinking
water systems are operational in Region 4. We are not aware of
any people served by a system that are without access to
potable drinking water.
Mr. Hudson. Great. What about right after the storm? How
did the drinking systems fare during the hurricane?
Mr. Glenn. Well, as you know, any time a storm like this
comes through it has impacts. It has immediate impacts, and so
almost every municipality that was in the path of the storm did
experience some type of impact at varying levels.
The impact you've heard today--physical damage, power
outages, personnel, chemical supply interruptions, and the
like--so almost every system was impacted and----
Mr. Hudson. In terms of water systems--drinking systems?
Mr. Glenn. Yes, sir. Drinking systems. Correct.
Mr. Hudson. Well, just on your assessment, are there any
improvements to the drinking water systems that we could look
at to help in future situations like this?
Mr. Glenn. Well, as you know, we operate under the
permission authority of the Stafford Act and we will continue
to do so and fulfill whatever authorizations are provided for
in that act.
Mr. Hudson. Got you.
For everybody, the whole panel, in June 2016 the National
Infrastructure Advisory Councils recommended FEMA consolidate
Federal emergency response roles and responsibilities for water
into a single ESF within the annex of the national response
framework to improve coordination and reduce confusion and
improve the information sharing and communication.
The 2016 recommendation repeats an NAIC recommendation from
2009 that declared DHS should elevate water services to its own
ESF within the NRF to achieve higher prioritization of water
systems during emergency response that opens up to at least
everyone from FEMA.
And Dr. Shaw, you're welcome to join in too, but do you
believe making this change is a wise move? I would just ask the
FEMA regional folks to chime in.
Mr. Coleman. So with regards to that recommendation, we
think that, and my personal experience is that, water
infrastructure is extraordinarily important. It essentially
sets the basis for when people can repopulate an area.
So, you know, I think it is very important. I don't have a
specific opinion on if it should be its own emergency support
function but I think that working very closely with the State
Governor's office, et cetera, to make sure that in a response
you restore service as soon as possible is the most important
thing.
Mr. Hudson. So you don't--you don't want to say whether
making its own ESF would help with that coordination?
Mr. Coleman. From my personal experience the coordination
with the Governor's office and the local officials is the most
important coordination that needs to take place and when that
takes place you're able to actually get the right equipment,
infrastructure, or support to bring those systems back online.
Mr. Hudson. Got you.
Dr. Shaw, I see you are chomping at the bit. Please.
Dr. Shaw. And I am going to be supporting what Mr. Coleman
said as well and that is that I think the key point is in my
State it may be difficult for me to assess whether that--what
that need would change because we have such a focus on water
and wastewater as our initial response in that.
I am thinking back through the days before, during, and
after the landfall and I don't--I have not identified the place
where that would have changed things because we work
cooperatively and our mission is first and foremost to get out
and assess those issues that are immediate harm and key among
those are water and wastewater systems and getting those back
online.
We have partners such as with Texas--I always get this
wrong--the Texas American Waterworks Association--our TXWARN
system which helps us to bring together different resources
from different services that are available to get equipment in
places. Those things are all working very well. And so my only
concern with changes is making sure we don't lose what's
working well because it is working well in the State of Texas.
Obviously, you want it quicker, but those are tweaks as opposed
to major overhauls.
Mr. Hudson. Got you.
I have got a little over 10 seconds. Do either--Lopez or
Glenn, do you have an alternate opinion?
Mr. Lopez. Just to reinforce, I was a local official and I
was also on the ground during Irene and Lee. The issue of
communication is really the critical issue.
So whether it is a single function or a coordinated
function, you really need to be in the heads of the plant
operators who know exactly what they need and how to get up and
running. So if you can penetrate to that level quickly, that is
really what you need.
Mr. Hudson. Great.
Mr. Chairman, my time has expired. I will yield back. Thank
you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
We want to thank this panel. You can tell--we know you've
travelled far and there is still a lot of work to do and so we
are very appreciative of your efforts.
And there are some Members who have asked questions for you
to respond. If you can do so in a timely manner, that would
also be appreciated. Thank you for what you do, and now go back
to your regions and get to work.
And with that, we will dismiss this panel and ask for the
second panel to join.
[Second panel arrives.]
OK. We want to thank all our witnesses for being here
today, taking the time to testify before the subcommittee. Our
second witness panel for today's hearing includes Mr. Mike
Howe, executive director and secretary treasurer for the Texas
Section of American Waterworks Association; Mr. Mark
Lichtenstein, chief of staff, chief sustainability officer,
State University of New York, College of Environmental Science
and Forestry; Ms. Lyvia N. Rodriguez del Valle, executive
director of Corporacion del Proyecto ENLACE del Cano Martin
Pena; and Mr. Trent Epperson, assistant city manager,
administration, City of Pearland.
So you were able to be here for the--obviously, the first
panel. This will be a smaller group but still as important as
we get your statements into the record.
There will be some of us who will be here to ask the
questions, as you saw in the first panel. We do appreciate you
being here, and with that we will start with Mr. Howe. You are
recognized for 5 minutes, and your full statement is submitted
for the record.
You are recognized, sir.

STATEMENTS OF MIKE HOWE, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, TEXAS SECTION,
AMERICAN WATER WORKS ASSOCIATION; MARK LICHTENSTEIN, CHIEF
SUSTAINABILITY OFFICER AND CHIEF OF STAFF, COLLEGE OF
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND FORESTRY, STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW
YORK; LYVIA N. RODRIGUEZ DEL VALLE, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
CORPORACION DEL PROYECTO ENLACE DEL CANO MARTIN PENA; AND TRENT
EPPERSON, ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER, CITY OF PEARLAND, TEXAS

STATEMENT OF MIKE HOWE

Mr. Howe. Thank you much and good afternoon, Chairman
Shimkus and members of the subcommittee.
My name is Mike Howe, the executive director of the Texas
Section AWWA and we manage the Texas Water/Wastewater Agency
Response Network, or TXWARN.
The mission of TXWARN is to provide emergency preparedness
disaster response and mutual aid assistance for water and
wastewater utilities. TXWARN began after Hurricane Katrina when
it was apparent that the coordination and prioritization of
water utility needs was disjointed under the existing national
response framework.
We in the water sector realized that we needed to develop a
utility-to-utility mutual aid system. AWWA spearheaded the WARN
initiative and collaborated with other stakeholders to
facilitate the growth of WARN from the two-State program in
2006 to the 50 programs we have nationwide today.
Membership in TXWARN is free and is available to all public
and private utilities in Texas, making it the largest utility-
to-utility mutual aid program in the country with more than
1,200 utility members that provide services to 78 percent of
the population of the State of Texas.
The Texas Section AWWA manages TXWARN and receives partial
funding from the TCEQ via the State revolving fund program to
facilitate training and exercises.
Hurricane Harvey made landfall as a Category 4 hurricane in
Nueces and Aransas Counties on August 25th and, as you know,
meandered to the northeast over the upper Texas coast for four
days.
It presented water utilities with unique challenges. As the
storm approached, we activated the TXWARN system on October--
August 23rd. We first began preparing support teams for the
inevitable aid requests.
Ground zero for Hurricane Harvey was the small coastal town
of Port Aransas. At daylight after the storm the local water
utility manager assessed the damage to the community and the
water system.
The power was out for the water pumps, one of the water
supply lines from Corpus Christi was out of service, and the
majority of the community's water systems were leaking.
As Harvey crossed Aransas Bay, it brought significant
similar damage to Rockport's water and wastewater system. The
first major request for TXWARN came early Sunday morning on
behalf of Port Aransas. The water system had to be operational
before authorities could bring the population back.
TXWARN contacted the San Antonio Water System, or SAWS, a
little more than 2 hours away from Port Aransas and its
management agreed to send equipment and manpower to Port
Aransas. In less than 24 hours, SAWS had deployed 20 field
staff and by Friday of that week they had completely restored
service.
SAWS also responded to Rockport, performing repairs to it
water and wastewater systems. TXWARN arranged to relief SAWS
crews after 10 days from this grueling work with crews from the
Austin water utility.
During the nearly two-week response period TXWARN was fully
activated, we managed more than 50 similar requests for large
and small systems. We are very pleased with our response
operations during Harvey but there is always room for
improvement.
Specifically, I would like to call your attention to how
the needs of the water sector are prioritized and coordinated
as part of the national response framework, or NRF.
The current organizational structure of the NRF largely
reflects the 1992 Federal response plan prepared by FEMA. That
was 25 years ago. The experiences of the water sector since
then suggest that this current model requires a thorough review
and update.
The loss of drinking water and wastewater services
compounds the complexities of all response activities and
impacts the ability of first responders to sustain shelters,
hospitals, and other first responding units.
Therefore, prioritizing the recovery of water and
wastewater service is essential to bringing normalcy and
commerce back to any community.
The disaggregated approach under the national response
framework means that no single entity at the Federal level has
total responsibility for the water mission. This is our issue,
and others at the Federal level has also recognized this.
In 2009, the National Infrastructure Advisory Council
recommended the Department of Homeland Security elevate water
services to its own ESF category within the national response
framework.
Seven years later, the NAIC recommended that DHS direct
FEMA to consolidate Federal emergency response roles and
responsibility into a single ESF.
Implementing these recommendations will be consistent with
the approaches applied for similar critical infrastructure such
as transportation, communications, and energy.
We urge Congress with its oversight jurisdiction and
responsibilities to direct FEMA to reconsider how the NRF is
used to support disaster response and recovery. This is vital
for protecting public health, the environment, and all the
communities we serve.
And thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Howe follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, sir.
And now I would like to recognize Mr. Mark Lichtenstein
from the State University of New York. You are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK LICHTENSTEIN

Mr. Lichtenstein. You pronounce my name better than I do.
Thank you.
Chair Shimkus, Chair Walden, Ranking Members Tonko and
Pallone, and honorable subcommittee members, thank you for the
opportunity to participate.
Having just returned from Puerto Rico and the Virgin
Islands, I have many observations and concerns. But today I am
only going to focus on disaster debris.
I have more than three decades of waste management
experience including with disasters. I am employed by the State
University of New York College of Environmental Science and
Forestry--ESF--in Syracuse. It is a different ESF than we have
been talking about.
As immediate past president of the National Recycling
Coalition, I helped create a task force on sustainable disaster
debris management immediately after Harvey.
I have helped address issues in the island since 2009,
working with colleagues like my partners to the left, and I am
a member of the board for Island Green, a U.S. Virgin Islands
nonprofit.
I have been working with local people to devise a
sustainable approach for the storm debris. Some U.S. Government
responders are appreciated.
However, there is concern from some residents and other
experts regarding the potential ecological and human health
impacts of a disaster debris management method of choice of the
Army Corps of Engineers--air curtain incineration.
ACI is a past practice of FEMA and the Corps in these
situations and they have proposed it for the Virgin Islands and
possibly Puerto Rico as well.
This would add insult to injury, especially considering
that much of the debris is clean vegetation. There are better
ways.
During Superstorm Sandy in New York City, the Corps planned
to use ACIs continuously for four months but they stopped after
one month because they could not get them to function properly.
Air quality was exceeded during days of high humidity and
this was November in New York City. Humidity is routinely
extremely high on the islands. Local people and others are
concerned that ACIs will emit pollutants that could cause
pulmonary aggravation, particularly for individuals with asthma
or cardiac diseases.
Diesel and gasoline generators, which you have heard about
already today, and exposure to indoor mold are already
aggravating existing respiratory conditions.
If burning moves forward in any manner, appropriate
agencies should be asked to address potential health issues,
especially regarding existing conditions. The agency for toxic
substances and disease registries should be requested to do a
review of the health impacts of burning before it commences.
EPA should be asked to establish air monitors downwind of the
burners and burning should not commence until monitors are
established and EPA immediately shares results with the public.
Much of the topsoil has been lost through storm water. They
have been hammered with rain since the hurricanes. So it is
critical that the vegetative debris remain to help replenish
the soil that the plants of the islands need.
When considering options like burning, it is essential to
incorporate externality costs--costs for which it is hard to
calculate an immediate number like climate change, the impacts
of depleted soils on the ecosystem, or health effects of air
pollution.
These impacts can be reduced through other viable options
and this is one reason groups like the National Recycling
Coalition have opposed ACIs.
FEMA and the Corps have said they will take the Governor's
lead. Many in the Virgin Islands have asked their Governor to
oppose incineration. Experts from Puerto Rico, the Virgin
Islands, and stateside have worked to develop a viable
alternative including recovery of hardwood and then mulching
and composting. This all could be done safely and efficiently.
Composting is a process that nature has perfected over
millions of years. It has been successful in many locations at
large scales and with other disasters like Superstorm Sandy.
Puerto Rico officials are working towards a similar
sustainable plan. Providing a valid option to incineration can
serve as a positive framework for other disaster-impacted areas
in the future and that is key, and it represents a new
sustainable scheme for debris and waste on the islands, going
forward.
This is a once and done opportunity to get a leg up on
acquiring the infrastructure needed for management of the
island's long-term organic waste problem, which is about 50
percent of the island's normal waste stream. This gets to the
questions about landfills earlier.
To help this sustainable option move forward, assistance
could come in the form of a waiver of the matching funds
requirement for the next 18 months while the islands build
towards this more resilient and future-focused infrastructure.
Right now, FEMA is requiring the debris management solution
to be fully implemented in 180 days and this is considered
unrealistic for composting or burning.
The residents and visitors of Puerto Rico and the Virgin
Islands deserve our focused attention. They deserve clean air
and a healthy ecosystem.
The hurricanes were certainly not desired, but this is a
great opportunity to build a more resilient and sustainable
future so that the islands can come back better than before.
Thank you on behalf of my institution, ESF, and SUNY, and
we stand ready to assist the subcommittee as it continues its
work.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lichtenstein follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
Next, we would like to turn to--I don't know if it is
Senora or Senorita. Senora? Rodriguez del Valle.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LYVIA N. RODRIGUEZ DEL VALLE

Ms. Rodriguez. A disaster within a disaster--that is what
the eight densely populated communities on the Cano Martin Pena
and others that were already under environmental distress prior
to Irma and Maria have been experiencing since the hurricane
struck.
The 25,000 U.S. citizens living on the eastern half of the
Martin Pena tidal channel already feared rain. They knew about
flooding. An average of twice a year heavy rainfall translated
into severe floods with wastewater.
Accounts of raw sewage coming out of the shower and toilets
or of waking up in the middle of the night to a wet bed and
water to your knees and waste were common.
They knew having to dry a wet mattress in the sun to have
somewhere to lay down to sleep at night. They also knew
disease. The prevalence of gastrointestinal disease in the Cano
was of 31 percent in three months, compared to 20 percent in a
full year for Puerto Rico.
Forty-four percent of the children 5 years of age and under
living close to the Cano had asthma. People had experienced the
dengue fever, zika, and chikungunya epidemics. There have been
reports of leptospirosis, a disease transmitted mainly by
contact with the urine of rats and other animals and which can
be fatal.
The Martin Pena channel stretches for 3.7 miles across San
Juan, connecting San Juan Bay, where Puerto Rico's busiest port
is, to the inland San Jose Lagoon to the east, vital for the
stormwater management of the adjacent Luis Munoz Marin
International Airport. It is part of the San Juan Bay,
recognized by the EPA for its national significance.
From a 200- to 400-feet wide navigable channel, today it is
barely five feet wide in some areas. Adjacent communities lack
sewer systems and the stormwater system has collapsed. The San
Jose Lagoon has lost superficial area and depth, increasing the
risk of floods at the airport and other communities throughout
San Juan.
If historic--if history were to repeat itself, almost a
century ago after two major hurricanes and in the midst of an
economic depression, persons migrated to San Juan and the
wetlands around the Cano became home.
Prior to Maria, the barrios which survived decades of
eviction and gentrification were already a symbol of
resiliency, empowerment, and grass roots organization.
Residents engaged in an unprecedented participatory
planning process that led to the creation of the comprehensive
development ENLACE Cano Martin Pena project. Since then,
together with the public and private sectors, they moved
forward an agenda of long-term resiliency that has the
potential of transforming the city by reconnecting its
navigable bodies of water.
Recovering the Cano with participation means healthier and
safer conditions for the residents without fear of
gentrification thanks to a community land trust recognized last
year with the United Nations World Habitat Award.
And then Irma and Maria struck. Close to 1,000 families
lost totally or partially the roofs to their homes.
Approximately 75 homes were totally destroyed. The communities
experienced another severe flood with raw sewage, only that
this time around it lasted for four days.
Approximately half of the trees along the Cano fell and
together with the debris from the destroyed houses further
blocked the Cano and the storm sewers.
Since Maria, it only takes 15 minutes of rain for floods to
start. It even floods on a sunny day. We already have had two
significant floods in the past two months, which have been
affecting other areas of San Juan as well.
Since Maria, water quality throughout the estuary has
significantly worsened. The disturbance of the Cano and
uncollected debris from streets caused a rat infestation and
augmented the risk of mosquito-borne diseases. Alligators are
approaching people's homes. Tarps and Corps-installed blue
roofs are already in place. However, there is mold and water
filtration.
Fifteen years of organizing allowed for ENLACE, the
grassroots G-8, and the land trust to work with partners and
bring aid. However, the crisis is far from over.
Now, imagine living in a state of never-ending crisis and
trauma--whole families sleeping on the floor on the room that
does not get wet after sleeping under the rain for many days in
the capital city of Puerto Rico, San Juan.
Using Federal recovery funds to support initiatives like
the ENLACE Cano Martin Pena project presents a unique
opportunity for an emblematic recovery process that increases
Puerto Rico's long-term resiliency and sound economic
development.
Investing in the ecosystem restoration of the Cano
infrastructure and related acquisitions and relocation supports
equitable development and participatory democracy.
There is already a credible and proven institutional and
policy framework in place and engaged community and partners,
shovel-ready projects and NEPA compliance for the ecosystem
restoration piece elaborated under the Water Resources
Development Act of 2007.
Due to the current crisis, the Cano cannot keep waiting for
ordinary processes to occur. At a time of severe political,
economic, fiscal, and financial challenges, support from the
U.S. Federal Government is crucial.
That is why I urge Congress to pursue the inclusion of this
project and all of its components in any upcoming disaster
recovery bill for Puerto Rico.
This project is necessary and should be a priority due to
serious repercussions in the San Juan Bay Estuary, public
health, and safety.
And finally, I want to stress the importance of ensuring
that any funding related to Martin Pena or other communities in
a similar situation promote on-site resilient recovery rather
than displacement and gentrification and for assistance
policies to be context sensitive to allow for a just and
equitable disaster recovery.
We are concerned that FEMA individual assistance programs
requiring families in need for housing to leave outside the
flood plain can make families in desperate need to leave their
communities.
When this happens in areas where resilient onsite
alternatives are visible and that have been under pressure of
displacement and gentrification due to their strategic
location, those who have struggled for their lands for decades
can end up being uprooted.
No person should leave fearing the rain and no community
should be displaced when there is an alternative at hand. With
your support, long-term solutions that also keep Puerto Rico
face--help Puerto Rico face its economic crisis such as this
project will become a reality.
An official visit to Puerto Rico I do invite you to come
and visit the work we've done. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Rodriguez follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
Now I would like to turn to Mr. Epperson. You are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TRENT EPPERSON

Mr. Epperson. Good afternoon, Chairman, and members of the
subcommittee.
My name is Trent Epperson. I am the assistant city manager
with the City of Pearland in Texas and I am pleased to be
invited here today to present to you the effects of Hurricane
Harvey as it occurred in the City of Pearland, especially as it
relates to critical water and wastewater infrastructure and the
need to make that infrastructure resilient and redundant.
The City of Pearland is a suburban city of about 120,000
residents just south of the City of Houston. It has been one of
the fastest growing communities in the Nation over the past 15
years.
We have grown from a population of about a little over
30,000 in the year 2000 to today over 120,000 to where we are
the third largest city in the Houston metro area.
During Hurricane Harvey, with its unprecedented flooding,
Pearland experienced structural flooding affecting over 1,700
residents, 50 businesses, and flooding to critical
infrastructure including two wastewater treatment plants.
Most of the flooding occurred along Clear Creek, which,
germane to this subcommittee is a 303D-listed impaired water
body for bacteria. With a 500-year storm event, it is--it was
estimated before this storm that about 7,000 residents in the
Clear Creek watershed would flood. I believe we saw that or
more in Pearland and the downstream communities.
There is, however, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers drainage
project that has been on the books since the '60s but yet to be
funded.
Based on the studies associated with that project,
approximately half of those residents that flooded in the
watershed would likely have been spared during Hurricane
Harvey.
Additionally, critical infrastructure within the watershed
would not have flooded and failed as well. Although the City of
Pearland has grown rapidly, our new development and our new
infrastructure follows current codes and standards.
The result was that in those newer areas we experienced
very minimal flooding and that is in areas where we have added
tens of thousands of new rooftops over the past 15 years.
So we see that along with the completion of the Clear Creek
drainage project what is needed is funding for continued sound
investment and resilient and redundant critical infrastructure,
especially to bring the older infrastructure to current
standards.
The most critical of those infrastructure pieces are water,
wastewater, and the automated systems that control that
infrastructure. It is a critical life safety issue for any city
to have the ability to deliver clean safe drinking water during
a disaster.
For Pearland, this critical infrastructure must have
adequate generator power, flood proofing, and adequate
elevation to survive a minimum of a 500-year storm as well as
able to withstand Category 4 hurricane winds.
During Hurricane Harvey, our water system performed very
well with only one water well sustaining minor damage due to
power surging. We never lost pressure and we were always able
to deliver that clean safe drinking water.
Unfortunately, some of our adjoining communities and the
smaller water systems around us were unable to do that and did
have to issue boil water notices.
Additionally, continuity of service in treating wastewater
is critical for citizens sheltering in place and the return of
evacuees when they return--when they come back to their homes.
We must ensure that wastewater is adequately treated and
not released during a flooding event because that can affect
the downstream water quality in our streams and bayous.
In our area, wastewater facilities are often located in
low-lying areas near the stream that they outfall to, making
them vulnerable to flooding, and therefore a lot of them are in
need of the same resiliency and redundancy criteria applied to
our drinking water facilities.
During Harvey, unfortunately our wastewater system did not
fare near as well as our wastewater system. Our Longwood
wastewater treatment plant, which was originally built in the
1960s and is sited in one of the old oxbows of Clear Creek, was
inundated with flood waters and inoperable for up to 72 hours
during the event. The estimated damage to the plant is about a
million and a half dollars.
But due to the proximity of the plant to the creek, instead
of making those expensive repairs on a plant that is vulnerable
to the next flood, this facility should have its flows
redirected to an adequate plant to mitigate any future damage
or loss of service.
One final critical piece of infrastructure to our utility
operations is the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
System, or SCADA.
What SCADA is is it is basically a system that allows us to
monitor and control our critical water and wastewater
facilities remotely.
These systems must be redundant and resilient to provide
continuous connectivity to those facilities throughout an
emergency event.
SCADA is indispensable to ensure the plants and the lift
stations are operational and properly functioning when we
cannot reach those facilities due to high water or debris.
During Hurricane Harvey, for three days we could not
physically access 18 wastewater lift stations which are
critical to getting the wastewater to the plants. Due to a lack
of SCADA redundancy, we were also unable to monitor many of
these facilities remotely.
The City of Pearland, although challenged, fared relatively
well through Hurricane Harvey and will recover stronger than we
were before the disaster.
As we rebuild, we look to ensure our critical
infrastructure is able to withstand flooding, high winds, and
other potential disasters.
To do this, we must have adequate recovery and mitigation
funding available so that we do not just rebuild our critical
infrastructure to its original state, but we rebuild resilient,
redundant infrastructure ready for the next disaster.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Epperson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much. I appreciate the opening
statements. I want to start by then recognizing myself for 5
minutes for a round of questioning.
And I have some here prepared in front of me but I really
want to go off script a little bit, and if you would hit the
time, too, Jerry.
The--you sat in on our--the first panel, which was long
with a lot of extensive questioning and I think there was a
consensus by my colleagues on both sides that maybe we are just
not organized right and I think it addresses all three of your
kind of positions because, one, it deals with, you know, the
debris management issue, who makes the decision and for what
purposes.
Obviously, the estuary and the river systems, but we also
want to make sure that if we go in this direction how do we
not--it was mentioned in the first panel--how do we not stumble
on them having a centralized government get involved in things
that are working, right.
So let me--let me go and turn to each one of you and, Mr.
Howe, my questions were going to be--going to be totally
directed to you but I really would like everyone's response
because this is kind of similar to the energy hearing where in
some places there is mutual agreements and when you have States
or local service areas you can coordinate and you can send
folks to. Obviously, islands much more difficult, as we saw
with the Energy Subcommittee.
So what would be a structure by which--I think your
testimony was there are things that are working--be careful not
to screw those up if there was a change in the--in essence, a
change of the Stafford Act in some delineation of
responsibility.
Mr. Howe. In speaking to what I spoke in my remarks on the
written testimony, also the issue of the multiple ESFs that
water is under.
Now, for lack of a better term, under the WARN program
across the country we have done a workaround. The WARN programs
are utilities supporting utilities and most of those programs
are operated independently of the State regulatory agency or
the State operation center, even though, as you saw from Mr.
Shaw earlier, we cooperate with them directly.
We are partially funded and we are unique to this, by the
way. The Texas--the TXWARN program is partially funded by the
TCEQ. So we work very closely with them and the State
operations center.
But we have identified an issue that occurs in the State
operations center because they are broadly looking at public
works and the totality of it--that even though we are in touch
with them and coordinating with them, they are not necessarily
always paying full attention to the water/wastewater side.
So during Harvey we had situations where we would loop back
to them and have conversations and we would have to go through
a complete refresh----
Mr. Shimkus. I wonder if I can jump in so I----
Mr. Howe. Yes, please.
Mr. Shimkus. So your position is that, and I am learning
these acronyms as we go through the hearing, it should be
raised to an emergency support function level and that would
help?
Mr. Howe. In other words, it is disaggregated now. If it
was under one, then I think, as I've said to somebody before,
that then those in emergency management would have the same red
light flashing on water/wastewater as they do on lifesaving and
everything else that they do because it would be a single
support function and we know from the industry that there are--
you know, we have only talked about three essential services--
police, fire, and EMS. But without electric, water, and
wastewater the first three can't function.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Let me go to Mr. Lichtenstein.
Mr. Lichtenstein. It is a dichotomous thing. I drove all
around the islands--Saint John, Saint Thomas, Puerto Rico,
Vieques. So need for plans ahead of time, clearly.
Standard operating procedures--we talked about those
earlier. But this is definitely a matrix thing. Can't be top
down. It is not linear but yet there is a critical role for the
U.S. Government. What I saw, this dichotomous thing, was some
unbelievable local efforts of stepping up to the plate. On the
island of Vieques, and I don't know if you're familiar with
that island but that is an island on the----
Mr. Shimkus. We used to debate it a long--couple years ago
all the time.
Mr. Lichtenstein. Yes. So here's a story about initiative.
The U.S. Coast Guard, while Maria was still kind of hanging
out, the captain there used initiative and sent some cutters
over to Vieques before anybody else was there for days.
So how do you--how do you value that and how do you enhance
that kind of activity to help the locals? Clarity of leadership
is key.
Mr. Shimkus. Right.
Mr. Lichtenstein. What I saw was lack of clarity of
leadership. So this is matrixed and it is something that we are
going to have to figure out how to structure and how do you
value these local people that are just stepping up to the
plate?
Mr. Shimkus. And speaking of local people, Ms. Rodriguez
del Valle?
Ms. Rodriguez. Yes. I have to totally agree with Mark
Lichtenstein's remarks. In our case being a community in San
Juan basically the after--right after Maria it was the
residents the ones that took care of themselves and the
institutions that have been working with them for a very long
time came in the next day and that was the only outside help
that they received in practically a month and this was San Juan
with a lot of partners--previously built partnerships.
So the other thing that is helpful is for the--in the case
of the Federal Government it was very critical for us to have
people on the ground that actually were able to listen, because
sometimes you design a program that you think is going to work
very well everywhere and not necessarily all the circumstances
are the same.
So we were able to establish those relationships and
improve dramatically the type of help that was being brought to
the communities, particularly with the project of the blue
roofs and other assistance that we finally got from FEMA and
the Federal Government.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
And let me, with my colleagues' permission so I can get Mr.
Epperson on the record, Texas, local community--how do we be
careful that we are not part of the problem and, you know, we
are from the Federal Government--we are here to help, and then
we end up not being helpful?
Mr. Epperson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is a very local response and effort from the beginning,
and with the experience of Hurricane Harvey we really could not
get out, could not get in for several days where we are
located.
We did--we did--we do have other local government contacts
throughout Texas that were able to send high water rescue
vehicles that were able to help out.
So I think that initial response it is very local and how
you have to deal with that, and then once the flood waters
recede and we start talking about projects to--the enhancement
projects and projects to make sure that the next time we have
the high wind event or the high water event, I believe that is
where we can partner with FEMA and the Federal Government and
the other agencies.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much, and I appreciate my
colleagues allowing me to go a few minutes over.
Now I would like to turn to Mr. Tonko for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Ms. Rodriguez del Valle, where water systems are now
working in Puerto Rico are there still concerns with water
safety?
Ms. Rodriguez. Yes. Yes, and the people are being told to
boil the water before consumption. But when you have no power
at home, you know, and the gas is limited it is very hard to
comply with those basic health measures.
Mr. Tonko. I have heard that there are over 200 independent
water systems on Puerto Rico but they serve a very small
percentage of the population.
Can you characterize the types of communities or people
served by independent non-PRASA water systems?
Ms. Rodriguez. Well, I am not an expert in this. But from
my knowledge, these are areas particularly in the mountain side
of Puerto Rico where it was very difficult to provide formal
services.
So the families did community aqueduct systems decades ago
and they have been living on those for a long time.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And Mr. Epperson, your testimony mentioned that you need to
make $1.5 million worth in repairs to your water--your
wastewater treatment plant. How important is it to protect your
community's investment by making sure that that facility is
more resilient to future flooding?
Mr. Epperson. I think it is very important, you know, that
we do have the plant up and running with temporary repairs.
Those are the more permanent repairs and--but because of
the location of that plant we really are going to look at an
enhancement type project with that--with that plant to send
those wastewater flows to one of our other plants, expand that
plant, because it is situated and located in a location less
vulnerable to the rising waters that we experienced at this
plant.
Mr. Tonko. And are there currently sufficient Federal
funding opportunities to help the communities assess and
mitigate future vulnerabilities to their water supplies or
water systems?
Mr. Epperson. I believe there are opportunities. I am not
certain that they are sufficient. You know, we are exploring
what those opportunities are right now and moving through that
process.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And Mr. Howe, I am interested in how FEMA can improve its
emergency support functions for the water sector. How does it
compare to other critical infrastructure sectors?
Mr. Howe. I think the difficulty we have is because it is
spread out over multiple ESFs there is not a nationwide or
entirety of a single operating system so it can vary from
region to region, area to area.
As I mentioned, we were--we were successful in Texas
because we've almost--we have made it happen that way. But it
is not--it is not consistent. So there needs to be a consistent
structure of how that works and we believe under a separate ESF
that would happen.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And Mr. Lichtenstein, what types of pollution occur--can
occur from burning debris?
Mr. Lichtenstein. Clearly, particulates or smoke. But that
is the question that we want to answer--what else is happening.
So if it is a lower temperature burn there--and if
plastic--I saw plastic tangled up with the debris and if that
is burned it can potentially have dioxins, furans, polyaromatic
hydrocarbons and other chemicals. But that really needs to be
looked at.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And I imagine that space is at a premium in areas like
Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. What is the current
state of the landfills there and what particular challenges
exist because of the land challenge itself?
Mr. Epperson. Yes. I can't speak with authority to the
landfills but I do have some knowledge. Some of them are really
exceeding capacity and exceeding Federal regulations. Others
are well run and doing fine.
The main island of Puerto Rico, of course, has more land
than the other islands. In the Virgin Islands there are serious
issues.
There are only two landfills--one on Saint Croix and one on
Saint Thomas. Both have capacity issues and operational issues.
So that is a big concern on those islands.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And Ms. Rodriguez del Valle, if you had one recommendation
to this subcommittee or to the committee in general, what would
it be in regard to what you see right now in Puerto Rico?
Ms. Rodriguez. I think disasters kind of bring out the best
of the--of the society and also the institutional flaws, and we
are seeing a little bit of that currently in Puerto Rico, not
only regarding the way in which we have been able to address
the crisis.
It has brought the best of the Puerto Rican people and its
capacity to organize and do a great job when nobody else was
doing it. But it has also brought to light issues regarding the
way in which disaster relief was organized, particularly during
the first days.
It seemed to many of us living there that there was a lot
of disorganization and some of the decisions actually delayed
assistance to the people who needed it the most.
I also wanted to add one point regarding Mr. Shimkus'
question, and it has to do with Federal Government aid.
Actually, being able to be culturally sensitive is something as
simple as having FEMA officers visiting people's homes to speak
Spanish because most people in Puerto Rico do not understand
English, and sometimes decisions were being done regarding the
type of aids that these families received with a language
barrier in the middle.
So perhaps that curtailed the ability of many of them to be
able to actually get the help they needed.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much.
And with that, I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Shimkus. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Olson,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair.
I am going to open with the praise and Texas brag about a
friend and leader back home in Texas 22, Trent Epperson. And
Trent, I should give you a proper Aggie greeting--howdy, my
friend. Welcome.
Trent is the assistant city manager of Pearland, Texas, as
he mentioned. Pearland is the largest city in Brazoria County,
with over 120,000 people and growing, rapidly.
Trent helps to run their half a billion-dollar capital
budget as well as overseeing both the city's public works and
utilities department.
Chair, we are so proud of Pearland and Brazoria County's
response to Hurricane Harvey. Please tell the committee how
many people died in Brazoria County because of Hurricane
Harvey.
Mr. Epperson. There were no people that died in Brazoria
County during Hurricane Harvey.
Mr. Olson. Zero. Nada. Nil. No deaths. That's amazing,
despite 5 feet of rain in parts of Brazoria County. Is that
correct?
Mr. Epperson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Olson. OK. Now the fun stuff: the questions.
What kind of help did you get immediately after Harvey hit
outside of Brazoria County from the Federal Government, from
the EPA, maybe from FEMA, from other States, other entities?
What would you change about the storm response lines of
communication now to the next storm that is coming? We know it
is coming.
Mr. Epperson. As far--as far as immediate help, I think it
was mostly locals that were able to do the--all of the
immediate response needs.
We have been working with FEMA, meeting with them on a
weekly basis since then. I believe that process for the
immediate needs and the debris removal and developing our
damage assessments is moving forward.
One of the areas where I think that moving forward we want
to improve--as well as working with the feds--is a buy-out
program, where it has in the past been kind of sporadic when
there is a disaster.
We move forward with a buy-out program. It occurs several
months to maybe more than a year after the actual event itself.
And so we see a need for accelerating that. There are people
that are out of their homes right now and don't know whether to
repair those homes and make those repairs because they don't
know whether there is a buyout opportunity or not.
So I think the ability to accelerate that and have that as
an ongoing program even when there is not a disaster that just
occurred would really help from a local's perspective.
Mr. Olson. Anything else you wish from Washington--what we
could do better to help you guys get through that? Because you
guys were awesome but we can help you I think a lot more, much
more--much quicker.
I mean, it just seemed like over and over people calling me
up, I can't get somebody to come out to my house to, you know,
look at my house and assess the damage.
For example, Pearland had five large--four large dump
trucks go in that heavy water. Three are flooded out. You are
down to one dump truck. And so I guess, you know, we are trying
to get resources to you.
Anything we can improve on here in DC? Because you all do
great but we want you to do better. We can help, I think.
Mr. Epperson. Yes, sir. I think any of those resources
would help.
Mr. Olson. The previous panel, Trent, talked about planning
scenarios with TCEQ and EPA. Has Pearland been involved in any
of those? Just--have you been involved at that level planning
for another hurricane like Harvey? Have you been involved in
that or are you sort of outside looking in?
Mr. Epperson. We work, you know, with our local county
emergency management as well as with the Texas Department of
Emergency Management. But we haven't had any direct contact or
work with those folks prepreparing for emergency.
Mr. Olson. Have you had to adjust your plans for an 800-
year flood as opposed to a 500-year flood or a 100-year flood?
I mean, how much have you adapted to what happened in August
with Hurricane Harvey?
Mr. Epperson. I think the big thing we have recognized is
that our newer infrastructure designed to current standards
fared very well even with the unprecedented flooding and that
it is our areas that have been there for many decades that were
designed to other standards or before standards were in place
that were mostly affected and that those are the areas we want
to concentrate on for future drainage improvement projects, as
well as other resiliency projects, to make sure that those
areas also are able to withstand the same type of flooding.
Of greatest importance to that is the Clear Creek project,
which is a project sponsored by the Harris County Flood Control
District, and I believe that project has been submitted for
Federal funding to move forward after this event.
Mr. Olson. I am out of time, and I want to say, ``Gig
'em,'' my friend. Thank you.
Mr. Epperson. Gig 'em.
Mr. Shimkus. The chairman now turns to another Texan, Mr.
Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Well, I appreciate it, and I married into the
Aggie family. My son and our son-in-law and my two
grandchildren now think they are going to be in the Corps
Cadets.
But be that as it may, Mr. Howe, in your testimony you know
that some of the City of Houston's wastewater operations were
overwhelmed during Harvey.
Can you describe in detail on what locations? Was it mainly
upstream, Buffalo Bayou? Because every creek and bayou I have
in my area in east Harris County were out of their banks. But
it was mostly the City of Houston and Buffalo Bayou that the
wastewater treatment plants were overwhelmed?
Mr. Howe. Yes, sir. It is my understanding on the west side
of Houston the wastewater plant was flooded out. Part of that
was due to controlled flooding out of the Addicks Reservoir, as
you are familiar with that area over there. They currently----
Mr. Green. I don't represent it, but I am familiar with it.
Mr. Howe. Yes, I understand from the City of Houston water
utility they are currently dealing with a wastewater line that
is in Buffalo Bayou where the bayou is sloughing off
continually.
They have a wastewater line that is on the side of that. It
is an ongoing issue. Obviously, there needs to be a coordinated
response on how that gets rebuilt and how their line gets
reinforced or moved.
So it is these ongoing issues. The water system operated
just fine. They were able to put coffer dams around the
northeast water filter galleries to keep the water system
operating fine but wastewater, by its very nature, as Mr.
Epperson mentioned, are built in lower level areas and they had
some significant flooding, particularly in Houston's lift
stations, too.
Mr. Green. We have untold number of water districts outside
the city limits of Houston or Pasadena and I know they--because
they are built on the bayou close to where they're--they treat
the effluent and it goes--they have permits to go into the
bayous.
Do you have any idea on how many of those were also
impacted?
Mr. Howe. I don't have specific numbers. The difficulty
for--in our response during Hurricane Harvey, obviously, was
that there was a delayed response. No one could do an
assessment until the flood waters went down.
Many of those operations were, obviously, shut down when
the flooding started but it doesn't mean there wasn't a
pollutant. I don't have specific numbers, though.
Mr. Green. OK. Well, I have the eastern part of the county
and, like I say, I could give you the watersheds from the
bayous and--but Buffalo Bayou and the shipping port of Houston
actually runs right in the middle of our district, and whether
it be Brays or Sims, Sims Bayou looked like it was the one that
didn't flood as bad as Brays and on the north side I have
Greens Bayou, Carpenters Bayou in channel view, Hunting Bayou
and----
Mr. Howe. I grew up in Houston. I am familiar with all
these.
Mr. Green. And all of them were and these were multiple
flooding experiences and we continue to work with the Corps of
Engineers and, of course, our Harris County Flood Control
District--that a lot of our neighboring counties don't have
flood control districts but in Harris County we pay property
taxes to be able to have drainage ditches and, you know, take
care of our bayous along with the partnership with the Corps.
So it is a big challenge. Your--Mr. Howe, in your testimony
you said that the City of Houston was overwhelmed. What part of
the city did they--did they shut down the wastewater system or
did----
Mr. Howe. It is my understanding----
Mr. Green [continuing]. What part of the city was impacted?
Mr. Howe. Excuse me. I am sorry.
On the west side of Houston they did have one of their
wastewater plants completely flooded out. It was out of
service. They were advising people not to flush, those who were
still in their residences, and they were--they had the
resources to get that plant back online in three or four days,
once the water--the water receded.
You know, as you may be familiar, most of Houston's
wastewater system is with forced mains or lift stations and
they have a significant number of those and I know a number of
those were flooded out.
Houston proper was pretty resilient and a lot of that, much
like some of the other cities around there. So I don't have
specific details as to how they came back but they were very
resilient on their own.
Since Hurricane Ike they have built up a lot of resiliency
within the City of Houston.
Mr. Green. Well, in Harris County also many years ago,
because you recognize we were subsiding, the City of Houston is
now almost totally on surface water and they have surface water
rights.
I know Pasadena I represent complains about having to pay
high water rates for the City of Houston.
So we have a central location for surface water so we don't
continue to subside. Do you think there is--should be an effort
to try and create mega wastewater treatment facilities and
partner with an untold number of water districts that we have
and see how that would work?
Mr. Howe. You know, obviously, sir, that is a local
decision. The first thing, when you said it, that popped in my
head was the--an example of the Trinity River Authority in the
Dallas-Fort Worth area, which is a mega wastewater operation
without regard to issue.
You know, most of Houston's water comes from the discharge
in the Trinity River from TRA. That might be a possibility. I
mean, there are any number of small package plants in the muds
that you spoke of outside of the Houston area.
There might be an effort to look at consolidating those in
a system that would be more efficient. There are enormous costs
involved in doing that and getting to that, you know, rerouting
sewer lines and everything else. But it is those sort of
options I think everybody needs to look at.
Mr. Green. Well, and I am already over time, but with the
amount of money we are going to have to do to redo those plants
and also the houses and the businesses downstream who are in
danger of, you know, because of that effluent being in their
houses and their--in their businesses.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. I thank my colleague.
I want to thank the colleagues who stayed and participated
in the second panel. I personally really appreciate it. An
observation is that these disasters that we are talking about
in this event, if you noticed--for the panelists, those of us
who have been through them really kind of the same type of
story.
I do think there is an opportunity for us to work
collectively and look at the Stafford Act. This is
multijurisdictional, though. This would be a long-term, 5, 6
years trying to get a response.
You know, I keep thinking about big piles of stuff and how
do you separate them. I am a big trash energy guy. I would like
to see more of that. We have some locally that I have toured.
Buy-out programs--we just had a flood 5 years ago. People
are just getting their checks now. So there is a lot of ways
these things can be fixed so we do appreciate your testimony.
I also want to tell my--to the committee that we have five
legislative days to submit opening statements. I forgot to do
that at the beginning of this.
I want to thank you all for being here and pursuant to
committee rules, I remind Members that they have 10 business
days to submit additional questions for the record.
If you get those, if you would reply we would appreciate it
and I ask that you submit your responses within 10 business
days upon receipt of the questions.
Of course, if your--can't use your electric stuff because
you are in a place where there is no electricity that might be
a challenge. But we do appreciate you being here. There is a
lot of work for us to do.
Thank you for your time, and with that, I will adjourn the
hearing.
[Whereupon, at 12:56 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
